Hello – Warren Murray making sure you are switched on to the news this morning. Paul Manafort has committed further “crimes and lies” that invalidate his plea deal, the Trump-Russia investigator Robert Mueller has declared. The former Trump campaign chairman breached the agreement by “lying to the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the special counsel’s office on a variety of subject matters”, Mueller said in a court filing, adding that his team would file a comprehensive account of the breaches for consideration in Manafort’s sentencing. Manafort pleaded guilty to conspiring to defraud the US and conspiring to obstruct justice, in relation to his unregistered lobbying work for pro-Russian politicians in Ukraine. Other charges against him were dropped. Manafort had agreed to help prosecutors with “any and all” matters, briefing them about “his participation in and knowledge of all criminal activities” as well as turning over documents and testifying in other cases. Investigators were no longer bound by their side of the deal, which included a reduced sentence for crimes Manafort previously admitted, Mueller said. Manafort has denied breaching the plea deal, saying through lawyers that he “believes he provided truthful information”. Mueller is investigating Russia’s interference in the 2016 presidential election and any collusion between Russian operatives and the Trump campaign. Trump has the power to pardon Manafort for any federal crime. Trump helps with Brexit – The US president has added to Theresa May’s Brexit headaches by suggesting the deal she is taking to parliament could hamper UK-US trade ties. “Sounds like a great deal for the EU,” Donald Trump said. “Because, you know, right now, if you look at the deal, they [Britain] may not be able to trade with us … hopefully she’ll be able to do something about that.” In response, Downing Street said the deal was “very clear we will have an independent trade policy so that the UK can sign trade deals with countries around the world, including with the US”. Almost half of the cabinet have discussed a “Norway-plus” soft Brexit model as a plan B if parliament rejects the PM’s deal. Their favoured option is believed to be staying in a permanent customs union, which is also Labour policy. The group has been meeting weekly for some time – “They just don’t make as much of a fuss about it as their Brexit-supporting colleagues,” one source said (quality burn there, source). May has two weeks to try to persuade 89 hostile Tory backbenchers to support her final deal. The make-or-break vote is to be held on 11 December after a marathon five-day Commons debate. ‘Part of something important’ – The celebrated Bletchley Park codebreaker Jean Barker, Lady Trumpington, has died aged 96. Barker retired from the House of Lords in 2017 after a 37-year tenure as a Tory peer that included spells as a minister and a government whip. Her death was confirmed by her son, Adam Barker, and senior Conservative party members on Monday evening. “My mother passed away this afternoon in her sleep. She did not make it to October 2022 [age 100] .. but she had a bloody good innings,” Barker wrote. Lady Trumpington famously raised two fingers at a fellow peer who referred to her age during a House of Lords debate in 2012. Born into British-American aristocracy, in the second world war the young Jean Alys Campbell-Harris was assigned to Bletchley Park, where she typed German naval signals after it was discovered she spoke both German and French. “Life only really began when I went to Bletchley,” ” she later said. “That’s when I made my real friends, and it was exciting being a part of something important.” Down to earth on Mars – Nasa has successfully landed its InSight spacecraft on the red planet where it will attempt to burrow a heat probe five metres into the surface. Insight will also use a seismometer to measure “Mars-quakes”. The overall goal is to explore the makeup and dimensions of the planet’s core, mantle and crust to learn how Mars and other rocky worlds formed at the dawn of the solar system 4.6bn years ago. The position of the craft will be tracked to figure out how much Mars wobbles on its axis, which could indicate whether it still has a partly molten core like Earth. Insight’s touchdown just before 8pm GMT marked the end of seven-month, 300 million mile journey. Dubai ‘spy’ Briton freed – It is hoped Matthew Hedges will be back in the UK today after the United Arab Emirates freed him from a life sentence on spying charges. The British academic received a presidential pardon on Monday, although the UAE government still claims he had been spying, not simply researching his doctoral thesis on the Arab spring, when he was arrested in May. The foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, said efforts continued to free other Britons including Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe who remains detained in Iran. ‘Hard pears, sweaty carrots’ – “Children are being presented with produce so lacking in flavour and texture that it is teaching them to actively dislike – or at least distrust – fruit and veg.” The verdict from the Soil Association on the quality of produce given out at English schools. The government admitted in response to a freedom of information request that only 13% of apples and 5% of pears – popular items for the initiative – are sourced from the UK, even when in season. Overall, less than a third of the produce came from Britain, and it often had higher levels of pesticide residues than supermarket equivalents. The association is urging the government to revamp the scheme to make sure produce is British, local and organic. More than a million people around the world have been harmed by medical devices they assumed were safe. We hear from one woman whose life has been devastated by what she thought was a routine procedure. Science correspondent Hannah Devlin lifts the lid on the implant industry. Plus, Bryan Mealer on the migrant caravan trying to reach the US. Should I buy travel insurance from Ryanair? How much money do I need to retire? Do shops have to accept Scottish banknotes? The Guardian’s money team on everything you need to know about your cash and what to do with it. England players’ £25,000 match fees may take a hit in the future, according to the Rugby Football Union’s departing chief executive, Steve Brown, after the governing body announced a loss of £30.9m on Monday. The world championship battle between Magnus Carlsen and Fabiano Caruana will be decided in a quickfire tie-breaker after Monday’s Game 12 ended in a 31-move draw. Luke Shaw has acknowledged that anyone playing for José Mourinho requires a “thick skin” but believes Manchester United’s squad now need to “fight for this manager and this club”. Joe Root’s relief was clear after England got past a nervy end to complete a series whitewash against Sri Lanka; the captain said he was proud of everything his team had achieved on the tour and that they had shown they are not “one-trick ponies”. Newcastle put their alleged hoodoo behind them – in seven previous Monday night Premier League outings they had not even managed to score – with a 2-1 win at Burnley. And Stephanie Gilmore equalled her fellow Australian Layne Beachley’s surfing record after claiming a seventh women’s world title at the season-ending Maui Pro in Hawaii. Asian shares managed to build on a strong lead from European and US stocks overnight despite Donald Trump saying he would most likely proceed with lifting the tariffs on $200bn worth of Chinese imports to the US from 10% to 25% in January. Trump also said tariffs could be extended to iPhones, which caused Apple shares to fall 1.6% in extended trade so things could be shaky in London and on Wall Street today. The FTSE 100 is currently set to open down very slightly. The pound is buying $1.281 and €1.130. The Guardian’s lead story is our exclusive: “Alarm as breast implants study reveals health risks”. The Express also has a health story on its front, saying England’s five-year cancer life expectancy lag behind comparable countries: “Cancer survival rate scandal”. News that Trump has said the agreement May reached with the EU might hurt chances of a UK-US trade deal leads the Telegraph: “Trump: May’s deal means no trade deal” and the Mail “Trump sticks the boot into May”. Brexit also makes the front page of the i: “Save the date: Tuesday 11 December. PM Has 14 days to save Brexit deal – and career”. The Sun points out an important TV scheduling clash: May’s proposed TV debate with Corbyn is on the same night as the I’m a Celebrity final – “Rumble and the jungle”. The Times’ splash is: “Jailed rapist given chance to see his victim’s child”; the Mirror reports that food banks are braced for record demand over Christmas, under the headline “Shameful”; and the FT has “GM deals blow to Trump heartland by slowing plants and shedding jobs”. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com