Young, feisty, uncompromising, unapologetic and talented – we already knew that about Max Verstappen but it turns out he is sweary too and not adverse to being a tad fighty. If he is auditioning as a role model for teenage rebels, this wild one may as well be fitted for his “What’ve you got?” leathers now. Yet for all the uproar and condemnation of his altercation with Esteban Ocon at the Brazilian Grand Prix, the incident, a moment of public emotion increasingly rare in F1, should be the least of his regrets after Sunday’s race. After Ocon had hit Verstappen, costing him the lead and an almost certain win, the 21-year-old Dutch driver had warned: “I hope I can’t find him in the paddock now because then he’s …”, the final part of which was censored by F1. He caught up with Ocon in the weigh-in room and proceeded to shove him while adding some words that were sadly inaudible. The FIA punished him with two days of public service, which in the past has entailed educational duties with junior formula, although they may consider Verstappen is not best-placed to impart advice to impressionable youngsters. In reality, the incident was more handbags than some reactions have suggested. Certainly it was far from some of F1’s previous flashpoints. Ayrton Senna punching Eddie Irvine after he unlapped himself in Japan in 1993; Nigel Mansell picking Senna up and pushing him against a wall at Spa in 1987 and famously Nelson Piquet launching himself at Eliseo Salazar after they had clashed when the Brazilian was lapping him at Hockenheim in 1982. There are more but all are dramatic and almost theatrical rather than harmful. Indeed, many will empathise with Verstappen showing a similar fierce emotional drive. Even the FIA in its admonishment acknowledged it was “sympathetic to Verstappen’s passion”. Verstappen and Ocon have history, having been vying with one another since karting in 2010 and there appears to be no love lost between them since. This is baggage that cannot be ignored and expecting drivers to tune it out would make rivalries far less engrossing. The Red Bull team principal, Christian Horner, naturally defended his driver but made a valid point in doing so. “We don’t condone violence but you have to understand emotions – you’ve had a victory taken away from you and they are running high,” he said. “Of course, there is a human reaction in these competitive animals. Emotions occasionally boil over.” Verstappen is a role model but he is human too and, because he has been in F1 for four years, it is easy to forget how young he is. He apologised to Ocon and the stewards, and F1 is in no danger of disappearing into a moral vacuum because of the incident. What he may consider is that had he shown better judgment the collision might have been avoided altogether. Ocon was ultimately at fault, as the stewards found but the FIA race director, Charlie Whiting, noted Ocon was entitled to unlap himself before adding: “He decided to fight for it, which was wholly unacceptable.” Yet given the circumstances Verstappen must shoulder some blame. The Force India driver was on fresher rubber. He had been a quarter of a second faster over the previous two laps and in an entirely different race to Verstappen, who was untroubled at the front. He would have lost some time letting Ocon through but nothing that would have threatened his lead. Instead he chose to contest the pass into turn one rather than letting it go. This left him side by side with Ocon through two, where they collided. Ocon was at fault but as Lewis Hamilton repeatedly noted, in those situations you just don’t get close and leave as much room is as necessary. The Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, said: “In Max we can see a future champion. Unbelievable talent and speed. Once the raw edges are off he will be a world champion. In a few years he will look at the footage of the race and have his own opinion of whether that was the right behaviour but you cannot accelerate these things, it is a learning process.” It not inconceivable that part of what was fuelling Verstappen’s anger was that he realised he was at fault for not winning. He will learn and will get better, control and composure will come but it is on track where he really needs to display it. In the meantime, expunging all his vim and vigour would make for a poorer spectacle all round.