When Dancing Brave went into the stalls before the Breeders’ Cup Turf in 1986, he was, in the minds of most European racing fans at least, one of the biggest certainties for years. His breathtaking success in the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe, against one of the best fields ever assembled at Longchamp, was still fresh in the memory. Alex Bird, a high-profile professional punter at the time, stopped off in Vegas on his way to Santa Anita, took what he saw as outrageously generous odds on offer with the casino sportsbooks and spent the days leading up to the race telling everyone how much he was looking forward to picking up his winnings on the way back. Much has changed in racing in the 32 years since the Brave shuffled into retirement as a beaten odds-on favourite, but when Enable, this year’s Arc winner, goes to post at Churchill Downs in Kentucky on Saturday evening, the race, the challenge, the odds and even the colours will be the same. John Gosden’s filly is the latest in a long line of champions to carry the pink, green and white of Prince Khalid Abdullah and she will set off as the hot favourite for the 35th running of the Turf. Will she finally succeed where Dancing Brave and seven more Arc winners have failed, and add a win at the Breeders’ Cup to the victory in Paris? The form book suggests that Enable, one of just eight horses to win the Arc twice, is as far in front of her opponents as Dancing Brave appeared to be back in the ’80s. The track, the trip and even the rain-softened ground should hold no fears for a horse on an eight-race winning streak. Yet still that list of beaten Arc winners, seven in the Turf and one in the Classic, is a nagging doubt. “Thirty-two years later, it still hasn’t been done,” Teddy Grimthorpe, her owner’s long-standing racing manager, said this week, “but Prince Khalid is always one to take on a challenge and that’s what this is, undoubtedly. “I think that in a perfect world, John Gosden would have liked a solid four or five races coming into this, but she managed to win the Arc on only her second start this year after nearly 11 months off, whereas every one of the other Arc de Triomphe winners who have come have had pretty lengthy seasons going into this. “Dancing Brave ran in the Craven Stakes in April, so he’d had a hectic programme to get to the Breeders’ Cup at Santa Anita. There are always different scenarios but at least from that point of view, Enable is not coming off a very hectic schedule. “I wasn’t on the team in those days, but I think it’s fair to say that Dancing Brave’s preparation, with the shipping and everything else, was not an ideal scenario. And as everyone remembers, he produced not only a personal best but a world best in that Arc, which again probably took a good deal out of him.” Racing has turned into a global sport over the last three decades, and the process of shipping horses through several time zones to run in championship events has improved immeasurably. Enable (8.56) was bursting with energy when she cantered on the track here on Thursday, and as Frankie Dettori, her jockey, keeps reminding everyone, “records are there to be broken”. Grimthorpe, more cautiously, points out that “whatever happens on Saturday, she will still be an exceptional filly” but it will be hugely disappointing if the hoodoo on Arc winners at the Breeders’ Cup extends any further. It may not be the only hex that is lifted on Saturday as Mendelssohn (9.44) looks primed to give Aidan O’Brien a long-awaited first success in the Classic, while Wild Illusion (6.04) and Happily (7.36) are two more members of a strong European contingent who can return home from the States as winners. Churchill Downs 4.00 Marley's Freedom 4.38 World Of Trouble 5.16 Catalina Cruiser 6.04 Wild Illusion 6.46 Imperial Hint 7.36 Happily 8.16 Monomoy Girl 8.56 Enable 9.44 Mendelssohn