Jonathan Coe is the award-winning author of 12 novels, including What a Carve Up! and The Rotters’ Club, both of which were adapted for BBC radio and TV. His new novel, Middle England, is out on 8 November and chronicles the lead-up to and aftermath of the EU referendum. Middle England is set very much in the moment – the last chapter is dated September 2018. How did it evolve?I had this sense, which kicked in just after the referendum in the summer of 2016, that this was an extraordinary moment in British life and it would be a good thing to write a book about it, but I had no idea how to do it. Then I had an epiphany. I had been wanting to revisit the characters from The Rotters’ Club and I thought if I could just take those characters, who I know really well, and make them live through Brexit, let the events take place and impact upon them in one way or another, then maybe I could do it that way. Political correctness is a key theme. One of your characters is suspended from her job as a university lecturer after being accused of transphobia. Her fictional husband thinks political correctness is running out of control. What is your view?As with everything else at the moment, the situation is so fluid and so complicated. In the book, it’s really more about how quickly the crisis escalates these days and how rapidly and loudly it is amplified by social media and then the mainstream media. Students and teachers have always been in conflict but the issues now seem to be so much rawer. That’s the landscape the book tries to show: a country where we can’t seem to agree about anything; we’re very tribal and polarised. Your books are much loved in Europe - you have just been made an Officier de L’Ordre des Arts et des Lettres in France. Why do you think you are so popular there?The French in particular love the British sense of humour – or what they think is the British sense of humour, which is probably more what it was like back in the 1970s. It is also my sense of humour, really. However, I have a sense these days that comedy of the kind we traditionally excel in is actually part of our current problems. You have a figure like Boris Johnson, who has got where he is by being funny, self-deprecating and self-satirising and we all loved that 10 years ago when he was on Have I Got News for You. But now we’re looking at what came out of that and realising maybe it wasn’t such a good idea to treat it all like a joke. Benjamin Trotter, who becomes a Man Booker-longlisted writer in the book, worries about whether it is the task of the novelist to be “engagé” at times like this. What do you think?I do think novels can help us understand what’s going on. But it’s true the audience for novels is fracturing. I think probably the age of the great, white, middle-aged male writer is over and that’s all to the good. The literature coming out of Britain, the range of young writing, is so much more diverse and varied now in terms of race and class. You grew up in Birmingham and the Midlands and often return there in your books. Why?I’ve lived in London for 30 years, but I feel you can’t write a book about contemporary England and just set it in London. And because so many of my books have among their themes the idea of nostalgia and how childhood and teenagerhood form you, I often look back to the first 20 years of my life in the Midlands. Also, my mother still lives in the Lickey Hills just outside Birmingham so I go back quite frequently. You’re married with two daughters. How do you manage to write at home in the midst of family life?I often don’t. I’m lucky enough to have friends who live in the countryside and I often borrow their houses to write in. I’ll go away for four or five days at a time and I can write 3,000 words a day easily in that situation. You spend a lot of time on Twitter. Do you turn it off while you write?No. I’m pretty much addicted now. It’s a bit like writing in a virtual cafe. I have it on in the background buzzing away and mostly that’s helpful unless you get sucked into a long conversation. How is it helpful?It stops you feeling too lonely and isolated and cut off. And, by and large, I love having direct contact with readers as long as they’re not too rude. It’s a comforting reminder that there are people out there who you’re writing for, otherwise you can feel you’re doing it in a void. You recently released an album of your own music. How big a role does music play in your life?I’ve always liked playing keyboard and guitar and writing music and I was in a band when I was younger. It enables me to express the more lyrical side of my personality because the music is quite gentle and melodic. It’s very amateur though and certainly not an alternative career. My last PRS [royalty] statement was £1.15 so I bought myself a KitKat. Who would join you for your dream jamming session?It would be a late-night cabaret trio with Kazuo Ishiguro, who is an excellent musician, on guitar and the novelist and historian Miranda Carter, who is also a superb singer of standards and torch songs. What next?Another book I guess, although the intervals between starting new books seem to get longer. I know writers who finish one book on a Friday and start a new one on Monday. I envy that a lot. I have a couple of theatrical projects on the go but writing for the theatre is such a different kind of writing. I’ve realised why so few novelists write plays and so few playwrights write novels. Michael Frayn is unique, I think, in being good at both. But I’ve done 12 books now and I think it is time to branch out in different directions. Any advice in the meantime on how to stay calm in the run-up to Brexit?I’m tempted to advise turning off the news, avoiding the papers, getting off Twitter and generally putting our fingers in our ears. Sadly, though, it’s important to stay informed. So maybe we should just sometimes read PG Wodehouse and watch Some Like It Hot or Victoria Wood videos, to remind ourselves that lightness and jollity can still exist in the world. And never, ever watch Question Time. • Middle England by Jonathan Coe is published by Penguin (£16.99). To order a copy for £14.95 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99