Brazil’s president-elect, Jair Bolsonaro, has prompted outrage and disbelief after he said the people of Brazil – which was ruled by the military for two decades – “still don’t know what dictatorship is”. The former army captain – who has made no secret of his admiration for the military dictatorship that ruled Brazil from 1964-1985 – was speaking after phone talks with Hungary’s conservative and fiercely anti-migrant prime minister, Viktor Orban. Hungary “is a country that has suffered a lot with communism in the past, a people that knows what dictatorship is”, Bolsonaro told a news conference outside his home in Rio de Janeiro. “The Brazilian people still do not know what dictatorship is, do not know what it is to suffer at the hands of these people.” José Miguel Vivanco, executive director in the Americas division at Human Rights Watch, criticised Bolsonaro’s “cold war tactics”. “It is extremely troubling and revealing that Bolsonaro is taking advice from a well-known populist autocrat like Orbán,” he said. “Anyone who has anyone doubts about what Brazil suffered under military rule, just remember the gross, systematic and widespread violations of human rights committed by that regime.” In 2014 a report from a government truth commission concluded that more than 400 people were killed or disappeared and many more tortured under Brazil’s military junta which also censored media and culture, forcing many into exile. Cid Benjamin, a journalist who was part of an armed leftwing group that opposed Brazil’s dictatorship, described Bolsonaro’s comment as “one more stupidity”. Benjamin was jailed and tortured after participating in the 1969 kidnapping of the American ambassador Charles Burke Elbrick – who was later released unharmed – and spent a decade in exile. Benjamin said Brazil’s amnesty law, under which nobody was ever tried for dictatorship-era human rights abuses, enabled Bolsonaro to play down the cruelties of the military regime. “In Argentina it would be impossible for someone who defends the dictatorship to be elected president,” he said. Set to take office on 1 January, the far-right leader has already drawn three of his government picks from the military, including General Fernando Azevedo e Silva as defence minister. Asked about Orbán’s tough anti-migrant measures – he closed Hungary’s borders to migrants in 2015 – Bolsonaro preferred to discuss the situation in his own country. “I was against our last immigration law [in 2017] which made Brazil a country without borders. We cannot allow the indiscriminate entry of all those who come here, only because they wanted to come.” Thousands of Venezuelan migrants fleeing a political and economic crisis have crossed the border into Brazil over the past year. In August residents of the Brazilian border town of Pacairama trashed migrant camps used by Venezuelans and more than a thousand fled back across the border. Oliver Stuenkel, a professor of international relations at the Getulio Vargas Foundation in São Paulo, said Bolsonaro was borrowing a narrative used by authoritarian leaders like Orbán. “The non-native population in Brazil is tiny, it’s less than 1%,” Stuenkel said. “It’s much more about projecting the narrative that it is a very dangerous world out there and it is important to have a strong leader to protect against these threats.” Stuenkel likened it to Donald Trump. “There will be a never ending series of provocative comments,” he said. “These kind of comments crowd out of the space for actual debate.” Last week Bolsonaro announced the appointment as foreign minister of Ernesto Araújo, a fervent admirer of the US president. In an article Araújo said German Nazism and Italian fascism were leftwing movements that “enslaved a genuine national feeling”.