England’s World Twenty20 campaign finally got under way in St Lucia on Monday in far from convincing fashion, the seven-wicket margin of victory belying their nervy performance with the bat. The win eventually came in the 10th over courtesy of the DLS method, England’s target reduced to 64 after four overs were lost to rain, but not before their star opening batters Danni Wyatt and Tammy Beaumont had departed for 0 and 2 respectively, giving their side a real scare. England, having won the toss and opted to bowl, had initially reduced Bangladesh to 3-2 in the first half of the powerplay, with the debutant Kirstie Gordon having a dream debut, her four overs yielding three wickets for 16 runs. Gordon, who was player of the match, said it had been a “really special” occasion. “I didn’t know if I was going to make my debut tonight,” she continued. “We didn’t even know if we were going to get a game in. It’s great to be part of this team.” However, England took their foot off the pedal somewhat, Bangladesh finishing their innings on 76 for nine. “Our aim is always to bowl as well as we can and restrict them to as low a total as possible, and I think we did that,” Gordon said. “The batters went out with the intent they always do and knocked off the runs.” England’s run chase began disastrously, though, with Wyatt trapped lbw by the off spinner Salma Khatun off the very first ball of the innings. England also immediately lost their one DRS review – Wyatt referred the decision upstairs but replays showed the ball would have gone on to hit the stumps. Eight balls later Khatun struck again, this time having Beaumont caught at backward point. With England’s nerves jangling Amy Jones was lucky not to also depart early, coming within a hair’s breadth of being stumped when still in single figures and having a catch put down in the fourth over by the wicketkeeper Shamima Sultana, who sustained a possible concussion in her head-first dive and had to leave the field. By the time Nat Sciver danced down the wicket to Khadija-Tul Kubra and was stumped for 23, England were 51 for three and the ship had been steadied somewhat. Captain Heather Knight (11*) and Jones (28*) eventually took England safely over the line, requiring just three balls after the 28-minute rain delay to seal victory. “We bat deep in this team,” Gordon said. “The openers’ job is to go out and go hard – sometimes it doesn’t pay but Nat [Sciver], Heather [Knight] and [Amy] Jones all batted so well that we were always confident.” Play had initially been delayed for 15 minutes as the groundsmen worked up until the very last second to dry out the pitch, which was soaked over the weekend by the torrential downpours that prevented England’s first group-stage fixture against Sri Lanka from taking place. With sawdust placed on the still-damp outfield and the boundaries brought in on one side of the ground, reducing the distance to the rope from 65 to 55 yards, play was finally deemed possible and England made inroads. Anya Shrubsole, star of last year’s World Cup, exploited the humidity well, taking three balls before her trademark hooping inswinger did for Bangladesh opener Sultana’s middle stump. Sciver stepped up to open the bowling alongside Shrubsole in place of the injured Katherine Brunt and she also struck early as Fargana Hoque was caught behind. Bangladesh, who had been bowled out for 48 in their first tournament encounter against West Indies, initially offered little with the bat aside from limp defensive strokes, but their innings was eventually kickstarted by the 24-year-old Ayasha Rahman, who sent three sixes sailing over the boundary rope, including one that travelled 67 metres straight down the ground. Her 39 runs accounted for 51% of Bangladesh’s eventual total. It was Gordon who eventually removed Rahman, the Bangladeshi attempting one big hit too many and being caught in the deep in the 13th over. In a surprise decision, the England coach, Mark Robinson, had opted to play all three of his uncapped players, with Gordon, Linsey Smith and Sophia Dunkley handed caps. While all three made good contributions – Smith finished with one for 17 and Dunkley claimed a good catch in the deep – it was Gordon whose star shone brightest. In a day of frustration for England, not least their ultimate failure to bowl their opponents out, she at least gave them one thing to celebrate. On the eve of this match Robinson had called for a ruthless performance from his side. This was not that, by any stretch of the imagination. With trickier group-stage encounters against South Africa and West Indies coming up later in the week England will have to up their game if they are to stand any chance of progressing to the semi-final stages of the competition.