When Stuttgart student Heiner Steinacker noticed the veranda of his halls of residence had rotted away, his landlord Studierendenwerk(student services), arranged for a nearby sawmill to deliver fresh timber. Together with 11 housemates, Steinacker spent three days designing and assembling a new terrace. They then plastered a wall and built four new roofs. “It was rewarding knowing that we built it with our own hands. It’s nice to sit on our self-built terrace, enjoying the sun with a beer and good company,” says Steinacker, 23, who is studying for a degree in renewable energy at Stuttgart University. “We’ve got everything a student needs, two great kitchens, a beer dispenser, a small cinema, a big fireplace in the garden, a wood-fired pizza oven and two lovely cats.” Steinacker is one of 30 students living in one of Europe’s more unusual student houses. The Bauhäusle, which means “little building house”, was originally built by students in the early 1980s. Over the years its residents have carried on the tradition of adapting and making home improvements using any discarded materials they can get their hands on. For those living here, it’s a world away from common purpose-built student accommodation that tends to be expensive, sub-standard and isolating – not to mention unattractive. In the UK, commercial student blocks regularly feature in the Carbuncle Cup, awarded to the nation’s ugliest buildings. As the product of many different ideas and designs over the years, the Bauhäusle has become a unique web of interconnected houses and communal spaces. “I love the organically grown structures,” says Daniela Schaffart, who lived in Bauhäusle as a media student in 2007. “It always makes me feel alive and inspires me to be creative. I remember waking up every morning and seeing the wooden ceiling and the tree right outside the window and feeling grateful.” Anyone from Stuttgart’s universities can apply to Bauhäusle. Students are given basic woodwork training, then left to learn on the job. Much of the wood is donated by local businesses. There’s a reclaimed tractor wheel sitting in the middle of a living room, and in another a heating/ventilation system has been fashioned from wine bottles. Rent is kept low, at €230(£200) a month, making the Bauhäusle the cheapest option in the German city. In return, tenants must do their fair share of housework. “Students in other accommodation don’t feel so connected to each other. They basically live door-to-door, but don’t communicate quite as deeply, if at all. There is no place where I laugh more, and just feel that sense of belonging,” says Schaffart. Bauhäusle wasn’t intended to become a celebrated example of alternative student living. It’s the product of an experiment in 1981 when architecture students, under the supervision of professors Peter Hubner and Peter Sulzer, were given the task of making a building they could actually live in. Hubner, now retired, remembers the project with fondness: “The Bauhäusle was a big adventure. It was a profound experience … and has been well looked after by its ever-changing dwellers over the years.” The Bauhäusle was based on Walter Segal’s self-build method. Segal, a German-born British architect, believed anyone who could use basic tools could build their own houses. He designed a system using timber, panels and bolts to make the task as easy as possible. There are still around 200 Segal buildings in the UK, including a self-build housing project in a south London cul-de-sac. In Wales in the 1980s, students at the Centre for Alternative Technology (CAT) took it upon themselves to build Segal-style accommodation. Self-building is far more popular in Germany, with more than 60% of homes built this way. A new scheme in Heidelberg, the Collegium Academicum, will eventually house over 200 students and apprentices. Although the Bauhäusle is a treasured example of self-build housing, it was intended as a temporary structure and students are now concerned that the valuable land it stands on within the campus could be reassigned. New buildings are being erected on every available plot and the university is running out space to expand. Schaffert says residents constantly work to protect the future of the community. “Students living at the Bauhäusle tend to fight for their beloved house. They use media coverage to keep it in people’s minds.” Steinacker says it would be a “great loss for Stuttgart” if Bauhäusle were to be replaced. “Bauhäusle shows that you just have to believe that you can do something and start it, and it will work out.” For now, the students’ campaigning efforts appear to be working. Herwig Geyer, head of communications at the university, speaks proudly of the building: “Bauhäusle is still a very much-liked accommodation. It shows how the self-build pioneer Walter Segal and the University of Stuttgart’s department of Architecture and Urban Planning motivated students to work together and combine theory and practice.” “Living here is like living in a family – except that there are no parents, not as many rules and you have 29 siblings your own age,” says resident and aeronautical engineering student Jana Friedrich. “Everyone contributes to the community in his or her own way. There are moments I feel like this is literally like a huge playground for grown up kids.” An exhibition on Walter Segal is at the University of Stuttgart until 27 November. Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to join the discussion, and explore our archive here