A plant-based burger that “bleeds” – from cult US brand Beyond Meat – is to make its hotly-anticipated UK retail debut in Tesco on Monday after its launch was delayed by supply issues. The Beyond Burger – the company’s flagship vegan-friendly product which sold out after its May 2016 launch in the US – will be stocked alongside conventional fresh meat patties in more than 350 branches of the UK’s largest supermarket. The product – which will cost £5.50 for a pack of two – had been due to arrive in Tesco in August but its launch was delayed after huge demand in the US put pressure on its UK supplies. Diners eating out can also now order it at the 30-strong Honest Burger restaurant chain, following a successful trial, and All Bar One’s 56 outlets. Unlike controversial “lab-grown” meats being developed in the US, the Beyond burger is made entirely from plants, does not use animal stem-cells in production, and is not tested on animals. Each contains 20g of pea protein, coconut oil, potato starch and uses beetroot juice to ooze or “bleed” a meaty red hue. “We see the growing global demand for delicious, plant-based proteins and are excited to serve that demand in the UK with the revolutionary Beyond Burger,” said Seth Goldman, Beyond Meat’s executive chair. “Bringing our innovative approach to merchandising to the UK, Tesco will sell the Beyond Burger in the chilled meat aisle alongside animal-based proteins.” The move comes as manufacturers, supermarkets and restaurants scramble to tap into the burgeoning vegan market, which has expanded as more Britons drop meat from their diet for health or ethical reasons. The UK has an estimated 22 million “flexitarians” – those who enjoy meat but want to reduce their consumption. According to research by Waitrose this month, a third of British people have now stopped or reduced their meat eating. In October, scientists reported that huge reductions in meat eating, including a 90% drop in beef consumption in western nations, are essential to avoid dangerous climate change. “The Beyond Burger has been one of the most eagerly anticipated food launches of the year and we believe that this fantastic tasting patty will be a real game changer for anyone considering going vegan or trying a flexitarian diet,” said Martyn Doble, Tesco prepared foods manager. “The most common reaction from those that have tried it is that they cannot believe it is made from plants.” The UK launch follows Beyond Meat’s strong growth in the US, where it counts Bill Gates and Leonardo DiCaprio among its investors. The Beyond Burger is designed to look, cook and taste like beef and is sold at more than 10,000 grocery stores across the US, and is on the menu at more than 10,000 restaurants. But the implications of the proliferation of lookalike meats for the global food industry are enormous. The US beef industry has filed a petition to exclude non-animal products from the definition of meat, while in France a law bans vegetarian companies from calling their products sausages, mince or bacon.