I was on maternity leave when I decided to leave my role as joint political editor to present Today in Focus – the Guardian’s new daily podcast. I was gutted to stop working alongside my amazing job-share, Heather Stewart, but excited to find myself back at our headquarters in King’s Cross. The new team was placed on a bank of desks on the second floor, close to the Observer newsroom, where colleagues I’d worked with for eight years before leaving for the parliamentary lobby in 2009 are still beavering away. On our other side are (usefully!) the lawyers and the sports desk, followed by global development writers, and a strengthened environment team. Then – just two minutes around the corner – is the newsdesk, where the volume rises as editors gather around desks to make quick, collective decisions on rolling stories. Given our aim is to showcase Guardian and Observer journalism by telling its stories in a fresh and engaging way, sitting in the middle of two newsrooms feels like the perfect location. Meanwhile, we can turn to the reporting teams in the US and Australia, foreign correspondents in Europe, Africa and Asia and some of the best opinion writers in the world. As for the podcast itself, our central aim is to provide listeners with 20 minutes every day that never scrimps on storytelling but is anchored in the news agenda. To achieve that, the Guardian has built a team that feels unique: because it brings together radio documentary makers with news junkies like me. That mix of skills and ideas has lent itself to an incredibly creative team in which everyone is learning a huge amount. And I’ve been really pleased with the pieces that combination of strengths has resulted in already – focusing on interesting news ideas, but telling them in a narrative, audio-rich way that we hope to develop over time. The first few episodes have been well received and have already given us good ideas on what works well. The most exciting thing has been quickly realising the scale of the talent we have to draw on here at the Guardian. Having covered politics for many years, I already knew there were excellent reporters in domestic policy areas such as the Guardian’s Patrick Butler, an expert on universal credit, and – of course – Heather and her team in Westminster, with whom we have covered the fast-moving story of Brexit. However, I had not worked with foreign correspondents such as Tom Phillips and Bethan McKernan, whose takes on the election of Jair Bolsonaro in Brazil and the war in Yemen combined excellent analysis with powerful and emotional stories from the ground. The format has also allowed us to be experimental, whether that means interviews with external figures such as the former Greek finance minister Yanis Varoufakis, or spending a day racing around Westminster to give a behind-the-scenes feel on a huge day for news. My co-presenter, India Rakusen, has done powerful episodes: one on poverty in Britain and another on the legacy of the Iraq war, for which Peter Beaumont was able to record for the podcast on the ground. The fact that not many others are producing similar content in the UK means that Today in Focus is inevitably a work in progress in every respect, from the subjects we choose and people we interview to the workflow we follow to get the product completed each day. The overall hope is to bring Guardian stories, told by its reporters alongside their writing, to a wider, younger and more diverse audience. And our position, at the centre of a values-based organisation whose global voice has been amplified in the face of political shocks such as the elections of Donald Trump and Brexit, make that something I believe we can achieve. Being based in the Guardian means we can be more credible than many of the websites cheerleading for their favoured politicians, but far more spiky than the BBC. Where the Today programme tries to give you headlines, we want to give you heart. We hope to offer a mix of immediate news stories, looked at from fresh angles, alongside deep dives into major, rolling stories. Then there is an opinion section, where we will hear from Guardian and Observer regulars as well as other voices from outside the building. For me, it’s a bit of a dream job, isn’t it? I get to sit in a studio day after day, discussing really interesting topics with the best journalists in the world, and working alongside some of the best young producers in the country to find new ways to present them. So far, in pilots and for real episodes, I’ve been discussing everything you can imagine, from Trump to Theresa May, the refugee crisis to Brexit, plastics to cocaine. And I’ve already experienced how differently you get to engage with your audience through a podcast. Along with Heather, I’ve been presenting Politics Weekly for the past two years, and I’ve always loved hearing from listeners who say they feel closer to my reporting when presented in that way. Today in Focus is going to be a bit experimental as we try things out with format, style and tone. In time, we will find the voice that we believe works best for us and as a platform for the Guardian. So please: come, try and (I hope) enjoy what we have to offer, but do also pile in with feedback and ideas. If you give us just 20 minutes of your time, we promise you will learn something relevant, interesting and new every day. 