Tommy Makinson has become only the fifth Englishman to receive rugby league’s highest individual accolade, the Golden Boot award. The England and St Helens winger was included in a four-man shortlist at the weekend alongside his England teammate Elliott Whitehead, the New Zealand captain, Dallin Watene-Zelezniak, and Australia’s James Tedesco. Australians, given the dominance of the Kangaroos at international level, have generally won the award, with Makinson only the ninth non-Australian to win the Golden Boot in its 34-year history. The 27-year-old has had a fine season for club and country, including England’s series victory against New Zealand. He scored a hat-trick at Anfield as England won the second Test to secure the three-match series with a game to spare. The final game is at Elland Road on Sunday. The award, which is given to the player deemed to have made the most impact at international level over the past 12 months, had previously been won by four England internationals: Ellery Hanley, Garry Schofield, Andy Farrell and Kevin Sinfield. Makinson joins that list, despite only making his Test debut against New Zealand in Denver earlier this year. Though St Helens failed to qualify for the Super League Grand Final, Makinson’s form was recognised with a place in the competition’s Dream Team. He overcame serious leg and ankle injuries earlier in his career while the England coach, Wayne Bennett, joked that he did not know where the winger had been hiding before Sunday’s victory against New Zealand. Makinson received the award at a ceremony in Leeds on Wednesday alongside the first winner of the women’s Golden Boot – the Sydney Roosters and Australia centre, Isabelle Kelly. The selection panel, which was comprised of members of the rugby league media on both sides of the world, cited the “spectacular way in which both players have adapted to the rigours of the international game”. Kelly scored twice for the Jillaroos as they won last year’s women’s World Cup in Australia, while also being recognised for her performance against New Zealand earlier this year. Kelly was nominated alongside teammates Ali Brigginshaw and Brittany Breayley, while New Zealand’s Honey Hireme and England’s Georgia Roche – the first winner of the Woman of Steel award – were also nominated.