Hotdogs are Copenhagen’s street food. It was the first and the only one for many years. We have a nickname for a hotdog stand: “Restaurant Cold Feet”. Growing up in the 1970s, having a hotdog was a treat. The sheer excitement of choosing between ketchup, mustard, rémoulade, or all together. Then the choice between raw or fried onions? And did you want it with or without pickled sliced cucumber? I always had fried onions, and the cucumbers were the absolute best for me. They made the hotdog perfect. I remember mostly having homemade hotdogs at special occasions, and often at birthday parties. We would buy thin sausages at the butcher and bake the buns ourselves. It was good for parties and perfect with beer, and also great for dinner. When I made them for my kids, I would always serve them with a red cabbage salad. It is still a combination that works for me. You can find hotdogs all over Copenhagen. There is even a stall in the arrivals section at the airport, to greet homesick Copenhageners. Makes 10 For the rolls:yeast 25g, fresh salted butter 50gwhole milk 300ml, lukewarmstrong white flour 500g, plus more to dustsugar 1 tbsp fine sea salt 1 tsp egg 1, lightly beaten For the cucumber salad:apple cider vinegar 250mlwater 3½ tbsp caster sugar 125g sea salt a pinchcucumbers 2 For the hotdogs:sausages 10, good-quality butcher’sonions 100g, fried (see below)onions 4 tbsp, raw choppedtomato ketchupsweet Scandinavian mustardrémoulade (see below) For the fried onions: Makes about 500g onions 750g, finely slicedplain flour 50g sea salt 1 tbsp, plus more to finishvegetable oil 500ml to 1 litre, flavourless, for deep frying For the rémoulade: carrot 1, finely slicedceleriac 120g, peeled and finely choppedsea saltcucumber ½, deseeded and cut into tiny dicemayonnaise 50mlred onion ½ tsp, finely gratedmedium curry powder 1 tsp English mustard powder ½ tsp lemon juice 1 tsp capers 2 tbsp, drained, rinsed and chopped For the fried onions, place the sliced onions in a bowl with the flour and salt and mix very well until the onions are coated. Pour them into a sieve and shake, to get rid of any excess flour. Half-fill a deep frying pan with the vegetable oil and set over a medium heat. Make sure the oil is hot by placing a slice of onion in it: if it sizzles, it is ready. Reduce the heat a little and a third of the sliced onions. Careful, it may spit! Don’t leave the pan; instead, stir occasionally with a slotted spoon. Fry until light brown and crispy. Using the slotted spoon, transfer the onions to a plate lined with kitchen paper and sprinkle with a little more salt. Repeat the process with the remaining 2 batches of onions. For the rémoulade, boil the carrot and celeriac in lightly salted water for 4-5 minutes. Drain and leave to cool, then mix with the cucumber in a bowl. In another bowl, mix together the mayonnaise, onion, curry and mustard powders, lemon juice and capers, then mix this into the carrot and celeriac mixture. For the rolls, crumble the yeast into the milk and stir to dissolve. Melt the butter and stir it into the milk. Now mix in the flour, sugar and salt, then knead well on a floured surface. Put the dough into a bowl, cover with a tea towel and leave it to rise at room temperature for 1–2 hours, or until doubled in size. After it has risen, form it into 10 fat oval buns and place on 2 baking sheets lined with baking parchment. Cover with tea towels and leave to rise for a further 20 minutes. Now for the cucumber salad. Whisk the vinegar, water, sugar and salt together in a non-reactive bowl. Slice the cucumber thinly, add to the vinegar mixture and leave to stand for at least 30 minutes. Preheat the oven to 180C/gas mark 4. Brush the rolls with the beaten egg and bake for 20-25 minutes. Leave to cool on a wire rack. For the hotdogs, fry the sausages in a dry frying pan for 5-10 minutes, depending on their size, until cooked through. Meanwhile, get all the condiments ready. Now everyone just has to assemble their own hotdog to their liking. Mussels are cheap and delicious, so we ought to eat them every week. Serves 4 mussels 1 kg olive oil 2 tbspbacon 50g, finely choppedonion 1, finely choppedpotatoes 100g, skins on, scrubbed and finely choppedgarlic 3 cloves, finely choppedtarragon 3-4 sprigs, plus a small handful of leaves to servewheat beer 300ml sea saltblack peppercrusty bread to serve Rinse the mussels in cold water. Scrub them thoroughly and tug out any beards. Discard any broken mussels, or those that are open and refuse to close when tapped against the edge of the sink. Keep them in the fridge until you are ready to cook. Heat the oil in a large saucepan, add the bacon and cook until crisp, then add the onion, potatoes, garlic and tarragon sprigs. Now tip in the mussels, pour in the beer and season with salt and pepper, remembering that the mussels are salty. Bring to the boil, then reduce the heat, cover and steam for a few minutes, shaking the pan from time to time, until all the mussels have opened. Discard the few that refuse to open. Serve sprinkled with the tarragon leaves and offer bread to soak up the delicious juices. This is my favourite chocolate bar. I really love the nutty taste of the marzipan. Makes about 12 For the marzipan:blanched almonds 350gicing sugar 100g , plus more to dustwater 50ml To finish the bars:dark bittersweet chocolate 200g, 60% cocoa solids For the marzipan, whizz the blanched almonds in a food processor and keep whizzing until they become a paste. Add the icing sugar, whizz again, then add the water and whizz again. Knead the marzipan on a work surface dusted with icing sugar. Form it into a big brick-like shape and leave it to rest in the fridge for 2 hours or, preferably, overnight. Cut the marzipan into 12 rectangles while you temper the chocolate. For this you will need a sugar thermometer. Knead the marzipan on a work surface dusted with icing sugar and form it into a big brick Melt 140g of the chocolate in a heatproof bowl over a saucepan of simmering water; make sure the bowl does not touch the water. When the chocolate has reached 50C, remove the pan from the heat and add the remaining 60g of chocolate. Mix well until melted. Gently heat in the same way as before until the chocolate reaches 31C . Now it is ready to use. Keep the chocolate’s temperature at a steady 31C while you are working with it. Finally, dip each bar in the tempered chocolate, making sure they are covered, then place on a wire rack until the chocolate has set. Copenhagen Food by Trine Hahnemann is published by Quadrille at £25. To order a copy for £17.49, go to guardian bookshop.com