It is nights like these that offer a reminder of why the Nations League was invented. Twenty-four hours after Croatia and Spain served up a classic in Zagreb, two nations that have been crowned world champions on seven different occasions between them played out a drab and bad-tempered friendly that only occasionally flickered into life even after Neymar scored a dubious penalty 15 minutes from time. In the end, despite their defeat, it was Uruguay’s veteran manager Óscar Tabárez, taking charge of his 188th international match, who will be the more satisfied after his team dominated large swaths of the game but could not find a breakthrough. “It’s difficult for us – when we have one player, Argentina have 10 and Brazil have 40,” acknowledged the 71-year-old afterwards. “But that doesn’t mean we should give up.” By contrast, their opponents – who round off their global tour with a meeting with Cameroon in Milton Keynes on Tuesday – appear a long way from some of their famous sides of the past, despite recording a 25th win in 29 matches under Tite. With Brazil set to host the Copa América next year for the first time since 1989, their coach had urged his players to use this match as preparation for a competition in which they have failed to even reach the final for more than a decade. The 57-year-old’s record would be almost exemplary if it was not for the quarter-final defeat by Belgium at the World Cup that led to much soul-searching among the selecao, but having handed out nine debuts in the four friendlies since that defeat Tite opted for a more familiar-looking line-up on a damp and drizzly night in north London, with Barcelona’s Arthur handed the task of providing a creative spark in the absence of the injured Philippe Coutinho. Uruguay – whose own World Cup campaign also ended in the last eight with defeat against France – were also without several key players, including evergreen captain Diego Godín, but could field Luis Suárez and Edinson Cavani in attack as they went in search of a first victory against Brazil since 2001. Their most famous win, of course, came against these opponents in the 1950 World Cup at the Maracanã in the match that was remembered for the mistake made by goalkeeper Moacyr Barbosa for the crucial goal. His modern-day successor – Alisson of Liverpool – proved more than capable to deny Suárez’s shot from the edge of the box in the best chance of the first half as an enthusiastic crowd made up largely of South Americans were left disappointed. Neymar did have the ball in the net early on but it was correctly ruled out for offside, with Brazil’s captain generally struggling to impose himself on the game. Arsenal’s Lucas Torreira – on his home turf – and the elegant Rodrigo Betancur dominated the central areas, creating a chance for Cavani at the end of the half that Alisson was once more equal to. The Liverpool goalkeeper has retained his status as Brazil’s No 1 despite strong competition from Ederson of Manchester City and he was on hand to deny Suárez just after the break from a powerfully struck free-kick, with Cavani also going close later on. Without Marcelo to provide his usual cutting edge down the left flank, Neymar increasingly found himself dropping deeper for the ball as his frustration grew in the second half. The referee Craig Pawson ended up showing eight yellow cards in total but his most important of the night came in the 76th minute. He seemed to initially wave away the appeals after Danilo went down under a challenge from Diego Laxalt before pointing to the spot to allow Neymar to take the headlines.