House Democrats overwhelmingly nominated Nancy Pelosi on Wednesday to be the next speaker – but she failed to defuse a rebellion within her ranks, setting the stage for a potential showdown on the chamber floor when the new Congress convenes in January. The 203-32 vote represented a critical test of strength for the longtime Democratic leader, and proved she commands broad support from her caucus. But it also showed the size of task she faces to persuade the more than a dozen members who are calling for new leadership and whose votes Pelosi will need to win an absolute majority on the House floor at the start of next year. The full House of Representatives, including Republicans, will elect a new speaker on 3 January. If Democrats win a final House race yet to be called after the midterm elections, and where their candidate is leading, they will hold 235 seats, meaning Pelosi could afford to lose 17 Democratic votes if all Republicans oppose her. In brief remarks to the press as votes were being tabulated, Pelosi, who ran unopposed, said she was in “pretty good shape” and expressed confidence that she would overcome internal resistance to be the next speaker. “I’m talking about scores of members of Congress who just gave me a vote – are giving me a vote of confidence,” Pelosi said. “That is where our focus is. Are there dissenters? Yes. But I expect to have a powerful vote as we go forward.” Moments before the nominating contest began on Wednesday afternoon, Pelosi huddled with leading rebels, including congresswoman Kathleen Rice, of New York, and Congressmen Seth Moulton of Massachusetts and Tim Ryan of Ohio, who challenged her for the post of minority leader in 2016. “We met with Leader Pelosi and tried to engage her in a reasonable conversation about leadership transition. Unfortunately, our concerns were dismissed outright,” Rice said. “We remain united behind our goal of new leadership and we intend to vote against Leader Pelosi in Caucus and on the floor of the House.” Moulton, who circulated a letter signed by 16 Democratic incumbents and new members, that calls for a change in leadership, called on Pelosi to develop a “plan for succession”. “No one wants to see this civil conversation spill into a floor fight,” he said in a statement. “Our request was, and has always been, simple. Produce a meaningful plan for a leadership transition, as you promised in the summer, to allow a new generation of leadership to step forward.” She did, however, manage to reach an 11th-hour agreement with a bloc of moderate Democrats who had threatened to withhold their votes if Pelosi refused to commit to a set of House rules changes that would give rank-and-file members more influence in Congress. After lengthy negotiations, the group struck a deal with Pelosi that they said would help “break the gridlock” in Congress. Though Pelosi ran unopposed, the caucus chose to vote by paper ballot, which gave new members who ran on a promise to vote against Pelosi for speaker the opportunity to declare their positions. The leadership elections began earlier on Wednesday morning and were expected to last late into the evening and possibly into Thursday. To begin the process, Democrats elected congressman Hakeem Jeffries, of New York, who beat California congresswoman Barbara Lee in a competitive race for Democratic caucus chair. Both are members of the Congressional Black Caucus and the Congressional Progressive caucus, and the choice left the caucus “torn”, according to Democratic congressman Gerry Connolly of Virginia, who wouldn’t say who he voted for. Jeffries’ ascent to the No 5 spot ensures that the caucus will have two African Americans on the leadership team for the first time. After the vote, Lee​, 72,​​ said she believed ageism and sexism were factors in her loss​. “I’m a black woman and the institutional barriers are still there, so we just keep fighting,” she said. J​effries told reporters after that he believed the contest was a “friendly competition of ideas” and said it was time for the party to unify. At 48, Jeffries will be among the youngest members of the leadership team alongside Ben Ray Luján, 46, who won the assistant Democratic leader​ position after steering the House Democratic campaign arm during the 2018 midterm election cycle. Both ​are viewed by their colleagues as a potential​ heirs to the speakership when Pelosi steps down.