I wrote the song in 1978, while I was a teenager. At art school, a teacher said: “The best paintings are when you get lost in a piece of work and start painting in a stream of consciousness.” I wanted to do music, not art, so started writing lyrics that way. The first song I wrote was called Ice Cream and Wafers. The next was Holding Back the Years. I didn’t realise what it was about until I’d finished it. It’s about that moment where you know you have to leave home and make your mark, but the outside world is scary. So you’re holding back the years. The line “Strangled by the wishes of pater” is my dad screaming at me: “When are you going to get a decent job? Tidy up after yourself!” The line “Hoping for the arms of mater” rhymes with pater, but I didn’t know what it was like to have a mother. My mum left when I was three and my dad never remarried. When it became a hit my mum tracked me down [but] I realised there was no future in it I first sang Holding Back the Years in my earliest band, Frantic Elevators. When the Elevators split and I started Simply Red, I returned to the song and wrote the “I’ll keep holding on” chorus. The song is credited to me and Neil Moss, the guitarist in the Frantic Elevators and my oldest friend. Neil didn’t write it, but we wrote so many songs together that I gave him a credit to remember the great times we had. We shared a flat, we toured with the Fall. We were skint, but it was magical. After Holding Back the Years became a hit, my mum tracked me down, but I thought: “My dad was there every day. Cooked my meals, wiped my arse and where were you? You think you can walk back into my life and it be OK?” My seeing her was making my dad unhappy. I realised that there was no future in it. People strive for success, but it’s very lonely at the top. Now I realise the ultimate prize is a family. I’m married with a kid, and the last 10 years have been the happiest of my life. My father was never that supportive of my pop career, but I understand now that he was trying to protect me. A working-class bloke who worked in a barber’s for 35 years couldn’t have imagined his son would sell millions of records. Even after the second album, when I was already very wealthy, he was a bit drunk after a show once and said to me: “You realise you’re still gonna have to get a decent job after all this, don’t you?” Oh, Dad. I was one of three budding brass players living in a flat in Hulme, Manchester. We wrote to Factory Records’ boss, Tony Wilson, asking him to give us a job. One day, there was a knock at the door and Tony said: “Right, come to the Haçienda and play for us, then.” We played some Charlie Parker riffs and this skinny little bloke said he liked it. He turned out to be Vini Reilly from the Durutti Column, who asked us to play on his studio album, Without Mercy. Anyone except Vin and Tony would have told us to fuck off. After Mick heard us, we all ended up in the early Simply Red, making the Picture Book album in Holland with the legendary American sax player Stuart Levine producing. I was this skinny, awestruck white kid just out of music college and I think he thought: “These cats ain’t gonna cut it.” We all got the heave ho, but then, when the band was back in the UK recording in the RAK studios in London (which looked like the cockpit of a 747), Mick asked me to rejoin. Someone suggested a trumpet solo on Holding Back the Years. I’d been listening to Miles Davis’s Kind of Blue, and he used a harmon mute – a bulky metal thing you stick in the end of the trumpet. I decided to put one in. Poor Levine must’ve thought: “What’s he doing now?” But I played something spontaneous and everyone liked it. A trumpet was pretty rare in pop and Levine was going: “I can’t fucking believe it, man. We’ve got a trumpet solo.” When I do the solo in the video, it’s out of sync: my fingers aren’t playing what is coming out. I don’t know if Mick’s even noticed, but it has always bugged me. The Simply Red live album and DVD, Symphonica in Rosso, is out now.