Come winter, a jumper’s stock is up. This is probably because jumpers are one of the few upsides to living in the northern hemisphere, so we tend to take them seriously – and because there is no one-size-fits-all. You can go classic or statement, short or big. Here are the four styles we are gunning for now and how to wear them. It may be an emergent jumper trend, but this is a bit of a hard sell. For one, it is cropped, which sets of all sorts off alarm bells. But it is also loose. Herein lies its salvation. If they are baggy, you can wear them over a shirt or with high-waisted trousers, as Stella McCartney did for her post-catwalk-show bow. On the catwalk, they came in wool and cotton-mix at Sacai and Proenza Schouler PSWL, while on the high street they feature in electric blue at Mango and dogtooth at & Other Stories. “Hybrid” because it is almost a poloneck, this is effectively a jumper with a zip. It is very 70s – Florence Pugh wears one in green during an early audition scene in The Little Drummer Girl – and very ski-friendly, if that is your bag. Otherwise it is practical, in that you can unzip it if you get too hot, which you can’t with a poloneck. Longline, fitted, with a bit of stretch and a zip down to the sternum, wear one zipped up with something thermal underneath if you are skiing, or unzipped with a gold chain if you are not. You may describe this as a turtleneck, but this is a turtleneck for people who are cowed by actual turtlenecks, which can be a) too restrictive, b) hard to wear with most hairstyles and c) too hot for most indoor environments. This style sits halfway up your neck and isn’t too tight, but also keeps your neck warm. New Look and Marks & Spencer have comfy versions, while Zara has one adorned with a bow. As for your hair, Jil Sander models wore theirs in tight plaits, but do what you want with yours. Fashion is better than you think at finding discerning ways to be comfortable. Enter the oversized jumper, which runs and runs each season, appearing as much on the autumn catwalks – see Acne Studios, Balenciaga and Jil Sander – as it does the high street (Reserved, Zara, Weekday et al have a cornucopia of styles). How to wear it is simple: over a pencil skirt like Christopher Kane; with wide-legged trousers for a Celine throwback; or, if you are feeling brave, with a sheer skirt (see Simone Rocha), as it covers your underwear. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.