As Amanda Harrison looks up at the war memorial in her home town of Barnard Castle, County Durham, she points to the names of five great uncles who died in the first world war, one after another. The brothers – Robert (22), George Henry (26), Frederick (21), John William (37) and Alfred (30) – all lost their lives on the battlefields of northern France and Belgium in a period of just 22 months between September 1916 and July 1918. Four are commemorated in cemeteries near where they fell, while Frederick is remembered on the Menin Gate in Ypres, along with 55,000 other soldiers whose bodies were never found. To this day, Harrison cannot comprehend how the boys’ mother, Margaret Smith (her great grandmother), endured so much pain and grief. Throughout the war, Margaret and her husband, John, kept a photograph of their boys on the mantelpiece. But in grim succession, the telegrams arrived with terrible news that another would never return. “You know yourself when you have got kids,” Amanda says, her eyes closing. “To think that Margaret had all these boys. She lost the first boy, then six or seven weeks later she lost a second one, and then it was only a couple of months later that she lost a third, and they were just getting wiped out. And so it went on. Five of them in all, and mostly they were just kids, only in their early twenties.” If that were all there was to the extraordinary story of the Smith family’s experiences of the first world war, it would be remarkable enough. But Amanda, and her children and grandchildren, would not be here today to tell the tale were it not for the equally remarkable events that ensured the survival of a sixth brother, the youngest, Wilfred, her grandfather. As news of the deaths of successive brothers spread round the town, such was the outpouring of sympathy for the Smiths that some could not bear the thought that even worse might come. One of those most deeply affected was the wife of the local vicar, a Mrs Bircham, who took it upon herself to write to Queen Mary, George V’s wife, to ask for Wilfred to be returned home to ensure at least one brother survived. Soon after that intervention, Margaret Smith received a letter from Edward Wallington, private secretary to the queen, and this time it bore good news. He wrote that the queen “has caused Mr and Mrs Smith’s request concerning their youngest son to be forwarded for consideration of the war authorities”. Wilfred was duly afforded the necessary official discharge and came back to Barnard Castle to be with his mother in the early autumn of 1918. They were clearly proud of what their sons were doing, but it must have been terribly harrowing to lose so many As she leafed through a pile of old photographs of the boys happily playing together before the war, in her home in Barnard Castle last week, Amanda struggled as she tried to imagine the emotion of that reunion. “I don’t think we would be here today if he had stayed out there, the way her luck was going,” she says. “And to cap it all, she had lost her husband just before the end of the war. So when Wilfred came back he must have just been, well, just so precious, so precious to her, trust me.” Wilfred rarely talked about his experiences of the war. He blocked it out. “We would ask,” says Dianne Nelson, Amanda’s mother, the youngest of Wilfred’s five children. “But he didn’t want to talk about it at all, really.” And his brothers who were lost in battle? “No. He just said that they died and that he was brought back to carry on the line. That was all.” And so he did. Wilfred and his family remained in Barnard Castle, where, despite suffering for years from the effects of respiratory disease caused by a mustard gas attack on the western front, he worked as a stonemason and chimney sweep before dying at the age of 69 in 1968. A local amateur historian, John Pringle, who has helped piece together the story, said the family were clearly intensely patriotic. In the local paper, the Teesdale Mercury of 3 November 1916, a few days after Robert had died, he found an entry reading: “The parents have five sons fighting for king and country and say that if they had five more they would be willing for them to go too.” Three days later George Henry was killed. Pringle said: “They were clearly proud of what their sons were doing, but nonetheless it must have been terribly harrowing to lose so many.” Next Sunday, on the 100th anniversary of Armistice Day, more than 30 descendants of Wilfred Smith, spanning four generations, will lay a wreath at the same war memorial where the names of the five brothers are listed. Across the UK and around the world bells will ring out to commemorate the end of the war. The UK and Germany have asked for bells of all kinds to be rung globally (at 12.30 GMT, 13.30 CET and 12.30 local time) to mark the outpouring of relief when the guns fell silent. “It will be very moving,” says Harrison. “We will just be one family. There will be many, many others with their own memories and their own stories.” The traditional ceremony at the Cenotaph in central London will conclude with an expanded march past. The day will end with remembrance services at Westminster Abbey, and in Glasgow, Cardiff and Belfast. Harrison picks up an old, faded picture of a large crowd that had gathered by the Barnard Castle memorial when it was officially unveiled in 1923. At the front there is a single lady, who is standing nearest to the new stone structure. “It was Margaret who they asked to lay the first wreath for the people of the town,” she says. “They knew that she suffered a great deal.”