Nothing is simple about constitutional reform and the creation of an Indigenous voice to parliament. There are many different views on the best way to proceed, even as the current federal government remains hostile to proceeding at all. So, for some in the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander community, the chance that an Indigenous voice to parliament could come to life in the first term of a Labor government is a glimmer of hope. But others are worried the process could lead to “a dead end”. The final report of the joint parliamentary committee on constitutional recognition was released this week – the latest in a long line of reviews – but this one was followed by Labor senator Pat Dodson’s declaration of what his side of politics intends to do in response, should they win government next year. “We are going to embark on a pathway that involves making real what has come from the Uluru statement of the heart,” Dodson told Guardian Australia. “There’ll be a voice to parliament, there needs to be constitutional entrenchment of the voice and there’ll be a Makarrata commission to do truth-telling and agreement-making.” “And we’ll try and legislate, in consultation with First Nations people, a process that engages the regions, not just those who can travel around the eastern seaboard at their whim.” This might have been a slight dig at critics such as the Cape York Institute’s Noel Pearson, who this week said the report was another exercise in kicking the “can down the road”. Dodson said he and his co-chair, the Liberal MP Julian Leeser, were convinced there was more work to do before a vote is put to the Australian people. Their report warned of the “serious consequences of a failed referendum”. “To succeed, a referendum must be passed by a majority of the Australian people and a majority of people in a majority of states,” it said. “This is a high bar, achieved on only eight occasions in the last 117 years, and never without strong bipartisan support.” Dodson told Guardian Australia: “You’ve got to take time to weigh up and discuss what people want. It’s not a delay tactic, it’s allowing the principle of free, prior and informed consent to operate. “You have to clarify what First Nations people want but you also have to work simultaneously with the broader public. “How are youth going to be represented? How are women going to be represented? What powers and functions do you need? There has to be negotiation with the states because they deliver the majority of the services. “So it’s not easy. If it was easy, someone smarter than this particular committee would have done it a long time ago.” Dodson’s co-chair, the Liberal MP Julian Leeser, said people want to know what they are voting on first. “I think many people are still unaware we are having this conversation. It’s not a barbecue stopper,” he said. “I have been involved a few ‘No’ cases in my time, especially on the national committee for the 1999 ‘No Republic’ referendum, and a few of the arguments we put forward in that case were: the devil is in the detail, there’s more to this than meets the eye, don’t give politicians a blank cheque. “Without proper detail I can see the same arguments being raised in this case. That’s why the co-design process is the logical next step.” The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander social justice commissioner, June Oscar, said she supported an Indigenous-led co-design process. “We must deal with the unfinished business of our country and finally incorporate our voice and rights into the foundational document of this land,” she said. “I also support the recommendation for a national resting place for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander remains in Canberra.“What we need now is political leadership to make sure the joint select committee’s recommendations are realised.” Opposition leaders seeking election, and prime ministers, have been prone to breaking promises to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. The National Congress of Australia’s First Peoples, which represents more than 9,000 individuals and 180 organisations, wants to be a key player in the co-design process. “We’ve got to go through all the mechanics of what the voice actually is, and the mechanics of that still haven’t been decided,” co-chair Dr Jackie Huggins said. “We’re prepared to have that discussion. Anything that’s going to elevate the voice of your people is a good thing to do. “All this takes time … We’re just 3% of the population. We do need the 97% to come across with us. “I’ve been through the ups and downs of the reconciliation process for many years, trying to call this nation to account. I can understand the frustration of our people but this is an exercise that will take time.” Thomas Mayor is the Northern Territory branch secretary of the Maritime Union of Australia and president of the NT Trades and Labour Council. Mayor has been traveling the country, talking to as many people as he can about the Uluru statement from the heart. He is strongly in favour of a referendum as soon as possible, and well before any vote on a republic. “It’s important that the movement we have built continues to grow,” Mayor said. “We cannot forget that opposition leaders seeking election, and prime ministers, even with genuine intent, have been prone to breaking promises to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people because political expediency has moved them that way. “Our voice, calling for a First Nations voice to be put to the people of Australia in a referendum must be so loud, it must make them so uncomfortable that they will deliver a successful referendum. “I look forward to Labor’s commitment to agree on a process to find a clear pathway to a referendum when in government. The process is vital and we must ensure that the pathway cannot take us to a dead end.” But even while the pathway remains under construction, there are some things the government can do now, according to Huggins. “You don’t need a referendum to set up the foundations for truth telling, or a truth commission,” she said. “Let’s hope the government can act in bipartisanship like they once did, to get some runs on the board for us because we have been in deep crisis for many years. “It’s a glimmer of hope that we’re seeing at the moment.” The one thing they agree on is how important this is to the future of the nation. “This referendum is unlike any other,” Leeser said. “We aren’t talking about powers over prices and incomes or the length of parliamentary terms. We are talking about our First Nations peoples. We owe it to them to get this right.”