I was blessed to meet him a few years ago, when I was costuming as Wolverine. At that time, multiple sclerosis had really taken a grip on me, and Stan took the time to step away from his photo shoots, sit me down and have a lovely chat. I’ll never forget, when thanking him for filling my childhood and beyond with tales of such amazing superheroes, he told me that people like me in his words, who put disability aside to help others and push through adversity, “were the true superheroes”. Those words stay with me every day. Bless you Stan for being such inspiration. tachikoma I had reading difficulties when I was in primary school back in the early 60s, but over time managed to understand the text and speech bubbles in comics more easily than pages in text in books. Thanks, Stan, for being one of the people who taught me how to read when my school couldn’t and for being one of the creators who gave me a world of amazing characters to engage with at a time when I was a pretty lonely little girl. I still read comics, but also became a voracious reader of books because of them. Madeleine Wolfe Stan Lee saved my life. Possibly. When I was six, a car hit me as I crossed a road (the man was on green, so I ran. Look both ways, kids!). Just before it did, I tried to jump, as Spider-Man had done in the comic colouring book I had just read. He got a bit higher than I did, having recently been bitten by a radioactive spider, but my tiny leap might have been the difference between flying over, as I did, and going under. Or it could have made no difference at all. But my point is RIP Stan, thanks for the magic. guyfm I was lucky enough to meet Stan a few years ago at a convention in London. He was clearly frail and needed help to walk and steady himself, but seemed overjoyed that so many people had come out to see him and support his work. His enthusiasm for his fans made him appear much younger than the 90+ years he was at the time. Although the meeting was brief and consisted little more of a few words, a handshake and a photograph; it was an unforgettable experience. It was a rare opportunity to meet a man whose work had a profound impact on my early life and must be considered among the 20th century’s most influential writers and creators. Marc Casson, college lecturer, north Wales Growing up in war-torn Belfast, I was lucky for two reason: the local library at the bottom of my street, and my father as a merchant seaman, bringing home a suitcase filled with American comic books, from New York, every trip to sea. I rarely attended school, for numerous reasons, but learned the love of words through Stan’s writing. I always wanted to be a writer, even though I knew I could never become one because of my working-class background. Then I listened to Stan’s advice: “The only advice anybody can give is, if you wanna be a writer, keep writing. And read all you can, read everything.” So I did, and I am! Thank you Stan, warts and all. Sam Millar, writer, Belfast My favourite recent cameo of his was from the Spider-Man game that came out a few months ago. You tend to expect cameos in all Marvel movies but for some reason the cameo in the game took me by surprise. Even though it was an animated version rather than his actual likeness, it captured all his charm and I was grinning like an idiot when i saw it. Turns out it’ll be the last one released before his death. Fitting that it was Spider-Man. RIP Stan. dsk84 A huge escapist part of my otherwise anxious and sometimes fear-driven childhood. I know he sometimes blurred the details of who created what, with Kirby and Ditko especially, but even if he just mostly left him and the others to get on with it, to later become the brash salesman/front man, he must have been doing something right. Though he didn’t always make the best business decisions. But thank you Stan, for brightening up my young world. PP100 I thought it would be nice to share my father’s memories of Stan Lee with you along with a photo of the A1 size drawing of the superhero Stan and Herb Trimpe created during a 1975 BBC Pebble Mill at One interview. Personally I am a life long Marvel fan, as are “Seymour-Man’s” grandchildren so the fact that their grandpa is not only their real life superhero but also a Stan Lee created Marvel one is priceless. The following is my dad, David Seymour’s, fond recollection of Stan’s visit to the Pebble Mill studios: “In 1975, I was a BBC reporter and television presenter working on a daily network magazine/talk show on BBC One called Pebble Mill, named after the the broadcasting centre in Birmingham. I vividly remember interviewing Stan Lee during his visit to the UK, promoting the Son of Origins, which described the creation of several Marvel Comic superheroes. Stan was a great guest both on and off the set. He was helpful, charming, talkative and inventive. It was an extended interview and Stan decided to transform me into a new type of superhero. “I was young, British, black-haired and, Stan claimed, clearly suitable for transformation. It’s 43 years ago, and I forget now what superpowers Stan endowed me with, but as we talked live on British TV, the Marvel artist Herb Timpe sketched out the the new creation: he was called Seymour-Man. I have the sketch to this day, signed by its creators, Stan and Herb. It graces one of our guest bedrooms at home in Northumberland and has always intrigued our grandchildren. Sadly, I never developed the super powers that Stan had described. But now, silver-haired, I’m still Seymour-Man.” Ben Seymour, 42, Newcastle