When Blanche Marvin moved to her flat in London, it was on a temporary basis, until she could find somewhere more suitable. That was 50 years ago. Rent was £8 a week: “It was déclassé to live above a shop, so it was cheap,” she says in her throaty, well-bred New York accent. She has rented it for so long that she now has residents’ rights. And besides, no one would dare turf this small but formidable nonagenarian on to the street: she has gale-force opinions on everything from plastic bags to actors. Marvin, a former actor and producer, is probably one of the most active theatre critics you’ve never heard of. At 93, she still goes to the theatre “most nights”, and writes thorough reviews which she publishes at blanchemarvin.com. She regards her pieces as providing a service; they are written, she says, for the industry – directors, producers, other critics. “My reviews don’t put bums on seats. I’m older than anyone else – I’ve seen the originals, I can provide the context. Critics used to be authorities. Now they’re just journalists. I’m the only one left.” Born Blanche Zohar in New York in 1925, Marvin left home aged 14. She worked as an actor and dancer on Broadway, was courted by Marlon Brando, and became a close friend of Tennessee Williams. The playwright, she claimed, named Blanche DuBois in A Streetcar Named Desire after her. Around this time, she met the producer Mark Marvin, 17 years her senior. By her early 20s, she was living in postwar Europe, setting up theatres in Germany and picking up acting work in Italy. “Then I got a telegram from Mark saying, meet me in Paris, where he proposed. I dropped everything.” Paris was “hostile – people shopping collaborators to the authorities”. Shortly after, the newlyweds moved to London, where Marvin has lived since. The couple had two children, before Mark died in 1958. With her striking outfits, strong sense of style and colour, and trademark cloche hats, Marvin has the air of a well-kept, wealthy woman. “I could have gone to Hollywood, become a big star and married a rich man,” she says. “But that wasn’t for me. I’ve never had any money. Beyond rent and food, I don’t care: I don’t go on holiday. I sit in the square in the sun and drink a coffee. I have nothing to leave my children except what’s in this house.” Her home reflects this thrifty lifestyle. It consists of a kitchen, living room, office and dining room that doubles as a bedroom, with a daybed in the corner where she sleeps at night. She takes pride in the way her furniture adapts to the small space: the sofa becomes a guest bed; a small table hinges out to become a larger one; a wooden bench turns into another table. “Everything is convertible,” she says. “I’m very organised – in a small space, you have to be.” Her living room is painted grey, and the office, dining room and a set of elegant velvet curtains are a mustard shade. “Things don’t have to match,” Marvin says, “but they do have to harmonise. If they don’t, keep working at it until they do!” Nothing looks as if it was acquired later than 1950. The kitchen table is an old desk painted white, fitted with a green lacquer top. The room is painted gun-metal grey, not for style points but for practicality: “White in a kitchen gets too dirty.” Her woven glass curtains, at 80 years old, are only slightly younger than Marvin is. Her front room is filled with objects, collections and personal pieces, each with a story. She bought a set of green ceramics, on display in the kitchen, on her honeymoon in St Tropez. “It was just a fishing village where artisans lived and worked,” she says. The most striking feature is a narrow, cork-walled hallway filled with theatre bills, programmes, photographs and pictures spanning her nine decades. A pencil drawing turns out to be a portrait of Marvin by Marcel Marceau, which he did just after the second world war, before he became famous. These objects are not just decoration, but memories: “I’m never lonely in this house, because I have my life with me.” She loathes waste and consumerism. “I hate plastic bags – we’re creating so much waste, this planet will explode,” she says, her voice rising to almost a shout. Her reuse philosophy is thoroughly modern. She gestures to an ancient Kenwood. “I love my mixer, but thank God I have all these hand-held things, because what happens when the power goes? There are many good things about progress – I see furniture today that is a vast improvement on the past – but you have to use it with intelligence.” She is equally passionate about the theatre. What recent plays stand out? “Debbie tucker green’s ear for eye at the Royal Court, and the RSC’s Don Quixote at the Garrick Theatre: it’s dramatised like a pantomime, including slapstick audience participation, food-throwing, but with a warmth to counter it all.” What actors does she admire? Timothy West, she says, without missing a beat. “He has the magic.” Billie Piper was “brilliant” in Yerma; and Joe Dixon, who played Catiline/Mark Antony in the Royal Shakespeare Company’s Imperium, is “a giant. Now there’s an actor.” Marvin takes her theatre-going seriously; she never eats out or has a drink in the interval. “They’re indulgences,” she says. “A drink would break my concentration. I stay in my seat, think about the play, then I’m prepared for the next act.” She bemoans the way people don’t dress up any more. People always confuse her with Joan Plowright, Baroness Olivier, she says. “I met her recently at Peter Hall’s memorial and said, ‘I hope you’re not offended.’ She said, ‘Not at all, you can do my work for me.’” I tell her I enjoy going to the theatre so much, I can even overlook a dull play. “You mustn’t confuse the occasion and the piece,” she says, kindly. Recently, she’s been feeling “very weepy”, going to too many funerals, including that of her best friend. Does she feel her age? “My digestion is shot to pot, and my hearing is going, which affects my balance. But I’ll be damned if I’m going to live my life through my aches and pains. I don’t want to know about it.” She wants to write her memoirs, but needs to find the time. “People say old people are lonely, but I am fascinated and rejuvenated by life. There is so much I want to do, and not enough time to do it.”