A visit to the new Esquilino market inevitably ends with a second breakfast or early lunch at an Indian fast-food canteen called Janta. Not much larger than the lower deck of a bus, it has eight Formica tables, each one home to a springy napkin holder, a big jug of water and two smaller jugs, one of spearmint-green yoghurt sauce, the other dark, sweet tamarind. I’m not sure if it’s the done thing, but I swirl the two into a spiral dip for samosas and pakoras – clusters of vegetables dipped in chickpea flour batter and fried. The menu is a mix of Italian and English: riso (rice), biryani, veg curry, non-veg curry and pollo con curry di spezie indiane, all served on stainless-steel trays. Always busy, but somehow never feeling busy, Janta, like the market nearby, is multicultural: Rangpuri, Italian, English, Bengali and Mandarin all swirl into the 9X Music hits pulsing from the TV. A piece of India and Bangladesh in central Rome, I love Janta. For its decor – on the one hand pure function, on the other as ornate as the wooden divider half-hiding the kitchen and the child-sized Ganesh by the till; for its warm, spiced air; and for the friendly, efficient waiter from Dakar. Mostly, I love it because mounds of basmati rice, spiced vegetables, strident lime pickle and cool yoghurt sauce are just what I want to eat when I come out of the market with bundles of coriander, a kilo of semolina and a hand-shaped ginger root. Back in Testaccio, the three young men who work in the frutta e verdura shop under our flat are also from Bangladesh, as is the sous chef at a favourite trattoria and the five men who sell garlic at the market. This column isn’t the place to discuss the complexities of immigration and migrants – of which I am one, if a privileged one – but I do know that these men work hard for very little, and that they’re a vital part of the city and the life of Testaccio. As I pick a cauliflower, one of the young men tells me his home village is the greenest place imaginable – and to use both turmeric and cumin when I cook it. Having set myself on an Italian food path, I rarely cook Indian (that is, Bengali, Gujarati, Kashmiri …) food at home, but that is changing. This week’s dish of cauliflower, cumin and ginger is adapted from Madhur Jaffrey’s instructive and comforting An Invitation to Indian Cooking – ideal for beginners such as myself. Jaffrey suggests eating this dry but deeply flavoursome dish with chapatis, lentils and plain rice, or with pilau and cucumber raita. We had it with buttered basmati cooked according to Janta, a speedy mix of grated cucumber, thick yoghurt and salt, and a spoonful of Fergus Henderson’s green bean chutney. It was the sort of unstructured, aromatic food and heat that I crave these days, and almost as good as lunch at Janta. Serves 41 piece fresh ginger (about 2in x by 1in), peeled1 medium cauliflower8 tbsp vegetable or olive oil1 small onion, peeled and sliced½ tsp chilli powder (or cayenne)1 tsp turmeric1 green chilli, thinly sliced (discard the seeds if you prefer less heat)1 tsp cumin1 tsp garam masala1 tbsp lemon juiceSalt To serveBasmati rice and either dal or cucumber raita, or both Blend the ginger with four tablespoons of water until you have a rough paste. Break the caulifower into small florets. Warm the oil in a large frying pan, then saute the onion until soft. Add the ginger paste, fry gently for two minutes, then add the green chilli, chilli powder and turmeric, and stir for another minute. Add the cauliflower, sprinkle over the cumin, garam masala, lemon and a pinch of salt, and stir again. Pour over 100ml warm water and let everything bubble for a couple of minutes. Cover the pan, turn the heat to low and leave to simmer gently so the cauliflower cooks in its own steam for 20-30 minutes, stirring every 10 minutes or so, until tender and all the liquid has been absorbed (but not so much that it’s dry). Serve with basmati rice, cucumber raita and/or braised lentils or dal.