You know the feeling: you have been an age in the kitchen, your stomach hasn’t stopped rumbling and you are starting to go dizzy with hunger. Clearly, it’s time. Time to take a photograph, that is. If the entire point of eating these days is to accrue social media likes, then pasta company La Famiglia Rana looks set to capitalise. It has released a luxury fresh pasta kit specifically geared towards Instagrammers, with prices starting at £10 and proceeds going to the charity FoodCycle. Along with your pasta, inside each box is a plate, a wooden spoon, a set of fresh ingredients and a guide by the chef Skye Gyngell on how to make this all look beautiful on your plate. Also included is a photograph of two attractive people completely ignoring their food (and each other) while they point their phones at their meal, which I assume is meant to be aspirational but has the unfortunate side-effect of making you despair for the human race. Antonella Rana, who helped put the kit together, says it is her way of bringing quality ingredients to an increasingly visual medium. “We are in an age where people prefer to give everything to the eyes,” she says. “We wanted to create something that was easy to make so that nobody had to decide at the crossroads – eyes or stomach. We could be the bridge between both.” I get to test the kit, and you can’t argue with the quality. Fragrant bunches of marjoram, slabs of pecorino romano, a paper bag of fresh girolles – it feels like opening something luxurious, if a little overblown for what is essentially a meal of fresh pasta. There’s also something confusing about the kit – it has a plate for one, a recipe for two and enough ingredients for about four. This is more a posh recipe box than a serious social media dweller’s toolkit. Gyngell’s instructions are brief, and largely focus on things you probably knew already: don’t overcrowd your plate, save some fresh herbs for decoration at the end. Still, I find it useful when it comes to suggesting accessories to make my meal look pretty – a line of walnut shells by the plate, for instance, or a plump bulb of garlic – and it doesn’t take all that long to take a decent picture before I tuck into mushroom and ricotta tortelloni with walnuts and chilli. The food tastes good. But do kits such as this not risk us focusing on the visuals at the expense of the eating? “There is a risk,” acknowledges Rana. “But Italians can help here, because we love food so much that we can never accept that a picture could destroy it. My suggestion is three, four seconds for taking the picture ... and then with the rest of the time to eat.” It will probably take more than a pasta kit for you to master the art of photogenic food. For more inspiration, here are the Guardian food team’s best Instafood follows of the year. @karinpfeiffboschekGerman pastry artist, cook and photographer Karin Pfeiff-Boschek posts shots of lattice-topped pies with stunningly intricate geometric designs. From now on, your bake will never look ambitious enough if it doesn’t feature scalpel-cut seasonal leaves and flowers. @ard_bakeryGraphic, showstopper cakes with an 80s Memphis-movement style, by London fashion accessories buyer-turned-cakemaker Alison Dunlop. They taste amazing, too. @dearsafiaBritish-Iraqi baker, stylist, writer and photographer Safia Shakarchi was inspired by baking kleicha (cookies) with her grandmother, as well as time spent in Madrid and Melbourne. Travel and food meet in a carefully composed feed with a Kinfolk-style palette. @skyemcalpineSkye McAlpine’s enviable Venetian kitchen, with its Insta-famous pink wall and market-fresh northern Italian ingredients, produces food we want to cook – and a life we want to live – time and again. @rocketandsquashAuthor and blogger Ed Smith can always be relied on for great captions and restaurant recommendations, not to mention the cooking of British seasonal side dishes (his forte). Well worth following his newsletter for inspiration galore. @joe_woodhouseA London-based food photographer and one-time chef, Joe Woodhouse is a go-to for those after seasonal, vegetarian cooking ideas and beautiful styling. He’s also quite the natural wine buff, if you’re into all that. @georgiepuddingnpieFollow Georgina Hayden, once a recipe developer for Jamie Oliver, now a stylist in her own right and the author of Stirring Slowly, for dreamy kitchen interiors and brightly coloured bowlfuls you always want to eat. @the.xandwichHands in the air, the filling’s all there. A man on a mission to eat and review everything sandwiched between bread or bun, whether it’s from a high-street chain or the latest street-food phenomenon. @cocoinmykitchenCulinary polymath Anja Dunk – author of Strudel, Noodles and Dumplings, preserver and even printmaker – is our feed of choice for family food stories and the shabby chic kitchen shelves of dreams. @tobreakfastandbeyondEvery breakfast and brunch, from waffles to shakshuka, tasted in spots all around the UK and abroad. Philosophy: breakfast is so much more than smashed avo on sourdough.