If a vote of no confidence topples the prime minister, there is no shortage of candidates who may be quietly organising their bids to be her replacement: The former Brexit secretary has pole-vaulted over his rivals to become the first choice of many Eurosceptics. Raab’s credibility is perhaps higher than his predecessor David Davis because he had a more active relationship with Brussels, battled through to the end stage and resigned when he thought he had been overruled. He has not endorsed any leadership challenge to May and, like many of his rivals, almost certainly believes there is no personal advantage in doing so. He has the credentials as a Brexit “true believer” but is also seen as being from new generation of Tory MPs who have less baggage than some cabinet veterans. His name is never far from the lips of people talking about May’s successor but, apart from his instant condemnation of the deal on the day it was published, Johnson has kept his head down as the momentum moved towards plotting against May. Officially his allies stick to the line that it is the policy and not the prime minister that needs to be changed. However, he is certain to stand if there is a contest and he has a dedicated following. However, should he be successful, it could cause a schism in the party, a handful of pro-European MPs have suggested they would find that so distasteful that they would quit the party if he won. Gove has a dedicated follower base among MPs which straddles the divide including remainers such as Nicky Morgan and Brexiter converts such as Nick Boles. His decision to remain in the cabinet is a calculation that is likely to be informed by his betrayal of Johnson in the last leadership contest, for which his reputation has suffered. Many allies and aides are said to have advised him to resign from the cabinet but he has decided to stay within the tent and lobby for change from inside. His chances very much depend on whether he is punished for remaining loyal or rewarded by middle-ground Tories who recognise he has tried to make the deal work. Freshly back from a remarkably short time in the wilderness after her disastrous response to the Windrush scandal, Rudd is the firm favourite of remainers and soft Brexiter Tories on the party’s centre-right wing. She is the most likely to be the “stop Boris” candidate and that could work very well in her favour. However, she has several thing going against her, as an easy target for Labour attacks over her time at the Home Office and the very small matter of her Hastings constituency where her majority is very small. Hunt is clearly ambitious for the role and could end up being a safe choice for Tory MPs as an experienced cabinet minister. He backed remain but has become an outspoken Brexiter who makes multiple tough interventions in cabinet – which are then widely briefed. Hunt has had a remarkable ability to survive damaging scandals, including during his time as health secretary where he withstood multiple NHS winter crises and the junior doctors strikes. He may be able to walk the tightrope between leavers and remainers to win a contest, but he is unlikely to fire up many followers. Javid is another ambitious cabinet minister who has been keen to convey his conversion to Brexit from remain. A protege of George Osborne, he is said to have been instinctively Eurosceptic but only decided to back remain in the first place in order to please the then-chancellor. However, Javid and Hunt are not members of Andrea Leadsom’s “breakfast club” of five Brexiter cabinet ministers who have formed a band to try to persuade the prime minister to change course on the withdrawal agreement – suggesting they are not trusted as true believers yet. The international development secretary is probably the cabinet minister who has come closest to quitting but has taken a small shuffle back from the brink. She is an ambitious Brexiter whose name was mentioned by Jacob Rees-Mogg as one of his favoured candidates. One of her tactics has been an attempt to persuade May to allow Tory MPs a free vote on the final deal, a proposal that has baffled No 10, but one that Mordaunt may hope endears her to backbench Tories to show she is fighting their corner.