“My father began taking pictures when he was 13 years old,” says Jesi Kelley, “and, when we went to Jamaica in 1968, he went everywhere with his camera documenting the lives of the ordinary people we lived among.” The father she speaks of is William Melvin Kelley, who is enjoying posthumous literary recognition as a lost genius of American fiction. His debut novel from 1962, A Different Drummer, has just been reissued by Quercus books after a bidding war, and two further novels are also due to be published. But Kelley, it turns out, was not just a brilliantly experimental novelist but an accomplished photographer. He died last year, aged 79, and his family are currently cataloguing the several thousand negatives he left behind, many of them documenting everyday life in Jamaica, where he and his family lived for nine years in the 1970s. “He was a serious photographer from the start,” says his daughter. “But he got a whole lot more serious when he met Henri Cartier-Bresson in 1968.” At that time, Cartier-Bresson, who was revered as one of the greatest living photographers, was working on an assignment to document black writers living in Paris. Kelley had relocated there with his family following the assassinations of Malcolm X and Robert Kennedy. When the French photographer turned up at 4 Rue Regis, where the Kelleys lived and where the great American novelist Richard Wright had lived before them, he and William hit it off immediately. “I remember it well,” says Jesi Kelley. “The house had a real creative atmosphere. My earliest memories are of the smell of the linseed oil my mother used in her paintings and the click of my father’s typewriter. I think Cartier-Bresson picked up on that and he certainly influenced my father’s way of thinking about photography. After that, he always shot full frame on his Pentax and never cropped the results.” Kelley photographed many of the creative people who passed through the house, including the American jazz saxophonist, Marion Brown. Jesi Kelley also recalls a visit by the trumpeter Don Cherry, his wife Moki, and her young daughter, Neneh – “she had all this energy, even then”. The portraits of artists, writers and musicians that Kelley made in Paris and later in New York, where the family eventually returned, have yet to be catalogued. For now, the photographs he took in inner-city Kingston are the only tantalising glimpse we have of William Kelley’s other creative pursuit. They reveal an eye for candid, often intimately observed documentary pictures of everyday life in the ghettoes of Kingston, the same tenement yards that reggae singers including Bob Marley, Peter Tosh and Jacob Miller grew up in and sang about. Jesi Kelley believes that there may be a few shots of Marley somewhere in the archive. “Dad’s photographs are important because they show everyday life in those micro-village communities rather than the usual cliched images of poverty and suffering,” she says over the phone from her home in the Bronx. Her mother, Aiki, chimes in: “You don’t see that poverty if you live in it, which we did for a time. What you experience is a community pulling together – one fire stove, everyone sharing fish and vegetables and rice. That’s really what he set out to capture.” Children feature in many of the shots, including an infant girl enveloped in the wreaths of smoke emanating from her father’s chalice (ganja pipe) underneath a hand-painted sign that reads “God is Good to Us”. “She had a bad cough,” recalls Aiki Kelley, “so they blow smoke in her face to keep her relaxed and also to help clear up her condition. Ghetto people didn’t trust conventional medicine. They were treating her asthma the natural way – and it worked.” In another revealing portrait, an unnamed man sits by a record deck and amplifier in the makeshift bedroom of a house, a beer bottle resting on the table in front of him next to a baby’s bottle. “What you don’t see are the giant speakers outside the house, which brought the whole neighbourhood to the party“ says Jesi, laughing. What is evident throughout is that Kelley was an unobtrusive photographer, whose quiet images evoke the pulse of day-to-day life in the Kingston ghettoes. “You have to remember that, back then, not everyone was walking around with a camera in Jamaica,” says Jesi Kelley. “And, not everyone was going into the tenement yards. He took his camera everywhere, usually wrapped up in a makeshift bag. They called him ‘American’, but he was not a typical American. He dressed and acted like everyone else so he was accepted. There is a trust there; these are soulful photographs.” Jesi and Aiki plan to eventually exhibit William Melvin Kelley’s Jamaican images back in the country where they were taken and which, for a while, they called home. In the meantime, they will continue to catalogue and print the thousands of negatives from Jamaica, Paris and New York that make up the archive of a uniquely talented individual who, having just become one of the literary sensations of the year, continues to surprise.