The 2020 presidential campaign loomed into focus on Wednesday, even as thousands of 2018 midterms ballots were still being counted and several key races were yet to be called. But Democrats searching for a path to the presidency in Donald Trump’s America found little clarity in the results from Tuesday’s elections. A nation deeply divided along geographic and cultural lines delivered a split verdict in an election cast as a referendum on the president. “If Dems were looking for an obvious frontrunner for 2020 to emerge from 2018 results, well, you didn’t get one,” said Amy Walter, an elections analyst with the Cook Political Report. Democrats stormed to victory in the House, powered by a disparate coalition of young people, minorities, women and suburban white voters who mobilized in opposition to the president. It will fall to whomever the Democrats ultimately select as their presidential candidate to build an electoral coalition that fuses these competing constituencies as their party’s base voters tilt increasingly leftward. As many as two dozen Democrats are said to be seriously considering running for president. The sprawling field spans the ideological spectrum of the left and is distinguished by gender, race and age. Several potential frontrunners are women, including senators Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and Kamala Harris of California. The Democratic field could include a red-state governor, a big city mayor or perhaps even a failed Senate candidate, after Beto O’Rourke’s spirited challenge in Texas. There are also big question marks around whether Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont or former vice-president Joe Biden decide to make a 2020 run. Democrats are divided over which candidate, strategy and vision can forge a coalition capable of defeating Trump in two years. The 2018 map offers plenty of contrasting data points for both wings to make their case. The major fault line is between those who believe the party’s next presidential nominee should be unapologetically liberal who can boost turnout among progressives, minorities, young people and other base voters and those who believe the party should nominate a candidate who can chart a more moderate course that appeals to independent and undecided voters in battleground states. Yet the theory advanced by progressives that their candidates could win beyond coastal cities and urban centers was undercut by the losses of several high-profile and charismatic figures who were unable to translate national prominence into electoral victories. In Texas, Ted Cruz fended off a strong challenge from O’Rourke. Andrew Gillum lost to a Trump acolyte in Florida. Randy “Ironstache” Bryce fell short in a Wisconsin congressional race for House speaker Paul Ryan’s open seat. And Kara Eastman could not best the Republican incumbent in her conservative Kansas district. Even as candidates celebrated their 2018 victories on Tuesday night, 2020 was not far from mind. The New Jersey senator Bob Menendez, addressing the crowd in Hoboken after his re-election victory, said he was told that the state’s junior senator, Democrat Cory Booker, “may be busy really soon”. Booker is one of several Democratic senators expected to run for the party’s nomination in 2020. “Cory, everybody in this room is ready to get on board and make sure that happens,” Menendez, also a Democrat, said. In Ohio, Senator Sherrod Brown said his re-election in a state Trump won proved that “progressives can win – and win decisively – in the heartland”. “We celebrate Organized Labor and all workers,” said Brown, who is considered a dark horse presidential contender. “That is the message coming out of Ohio in 2018 and that is the blueprint for our nation in 2020.” In New York, Gillibrand thanked her supporters after winning re-election on Tuesday, telling them: “This is only the beginning, and I can’t wait to keep fighting alongside you.” While Warren, who has said she’ll “take a hard look” at running for president once the midterms are over, saw a clear mandate in her victory: “Tonight you told me to stay in the fight.” But much of immediate 2020 chatter centered on a man who didn’t win on Tuesday night and who just days before definitively ruled out running a presidential bid. “Beto lost?” actress and activist Alyssa Milano wrote on Twitter as #Beto2020 trended on the platform. “That’s ok. Now he can run for President.” Larry Sabato, who runs the University of Virginia’s election forecasting project “Crystal Ball”, predicted that O’Rourke might be drafted to run in 2020 because no one in the potential Democratic field “seems to come close to matching his appeal to the grassroots”. “There was another guy who lost a Senate race and was elected President two years later,” Sabato said. “A fellow named Abraham Lincoln.”