Truffles are not a regular item on my plate and, at London’s Soho delicatessen Gelupo, I get a reminder why not. They sell top-of-the-range white truffles, sourced from Alba in northern Italy, and they come with a price tag to match their scarcity. The customer queuing in front of me snatches up one of the few remaining pots – 21.2g of the stuff – and the till rings up £69.96. Gulp! But if I could afford to eat truffle every day I surely would, such are its uniquely aromatic and enchanting properties. And it was with people like me in mind that the folk at Gelupo had a brainwave: how can we give people a taste of these truffles without forcing them to remortgage a property? The answer lay in their other area of expertise – gelato. By combining the two, they arrived at white truffle ice-cream. It is, says Richard Crampton-Platt, Gelupo’s operations manager, a way of letting people sample these truffles for the (relatively) affordable price of £4 a scoop. But does truffle actually work as an ice-cream flavour? I arrive at Gelupo with high expectations after chatting to Crampton-Platt. Their alba truffles are, he assures me, the best you can find. They are sourced – according to their website – from a “Mr Piercarlo, who is President of the Piedmont Truffle Hunter Association” – the business card everyone dreams of. Unlike black truffles, which are predominantly mass-farmed in the south of France, these white ones are sensitive little things that are only available for a few months at the end of the year. They have an intensity that outclasses their inferior relations. When their salesman visits the office every Tuesday and Friday to show off his wares, the aroma from his truffle box is so intense that it can linger for two or three days afterwards. “Those are the days everyone wants to be in the office,” says Crampton-Platt. This intensity means that a small amount of truffle will, when fused with milk, make a sizeable amount of ice-cream. Gelupo uses sheep’s milk ricotta to add savoury depth, and then serves the finished product to customers on a Saturday afternoon. Some people are starting to visit the shop specifically for this event. The ice-cream I am served looks no more glamorous than your standard vanilla, but the taste is curious – a mix of sweet and savoury that seems to play tricks on your brain. Each mouthful is an adventure, and it is best to savour it slowly. Unlike most puddings, this is a dessert so decadent that you are not likely to be left wanting more – the combination of rich truffle and creamy gelato means that one scoop is sufficient. In fact, I am left wondering what other dessert staples a dab of this delicacy might work with, so that the truffle could be used even more sparingly. Perhaps, then, a few more of us might be able to indulge in white truffles without ending up bankrupt.