Sausage before onion or onion before sausage? It’s one of the key decisions Australians will not be making this weekend after Bunnings told all groups staffing the stores’ barbecues to put the onions on first. “Safety is always our No 1 priority and we recently introduced a suggestion that onion be placed underneath sausages to help prevent the onion from falling out and creating a slipping hazard,” said Bunnings’ chief operating officer, Debbie Poole. The “friendly recommendation” has been provided in the “sausage sizzle welcome pack” to community and charity groups that run the fundraisers. The recommendation is also now on display within the gazebos when barbecues are operating at many of Bunnings’ 290 stores. But disbelief ran hot on social media. Some questioned the danger of a fallen slice of onion. Others wondered whether the sausage was more of a slip hazard. And what about the sauce? How many people have died or injured slipping on onions at a Bunnings stall? Ambos must be stationed at every stall is next on the agenda. Bunnings sell bubble wrap right? Lets go buy rolls of this to cover ourselves with. FFS this is beyond madness now. Why dont we serve the sauce frozen in cups cause that might fall out too. Another great example of why Australia is so messed up. It's my biggest fear when going to Bunnings, the number of onions i have tripped over... my lord, every freakin sunday.... One more reason to hate Australia. 🤦‍♀️ #auspol #bunnings #WhatIsThePointOfLiving https://t.co/3CDF3ixrvx What an outrage! Onion first? What’s next, cheese before the patty on a burger. OH&S gone mad #Bunnings #sausagegate #onionoppression Some pointed out that at least the traditional items needed for a furious protesting mob would be readily available. For real I thought 3.50 made up some OH&S garbage to cause outrage. This is BEYOND ridiculous. *goes to Bunnings to buy pitchforks**stands outside Bunnings to protest, with said pitchforks* Debate also spilled into equally passionate arguments about how well the bread holds in the contents. I thought Bunnings sold tools. This ruling proves that they are a pack of tools. Onions first or last, when you roll up the bread it ends up in the same place. But a qualified Tradesman would be able to work that out. This seemed to be less of a dilemma in Western Australia where Bunnings sausages are often served in a roll, rather than a slice of bread. STOP WHAT YOU ARE DOING!!! ✋My colleague from Western Australia just informed me that over that side of the country - Bunnings sausage sizzles come served in a ROLL and not a slice of bread! WTAF?!?!? 🌭Can someone else confirm this madness? 🤯 pic.twitter.com/44ZLFba0Ou Thousands of community groups and charities apply to run sausage sizzles at Bunnings stores each weekend. The groups themselves decide what they will serve, with Bunnings requiring them to signpost what is on the menu. All money raised goes directly to the group manning the hotplates. Bunnings provides the barbecue and gas. Bunnings said it was confident the onion recommendation would not affect the experience. “Regardless of how you like your onion and snag, we are confident this new serving suggestion will not impact the delicious taste or great feeling you get when supporting your local community group,” Poole said.