It was a day heavy with emotion and one that nobody in the stadium will forget. There were so many deeply moving images, but none more so than the sight of Aiyawatt, Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha’s son, walking around the pitch after the final whistle and fighting back the tears while the supporters were singing his father’s name. Leicester’s staff and players followed closely behind, along with Claudio Ranieri, Nigel Pearson and Craig Shakespeare, three of their former managers, as the club came together to applaud the fans and in particular to show their support for Aiyawatt, who looked overcome by it all as he walked towards the centre circle holding a Thailand flag. “Forever in our hearts” was the message of the day, with the sense of sadness overwhelming at times as tributes were paid to not just Vichai, Leicester’s former owner, but also the four others who lost their lives in a helicopter crash here a fortnight ago. In many ways it felt more like a public wake and, in the circumstances, the game itself was largely an irrelevance. The whole occasion pulled on the heartstrings. Leicester’s players and many of the staff at the club had paid their respects to Vichai when they travelled to Thailand last weekend to attend his seven-day funeral, but for the supporters this was their opportunity to say farewell and thank you to the unassuming 60-year-old who made their dreams come true. “Champions of England, you made us sing that” reverberated time and again. A march almost three hours before kick-off, from Jubilee Square, in the city centre, to the King Power Stadium, set the tone for the day. Thousands turned out to honour Vichai, including Harry Maguire, James Maddison, Andy King, Matty James and Hamza Choudhury, who were not part of Leicester’s matchday squad. The rainbow that followed the rainstorm as fans got close to the ground was another affecting and fitting image on a sombre day. In keeping with the dignified way Leicester have handled such a tragic story throughout, fans were given commemorative scarves, pin badges and a souvenir programme that was full of touching tributes from players and managers past and present. Kasper Schmeichel’s thoughts were particularly moving, as the Leicester goalkeeper recalled the harrowing picture that he has been unable to shake from his mind for the past two weeks. “I was on the side of the pitch standing, chatting with some of those closest to him that night and waved him off as he took off, like I nearly always used to do after home games. What happened next will stay with us forever. It has replayed through my head every minute since, wishing that there was something more I could have done. I stood for a long time at the police cordon at the back car park on the night of the 27th and again the next morning. Tears streaming down my face.” There was barely a dry eye in the stadium in the moments leading up to kick-off. Alan Birchenall, the club ambassador and former Leicester player, reflected on that remarkable Premier League title triumph as he stood in the centre of the pitch holding a microphone and with the crowd hanging on his every word. “Without him, none of it would have been possible,” Birchenall said. Every Leicester supporter applauded. When a beautifully edited video tribute to Vichai was played on the giant screens moments later, you could have heard a pin drop. The stadium fell silent again at the end of that clip, for two minutes, in respect to all those who lost their lives in the helicopter crash and also ahead of Remembrance Sunday. Thirty thousand Leicester supporters stood shoulder to shoulder, holding aloft scarves bearing that message, “Forever in our hearts”. It was such a poignant moment, impeccably observed by the Burnley supporters too, who could not have been more respectful throughout. In truth, it was hard to think of a more difficult backdrop for a football match, for Burnley as well as Leicester, and it was no real surprise that the game ended goalless. Leicester had their chances, especially in the first half, when Jamie Vardy’s effort was cleared off the line by Matt Lowton, Rachid Ghezzal headed against the bar and Joe Hart saved at the feet of Demarai Gray. As for Burnley, Chris Wood profligately blazed a decent chance over in the second half. Not that anyone came here to talk about the football.