Unlike many who claim they saw the New York Dolls play Max’s Kansas City in 70s New York, Chandra Oppenheim was actually there – although she was sleeping snugly under a table as her parents watched. She saw Steve Reich live and would attend hog-roast gatherings under the Brooklyn Bridge hosted by the artist Gordon Matta-Clark set to a live soundtrack by Philip Glass (known to the family as Phil). Aged eight, she was delivering performance pieces at the Kitchen, a downtown arts space; by 12, she was the leader of the post-punk band Chandra. Chandra – the band – were steeped in New York’s prolific post-punk, funk and no wave scenes, but until recently their music was largely forgotten. Even Soul Jazz Records’ comprehensive two-volume New York Noise compilation found no room for it. But a new reissue, along with forthcoming live shows, is bringing Chandra’s story back into focus. “I thought it would be three years before I picked up this music again,” says Oppenheim, now 50. “But it’s been more like three decades.” Oppenheim is the daughter of the late conceptual artist Dennis Oppenheim, who often included her in his work – her first drawing became the basis for a piece. Once, she held a limp, lifeless puppet with a knife in its back in her outstretched arms, while staring malevolently into the camera, for a series on puppets. “On one project my dad said, ‘They are going to shoot you’, meaning photograph me, but I took it very literally – the artist taking my photo had actually shot himself in the arm previously for an art piece.” This became the norm. “I was surrounded by it from day one,” she says. “It takes a long time to catch on that you’re living an unconventional life.” Oppenheim’s parents split when she was five. Dad’s house was filled with the music of Devo, Patti Smith and Lou Reed. At the house of her mum, Phyllis Jalbert, she’d stand on the coffee table and sing along to Janis Joplin. Encouraged by the creative freedom her parents offered her, Oppenheim soon outgrew assisting her father. “By seven, I was the artist and he was supporting me,” she says. Her performance art pieces at places such as the Kitchen and Franklin Furnace, a hole in the wall avant-garde venue, were an evolution of her childhood. “I had become infused with my father’s sensibility,” she recalls. One piece featured her and a friend tossing their babies into trash cans; there was a song about climbing out of high-rise windows. During this era at the Kitchen, the music director was the cult disco artist Arthur Russell, who booked bands including Talking Heads and the Modern Lovers – although Oppenheim’s attentions were focused elsewhere. “I just remember running around and making tunnels to crawl through from these old grey cushions.” Chandra formed when Eugenie Diserio and Steven Alexander saw Oppenheim perform and decided they wanted to work with her. They were contemporaries of her parents, former members of Model Citizens (who had been produced by John Cale) and played in no-wave band the Dance. “Chandra was completely unique,” Alexander remembers. “We wanted to create a project around her. It wasn’t just about working with a kid.” Oppenheim saw no problem: “It felt normal to be in an adult world and treated equally. I felt like an adult to a fault. I probably missed out on more fundamental kid-like experiences but that’s where I wanted to be.” Oppenheim was 11 in 1979, when Chandra rented a room in the Music Building in Hell’s Kitchen. “A grungy, gritty, rough place,” she remembers. They practised twice a week with Fred Maher joining on drums. Some days they would bump into Madonna. Oppenheim’s songwriting quickly evolved, Alexander recalls: “Chandra would blow us away with her lyrics. We were always like, ‘Don’t change a thing.’” The deceptively simple Kate, written about Oppenheim’s best friend, begins: “There’s a girl called Kate and she thinks she’s really great but she’s not.” The account of childhood jealousy moves from envy to empathy, telling a story from two opposing perspectives. Oppenheim squeezed in writing wherever she could: Kate was written on her paediatrician’s examination table while she waited for her appointment. In 1980 the band recorded the EP Transportation. Full of looping bass lines, spiky guitars, wheezing melodica and fizzy drum bursts – akin to ESG and Lizzy Mercier Descloux – these ornery textures were elevated by Oppenheim’s unique delivery. Her vocals were youthful, yet on tracks such as Concentration the manipulative and experimental shifts in tone and delivery sound way beyond her years. “It was very different to a lot of the aggressive no-wave stuff of the time,” Alexander recalls. “It had a meditative quality.” The band gave their debut show at New York’s legendary Mudd Club, a favourite hangout of Lou Reed, Debbie Harry and Johnny Thunders. There were more packed shows and great press in the New York Times and NME. “There were moments when the music was pulsing and Chandra was chanting, in a room full of jaded hipsters, and they’d be staring with their jaw open,” says Alexander. “It was so pure.” Oppenheim says: “I was more comfortable on stage than I was anywhere else in my life.” Oppenheim was shielded from many of the more unsavoury elements of band life. “We were protective of her,” Diserio recalls. “Everybody was always on their best behaviour backstage. We just wanted her to have an outlet.” Oppenheim recalls her mother kicking out a Paris Match photographer who requested she be “scantily clad and pose in a suggestive way” for a photoshoot. A second incarnation of the band called the Chandra Dimension was created in 1981 by Alexander and Diserio. While the pair remained in the band, they brought in three younger players aged between 12 and 19. They didn’t really gel, shelving a second EP. Plus homework got in the way. “I had to make a decision, school or music, and I chose school,” says Oppenheim. Oppenheim figured Chandra’s reputation would allow her to start new projects after finishing school but the interest wasn’t there. She moved into real estate but never stopped making music. “It was incredibly difficult and discouraging,” she says. “To have a life in music within my grasp and then it was gone. I never stopped making music but I no longer had an audience.” A limited vinyl reissue in 2008 via Cantor Records created a new one. The film director Matt Wolf, who had directed a documentary on Arthur Russell, included Kate on the soundtrack to his 2013 documentary Teenage, which was scored by Deerhunter’s Bradford Cox. A year later, offers to reform Chandra came in, which Oppenheim accepted: by 2016 she was performing live with the Avalanches in New York after they sampled the track Subways on their comeback album Wildflower. She continues to tour the music of Chandra with new band members. Schedule permitting, her 11-year-old daughter sometimes performs with them. “She’s the age I was when I was making this music so it adds a strange time warp experience,” says Oppenheim. “She looks so similar to me, it’s like staring at the record cover from 1980.” A reissue of Transportation is released on 7 December through Telephone Explosion.