More than 20 Conservative MPs have publicly said they have submitted letters of no confidence in the prime minister, and many more may have done so privately, but what would be needed to trigger a contest? It takes 48 Conservative MPs to back a no-confidence vote in Theresa May to trigger a leadership contest, according to party rules. A contest can be triggered in two ways. The first way is if the leader of the party resigns. If they do not but MPs are unhappy with their leadership, 15% of Conservative MPs must write to Sir Graham Brady, the chairman of the 1922 Committee of backbench Tories. The party has 317 MPs, so 48 letters would be needed. The next step is relatively opaque. It is likely that Brady would inform the prime minister and the chief whip directly. There is precedent for a vote to be called quickly. A vote of no confidence in Iain Duncan Smith’s leadership in 2003 was called the day the threshold was reached. A simple majority of 159 MPs would oust a party leader, though the leader would also be likely to resign if they received a significant number of no-confidence votes. Should May defeat her critics, they would not be permitted to challenge her for another year. No one knows how many letters have been sent, apart from Brady. Brexiters in the European Research Group of Eurosceptic MPs have been keeping a running tally. But they cannot know for certain. It’s possible. Brady hinted in a Tory party conference fringe meeting that should the threshold be reached he would double-check with MPs who had sent their letter some time ago in case they had changed their minds. For example, some may have sent theirs in the direct aftermath of the disappointing general election, and may now feel that the time for a challenge has passed. Tory leadership rules do not permit a challenge by a rival, so Boris Johnson or another candidate could not directly challenge May. A leadership contest could only be triggered if May resigned. Tory leadership races give MPs the power to whittle down the shortlist to the final two. After David Cameron resigned, five MPs stood for the leadership and the list was reduced to May and Andrea Leadsom. However, in 2016, Leadsom withdrew from the race after a damaging interview with the Times about the fact that May did not have children. Her withdrawal meant May was made party leader without having been elected by members.