Thousands of schoolchildren across Australia walked out of class on Friday to demand action by the federal government on climate change. The “Strike 4 Climate Action”, inspired by 15-year-old Swedish student  Greta Thunberg, brought together children in capital cities and 20 regional centres such as Ballarat, Newcastle, Townsville and Cairns. A large protest was also held in Hobart on Thursday. More than a thousand primary and secondary students filled Sydney’s Martin Place and students in Melbourne marched through the streets, bringing traffic to a standstill. The prime minister, Scott Morrison, had earlier this week urged students this week not to take part and told them to be “less activist”. On Friday, the resources minister Matt Canavan said he would prefer students to learn about mining and science. “These are the type of things that excite young children and we should be great at it as a nation,” he told 2GB radio. “The best thing you’ll learn about going to a protest is how to join the dole queue.” Stop Adani chant - deafening pic.twitter.com/kBO194Elsa Still waiting to go in to Parliament House...@ScottMorrisonMP @billshortenmp will you save us the wait and come #MeetTheKids? #SchoolStrike #climatestrike pic.twitter.com/7CgfBW9yNe 100+ students just started #ClimateStrike in Coffs Harbour! pic.twitter.com/IMIjEpYOkf In Sydney, student Jean Hinchliffe, 14, took to the stage and told her fellow students the protest was just getting started. “This is our first strike,” she said. “Our first action. And it is just the beginning. And we’ll keep doing it until something is done.” Lucie Atkin-Bolton, 11, the school captain of Forest Lodge public school, said she had been let down by politicians. “I wish I didn’t have to be here today,” she said. “I’m the school captain at my primary school. We’ve been taught what it means to be a leader. You have to think about other people. “When kids make a mess, adults tell us to clean it up and that’s fair. But when our leaders make a mess, they’re leaving it to us to clean up.” Loving this sign at the Melbourne #ClimateStrike pic.twitter.com/64FnzZqQjy Any mention of the prime minister brought boos from the crowd, as student after student criticised his comments. “If Scott Morrison wants children to stop acting like a parliament, then maybe the parliament should stop acting like children,” Manjot Kaur, 17, from Ravenswood school said. The noise was deafening as students waved homemade signs, chanted and sang along to a rendition of Stand By Me. Hinchchliffe called Morrison’s electorate office, and encouraged students to call the prime minister every day for the next week. best of #climatestrike signs in Sydney pic.twitter.com/nMH0MWZo9d Here's how far back the #climatestrike stretches - and it was even bigger an hour ago pic.twitter.com/NPFHS5vxmk huge boos for Tony Abbott as two students from Warringah say it's time to get rid of him #climatestrike pic.twitter.com/lAC5Wy1Inc Freya, 13, and Bee, 14, from Sydney Girls high school, said they felt like their voices were being heard. “Because we don’t have a vote in the elections, it sometimes feels like you’re silent,” Freya said. Bee added: “You can influence something. Now it actually feels like I am making a difference about something I believe in. “I think they are misjudging who we are,” Freya said. “They are underestimating us, You can look around and see how many people are here.” Elly, 14, was there with her sister Aidan, 10, and said they hadn’t expected so many students to turn up. “I wasn’t expecting this many,” she said. “I thought it would be small. It’s so good. I didn’t know many people coming from my school, but it’s so cool to have everyone else here.” Earlier in the week, hundreds of students from Canberra lined up outside Parliament House, waited on the lawns and met MPs from the Greens and Labor as well as independents. The Canberra students voiced these concerns in a series of sit-down meetings with the federal Greens leader, Richard Di Natale, Labor MPs Ged Kearney and Julie Owens, Greens senator Jordon Steele-John and Centre Alliance MP Rebekha Sharkie. .@MakeMayoMatter Rebekha Sharkie speaking with kids about climate action in Parliament House! #schoolstrike #meetthekids pic.twitter.com/QBRpR75yUo We’re talking climate action with WA Senator @Jordonsteele right now at Parliament House! #SchoolStrike #MeetTheKids pic.twitter.com/okMw0TZhZV On Tuesday, the Senate also approved a motion to support the students, moved by Steele-John and fellow Greens senator Mehreen Faruqi. Other students around the world have also posted messages of support on social media. @naamanzhou I am Lilly and I have been on #schoolstrike in holland for 12 weeks and I wish the Australian students the very best on #climatestrike. This is a historic day in australia the politicans spoke but the children's voices are louder. We strike for our future! pic.twitter.com/McfPY1jiVc