I came to American food writer Laurie Colwin’s book Home Cooking quite late on. She wrote it in 1987, but her I only heard about as recently as five years ago. A group of friends were getting together to cook a dinner, each making a dish from one of her cookbooks. I felt a bit embarrassed: these weren’t for the most part “food friends”, and I thought, “Hold on a second, I’m a cookbook writer and I’ve never heard of her”. The friend who had arranged the dinner was American, and I think her mother had had Laurie’s books kicking about at home, and in the end she ended up cooking most of the dinner and asked us just to bring salads. So having ordered the books and hurriedly read the introduction to Home Cooking, I decided to go with something very, very simple – a little gem salad with soft herbs and vinaigrette. That’s what Laurie is all about. She celebrates the simple, which, at the time when she was writing – the late 1980s – must have really set her apart from all the other cookery books. It’s not a book that I have cooked a huge amount of recipes from since. It’s more one that I like to read and go back to whenever I’m a bit stuck with my writing, or about to start work on another book, which is where I’m at now. Our food decisions are so multifaceted, so loaded, these days. Are they wrapped in plastic? Is that from Peru? Are these sustainable? And I can get caught up in that – especially in writing about vegetarian food. But sometimes I need a jolt, a reminder that actually joy and sharing are why I love cooking. The cooks I love reading, and reading about, are home cooks. I don’t have any interest in reading about techniques for a soufflé or using thermometers. Laurie draws you into her kitchen. She is the best friend you’d want standing next to the chopping board as you cook. Her style is casual and convivial, her recipes basically prose; freeform. In my own recipes, I always try to give people something more, so they don’t have to follow each one to a T. Laurie does that brilliantly. She has this wonderful passage about how novice cooks always start with something really complicated. Instead, she says, why not a beef stew? Why not start with something you can’t screw up? She encourages substitutions, and acknowledges there will be disasters – the antithesis of the Martha Stewart, American-homemaker brand. There’s a whole chapter on how to give a party without stressing out, advising you just to make one thing – or sometimes nothing at all: she’ll write a whole chapter of recipes only to end with: well, actually, maybe just get a takeaway. If joy and wellbeing mean a baked potato with grated cheese, then proudly serve that to your friends who come round and have dinner. That really resonates with me because, even when people come to my house – and I’m a cook! – I want to project this air of perfection. Laurie, instead, describes a tiny kitchen, and a makeshift card table, which she’d slotted between the wardrobe and a two-foot kitchen cabinet, upon which she served her dinners. She did her washing-up in the bath. There’s something so sweet and charming about that. It’s entirely unvarnished. She died in the early 1990s, not long after this book was written, so I never met her – nor have I met anyone who knew her. But I feel like I know her. In the preface, she talks about the delights of eating with friends, and that second to that is talking about eating. The unsurpassed double whammy, she then says, is talking about eating while you’re eating with friends. Which basically sums up what I like to do most in the world. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.