Taylor Swift has more conspiracy theories surrounding her than the moon landings: that she has an evil twin she banished to Japan, that Kanye West inducted her into the Illuminati, that she has no belly button… if there’s anyone more likely to have lizard skin photoshopped on to them by a YouTuber, I’d like to see them. So the internet has duly combusted at the news that one of these theories – that she is transported in giant suitcases as a way of avoiding the paparazzi – could indeed be true. Zayn Malik, her collaborator on Fifty Shades soundtrack smash I Don’t Wanna Live Forever, confirmed the news to Vogue, saying: “She was travelling around in a suitcase.” While it points to a viable circus career should she continue to release albums as middling as Reputation, Swift’s efforts are just the latest way she and her peers have sought to maintain their privacy. The Spider-Man co-stars and lovebirds should have won a joint Oscar for virtue signalling when they hid behind signs they had written featuring the websites of charities supporting orphans, autism, and youth mentoring. Benedict Cumberbatch similarly stoked his wokeness by hiding behind a sign that read “Go photograph Egypt and show the world something important” in 2013, before recording a voiceover for a Family Guy video game the following year. Perry told the New York Times that she repeatedly wears her Adidas tracksuit day after day, so that paparazzi photos all look the same and are thus devalued. She actually nicked this idea off Daniel Radcliffe, who told Jay Leno in 2007: “I would wear the same jacket and zip it up so they couldn’t see what I was wearing underneath, and the same hat … They became un-publishable, which was hilarious because there’s nothing better than seeing the paparazzi get really frustrated.” Showing that he learned absolutely nothing from filming Marathon Man, Dustin Hoffman’s facility for hide and seek would have even a five-year-old shaking their head in disappointment. Over the years he has been pictured ineptly ducking behind foliage, tree trunks and post boxes – surely a deliberate ploy to become an avuncular meme-lord. DiCaprio is noted for his ability to use hats in aggressively anti-jaunty angles, like a teenager who has been taken to an ice dancing show and doesn’t want to be noticed. But he peaked when he was pictured eating pizza in a disturbing black mask, resembling a man who has paid for a six-hour sesh at a BDSM club but got peckish halfway through. Rather like the horse meat or phone hacking scandals, the Jennifer Lawrence Era of Kookiness (2012-2016) feels like a relic of a more innocent time, where the actor would engage in red carpet pratfalls and horseplay that would now feel a bit gauche in the time of Trump and #MeToo. These antics were also used, a little like Perry and Radcliffe, to make paparazzi pics unusable, posing as she did with chopsticks in her mouth like walrus tusks – but which actually ended up stoking the kooky image all the more. According to William Boyd, writing in these pages in the wake of Bowie’s death, the Thin White Duke had an ingenious deflection tactic when travelling around New York. “I saw Bowie stepping out of a yellow cab and paying the driver. Greeting him and vaguely surprised to see him in this form of transport I asked him if he ever had any problems moving around the city. Not at all, he said, he happily used cabs and subways. ‘I just carry one of these,’ he said, and held up a Greek newspaper. People think: that’s David Bowie, surely? Then they see the Greek newspaper – no, can’t be, just some Greek guy who looks like him.” She may have since usurped this method with her suitcase shenanigans, but Swift’s original means of avoiding the paps was to walk so that she didn’t show her face to the cameras – either by moving backwards, or sideways like a crab. Someone, somewhere, is making a YouTube video entitled “Taylor Swift is an Illuminati CRAB”.