We already watch other people watching the telly, but now our appetite for the mundane seems to have extended to watching other people eat. The increasing popularity of ASMR (autonomous sensory meridian response) videos, in which people listen to pleasing noises that act as sedatives (like the sound of someone eating a raw cauliflower) and “mukbang” – a combination of muok-da (the Korean word for eating) with bang song (Korean for broadcast) – have seen millions tuning in to YouTube videos to watch people eat. But are these online food communities just another short-lived fad, or could they have wider implications for the way we socialise? While eating a meal has traditionally been a communal affair, eating alone is becoming increasingly common as the number of single-person households grows. The government predicts the number of single-occupant households will reach 1.7 million in England by 2039. Is mukbang a symptom of our growing loneliness? “Loneliness is such a personal experience, so it is difficult to say either way,” says Alice Stride, a spokeswoman for the Campaign to End Loneliness. “It might bring someone great comfort to watch someone else prepare a meal and eat it, especially if they have been living on their own for a long time.” Solo dining in restaurants is becoming more socially acceptable, too. According to the online reservation service Bookatable, single-table bookings have increased by 38% since 2014. Not everyone thinks this is a bad thing. A plethora of foodie bloggers can be found waxing lyrical on the joys of eating alone, invariably claiming that solo dining means you concentrate on your food rather than your dining partner. A recent report conducted by the Royal Voluntary Service charity found that one in five people over 70 eat most meals alone. Stride adds that she would be concerned if younger people were watching people eat instead of eating with friends or family, but recognises that for older people the television can be a huge source of comfort. Stride adds: “If you can’t get out, if you’re ill for example, then perhaps that would bring you a great sense of comfort. On the whole, though, we would advocate face-to-face contact, but we recognise that this is nuanced – it’s not one or the other, really.” Self-confidence expert and relationship coach Ben Edwards is less concerned by the trend’s potential implications. “I would always encourage people to do whatever makes them feel better as long as it is a healthy habit,” says Edwards. “I would obviously encourage people to be social, but I think if people feel like watching other people prepare and eat food, and it gives them some sort of satisfaction, I see no harm.” For further help and advice on dealing with loneliness, contact the Samaritans on 116 123, or go to samaritans.org.