This was a chaotic and controversial encounter that sparked outrage in Southampton’s ranks amid the deepening of their collective gloom. José Holebas’s 82nd-minute equaliser means they have failed to win any of their opening six home games of the season, which is not only an unwanted club record but leaves them outside of the relegation zone on goal difference. Yet, in the end, that only tells part of the story of what took place on a wet, windy and wild afternoon. The man at the centre of it all was Simon Hooper, the referee who up until the 57th minute was getting on with his duties with little fuss. But then came the meltdown. First, he failed to award Watford a clear penalty following Ryan Bertrand’s rash tackle on Nathaniel Chalobah and, six minutes later, decided to ruled out a second Southampton goal for what turned out to be a wholly incorrect reason. Hooper, taking charge of just his fourth Premier League fixture, deemed Maya Yoshida had got the final touch on the ball after Charlie Austin had struck it past Ben Foster from inside Watford’s area. Given the Southampton defender was stood in an offside position at the time, the goal did not count. The look of shock on the faces of the players in red and white said it all – Yoshida had not touched the ball. “We scored a perfectly good goal that was ruled out for offside. The officials cost us two points. That is a joke,” said Austin. “People go on about VAR – they clearly need help. If this is the best, most-watched league in the world then give them all the help they need. It is a joke.” Having agreed with Austin that VAR needs to be introduced in the Premier League, Mark Hughes was no less sparing in his criticism of Hooper, before going on to criticise the PGMOL, the Premier League’s referring body, for putting a relatively inexperienced official in charge of this fixture. “It was a game-changing decision they have got badly wrong,” he said. “For us, our game is as significant as the Manchester derby. Would the PGMOL have given that game to him [Hooper]? Absolutely not. For us to have a referee that today was not up to the standard required is hard to take. Over the years I have criticised referees and become known for that, but anybody who has seen the incident would say I have a decent case.” Hughes agreed that Watford were also hard done by Hooper over the penalty, but insisted Austin’s disallowed goal was the bigger error. Southampton played with a level of togetherness that suggests the players are behind the manager. The decision of the club’s owner, Gao Jisheng, to sack the vice-chairman, Les Reed, and the technical director, Martin Hunter, last Thursday is seen as a precursor for a change in the dugout. Hughes was in bullish mood about his job security here, but would have no doubt breathed a sigh of relief when Manolo Gabbiadini gave Southampton the lead with a close-range strike on 20 minutes. The hosts looked good for a first league win since September when Hooper took no action against Bertrand for his challenge on Chalobah. But then came the goal that was not given and Holebas’s strike, deflecting off Cédric Soares and past Alex McCarthy. Watford were good value for a point and asked about Austin’s disallowed goal, their manager, Javi Gracia, was in somewhat playful mood. “If I didn’t see our penalty ...” he smiled.