American novelist Jonathan Franzen has drawn the ire of fellow writers, who are mercilessly trolling him following an article in which he lists his 10 writing rules for aspiring novelists. No stranger to controversy, Franzen often ends up in public spats after media tours for his new books. His most famous was in 2011, when he derided Oprah’s book club following her selection of his novel The Corrections – after which Oprah disinvited Franzen from appearing on her show. This week Franzen published a new book of essays, The End of the End of the Earth. Franzen’s 10 rules, published on Lithub, include: “You have to love before you can be relentless”, “you are more sitting still than chasing after”, “It’s doubtful that anyone with an Internet connection at his workplace is writing good fiction”, and one that has particularly drawn the ire of library lovers: “When information becomes free and universally accessible, voluminous research for a novel is devalued along with it.” New York Times best-selling author Chuck Wendig tweeted his own writing rules, parodying Franzen in a thread that quickly went viral, inspiring other writers to issue their own mock advice. 6. characters poop plot7. maybe try saying something more than just what's just on the page, like, a lot of story is unseen8. writing advice is bullshit; bullshit can fertilize9. eat bees?10a. fuck, I dunno, nobody knows what the hell they're doing10b. have you tried napping hold on does jonathan franzen hate the library pic.twitter.com/vclzGsZnr6 brb texting my friends jonathan franzen's writing tips without context say what you will about Jonathan Franzen but he's great at getting everyone on Twitter to talk about him without actually being on Twitter, meaning he is better at Twitter than any of us Jodi Picoult tweeted that she was “delighted” to announce that she had broken every one of Franzen’s writing rules, stating later that while she wasn’t bashing Franzen, “his rules don’t work for me”. Best-selling historical romance writer Tessa Dare re-tweeted the list, commenting, “In which Jonathan Franzen reveals himself to be that guy who mentions Ayn Rand in his tinder profile”, and continued: “It is evident that writing with no Internet connection nearby makes you 1,000,000 times more likely to lose your work, good or not.” I am delighted to tell you I have broken every single one of these rules. https://t.co/9eX6WJw4ZP Comedian and actor Patton Oswalt also published his own list of seven rules. My 7 rules for book writing1. Spelling2. Have a Frankenstein in it3. Do not talk about Book Writing4. Do not talk about Book Writing5. It should take place on a boat6. A scene where a guy splits a bullet in half with a sword 7. Have a nice plant on your writing desk ten writing rules1. find exactly the right place to sit2. better get coffee also3. turn off the internet we're WRITING4. but i have a question only the internet can answer5. more coffee!6. maybe i got an important email7. how is the coffee shop closing8. oh no Jonathan Franzen’s rules for novelists are all really ordinary and what you’d expect. Except for this one. Kafka was not a beetle. Can confirm. pic.twitter.com/xcA9vgOgRV Non-fiction writer Jeff Pearlman tweeted, “God, Jonathan Franzen is one arrogant ****. I’ve written 8 books. Six have been best-sellers. And I can 100% promise you: Ignore this nonsense.” He apologised for the tweet in a subsequent one: My Franzen tweet actually reads insanely arrogant. Which is embarrassing, because who the fuck am I? Apologies. Following the publication of his writing tips, “Jonathan Franzen” trended in top 10 Twitter lists around the world, coming in at No 4 in America and No 7 in New Zealand. Jonathan Franzen hates Twitter because they've trapped one of his precious birds in their logo I like that Jonathan Franzen is such a reviled figure in letters that he can trend in the United States just for writing an article that's like "do not use adverbs" and "challenge yourself"