Having just released his first album at the age of 66, Jeff Goldblum is joyously unschooled in the mechanics of playing for 1,000 people at a time. That’s not to say he is unaccustomed to gigging live – he has had a semi-regular slot at a Los Angeles bar for decades, playing jazz piano when movie commitments permit – but he has never bumped up against the strictures that govern most pro touring musicians. Thus, while promoting the album, The Capitol Studios Sessions, with four sold-out sets, Goldblum runs his show according to his own warm, wonky internal rhythm. So an automated “evacuate the building” alarm is accidentally set off within two minutes of his arrival? No problem: as the audience wonder whether to flee, he chuckles, “Already this is a magical and unforgettable show.” So he feels he doesn’t understand British humour? Fine: a group of fans come up to read out jokes from the Edinburgh festival, allowing him to puzzle at length over expressions such as “jumpers for goalposts”. So the crowd want a closer look at the man in all his amused majesty? During the interval he invites everyone up for an individual selfie and a chat. He appears genuinely interested in each person. Underpinning all this showmanship is musicianship of a high standard, without which Goldblum wouldn’t be playing under the London jazz festival umbrella. At worst, this set of standards, silkily executed by Goldbum and the five-man Mildred Snitzer Orchestra, could be construed as the highest quality carpool karaoke. Goldblum doesn’t do much soloing; often, he’s more an awed sideman, overwhelmed by his bandmates’ fluency. There’s a loose-limbed, roadhouse feel as they slink from Come On-a My House to Autumn Leaves, with a stiffening visit to Marvin Gaye’s Don’t Mess With Mr T en route. “It’s very sexy,” Goldblum advises of the Gaye tune, which it is. It’s also very saxy, and I’m not complaining. But anyone can turn out twilit versions of Autumn Leaves, especially when Imelda May is along to sing them. It’s the Goldblumisms that set this musical side-hustle apart. • At Ronnie Scott’s, London, 22 November.