Eddie Jones has lobbed a tantalising curveball in Australia’s direction by retaining Manu Tuilagi in his 26-man squad for this Saturday’s Test at Twickenham, barely 24 hours after the head coach described the centre as “very doubtful” and suggested England would not rush him back prematurely. With England not due to confirm their lineup until Thursday, Jones is clearly happy to keep the Wallabies’ management guessing as to whether the 27-year-old, who has not started a Test since 2014, will feature. Sources at his club, Leicester, believe there is a good chance Tuilagi will be involved this weekend, however, assuming he comes through Wednesday’s afternoon’s training unscathed. England’s original plan this autumn was to unleash Tuilagi off the bench against South Africa, only for the powerful midfielder to tweak his groin in training in Portugal two days before the game. He sat out both his side’s subsequent games against New Zealand and Japan and Jones made clear England would not play him until he was 100% fit. “We are just being patient‚“ said Jones on Monday. “He could potentially be something a bit different for us and we want to make sure he’s 100% right.” Should England ignore their own advice and rush Tuilagi back into the fray there is every chance of a major row if he subsequently returns injured to Leicester. Had England released him back to his club on Tuesday night, however, Tigers would have been within their rights to consider him for their Premiership game at home to Saracens on Sunday given that an England team spokesman confirmed on Tuesday night he was “in contention” for the Australia game. The vision of a fully fit Tuilagi back at his rampaging best has been a recurring dream for English rugby fans ever since he left the All Blacks trailing in his wake at Twickenham six years ago. Jones is as keen as anyone to welcome the big man back but not until the moment is absolutely right. “I don’t think we should over-hype his entry back in the England side,” he cautioned last month. “It’s been a long time and he’s played a couple of good games for Leicester.” Tuilagi’s increasingly confident display against Scarlets in the European Champions’ Cup last month made his teammates sit up and Ben Youngs, England’s scrum-half, was among those who felt it marked a turning point after years of injury setbacks. “Everyone just watched him that night and thought: ‘He’s back,’” said Youngs. “Australia have got Israel Folau: a game-changer who can make something out of nothing and win you a game with the last play. Manu is that person for England.” The Wallabies will be spared a reunion with Chris Ashton, however, following confirmation the Sale winger will be sidelined for a couple of weeks with a calf injury he sustained in Saturday’s 35-15 win over Japan. It could mean another opportunity for Bath’s Joe Cokanasiga, a try-scorer on his Test debut last Saturday, although Jack Nowell and Jonny May are also among the 26 players still in Bagshot. With England keen to end the Quilter series with a resounding win, the forwards coach Steve Borthwick acknowledged that Cokanasiga had impressed against Japan. “Joe did really well. He’s got massive potential and is really eager to learn. Physically he’s got some great attributes and attitude-wise he wants to be the best he can be.” Ted Hill, who also won his first cap last weekend, has been released back to his club Worcester but Wasps’ Nathan Hughes and Bath’s Elliott Stooke have been retained.