When I was younger, I was always that kid half-asleep in school because I’d been awake the night before unable to sleep. It makes sense that now I pretty much start work when everyone is bedding in for the evening. I think it’s when my creativity kicks in, when I want to socialise. When I wake up I don’t want people to look me in the face – but when night comes that doesn’t matter, because I’ve made a new one: the makeup is on, I’ve made a hat and done my nails. I can go and face the world. I’m part of the furniture at Savage – the gay disco I run at an East End strip club on a Saturday night. It means I can run in last minute from another gig, throw my bags down and get to work. I’m usually working the door, which means standing on the street until 4am come rain or shine. I never factored that into my drag career – the number of coats I’d need to buy to make sure I look fabulous when it’s -5C. A drink or two, well, or seven, helps me make it through the night. Alcohol is a lube that makes working the night run smoothly. That said, I do a regular sweep of the club as it gets busier and have a quiet word with anyone who’s looking too wasted. “Have a bottle of water, babe,” I’ll tell them, while pointing in the direction of the toilets so they can sort themselves out. Our venue is a strip club through the week, so there’ll be guys who turn up and don’t know there’s a gay disco in. We tell unknowing punters that there’s a private party and point them down the road. I clock off at 4am, so I get to enjoy the final hour of the party. Even if I’m exhausted, I’ll stay for a dance and to take in what we’ve created. The bouncers all finish at 5am sharp, but that’s also kicking out time. We spit 150 people out on to the street, and they can be vulnerable. I don’t mind staying a little longer, making sure everyone is hydrated and makes it home OK. I’ll never forget that time that I was beaten up on a night out. By the time the night is over, I can’t wait to be outside – especially in the summer when dawn is breaking. I jump on my bike and cycle along the deserted canals in all my regalia. I love the feeling of taking my heels and lashes off at the end of the night. You learn early on that drag is uncomfortable – whether that’s staying awake all night working, or itchy wigs and scratchy face. It’s gritty and sweaty, and it ends up smudged all over your pillow. But you also learn to be poised, and to work through it. To dance it off, or just hide in the toilet while you regain your composure. I used to feel out of place in nightclubs, like a misfit. In drag I’m the outrageous colour at the party, the caretaker of the club. I started out at the market when I was four years old. Both my dad and my uncle Mick were in the business, so I’d go and help. By 14 I’d left school. My dad explained to the headmaster I’d be better off working. And he was right. Even now I don’t feel like I go to work, I go on holiday every day and I enjoy it. When you work nights you have no life, so the market becomes it. You don’t do it for the money. You’ve got no time to spend what you earn anyway. I’m at work when everyone else is down at the pub. The first thing I do when I wake up, around 1am, is have a black coffee. You never get used to getting up so early. Then I head to the market. We unload, get the orders sorted, put out the flowers nice and orderly so they look effective to the eye. Our first customers come in about 3am – florists, event organisers, hotel porters. There’s less bartering than there used to be, although we are a market, so you can always try it. But you don’t necessarily have to go cheap for people to buy from you, it’s about being on their wavelength and approachable. It’s like if there’s a nice barman at a pub who you get on with, you become a local. I live on between two and four hours sleep a day, I’ve been that way since I was a kid. I’m fortunate. My dad is the same, we just don’t need it. My working day is over by midday, so there was always time to spend with the family. That’s more important to me – I’ll get all the sleep I want when I’m dead. When you work at the market, you help each other out. If I run out of a particular flower or something I’ll go and get some from someone else for a reasonable price so I can still make a profit. It works because I do the same for them. By 11am we’re finished, so then it’s into the van for an hour to deliver orders. Traffic and the congestion charge means not everyone can make it down to Vauxhall. Then I’m off to the golf course. People thought we were mad, opening a bakery in Yorkshire, in the height of Thatcher’s Britain, when we first arrived in Otley in 1983. Independent businesses were closing down at a rate of knots. God bless Paul Hollywood, but back then the craft of proper baking wasn’t as popular as it is now. My partner Steve and I fitted the place ourselves. We were working on a shoestring, which meant we’d sell through the day and bake through the night. The secret? Well, 35 years later he’s still making me laugh. When you’re younger, you can do the nights pretty easily. We went to a friend’s 21st birthday party and stayed well into the early hours of the morning before heading back to crack on with the baking – I’ll never forget the sight of Steve falling asleep on the step by the ovens with the loaves still inside. It was quite romantic in those days, being holed up in the kitchen – and occasionally dancing. We built a business together while we built a life. Now we’ve got a team, so our shift patterns vary and it’s a little more professional. But it’s all hands on deck come 8pm on a Friday. I adore working through the early hours, it’s almost magical. Inside the bakery it’s hot and a hive of activity – music blaring from the radio as we fill the shelves with treats which bring the shop to life. But step outside into the darkness for a moment and it’s serene and silent. In the winter, taking in the icy air and the moonlight can reinvigorate you better than coffee ever can. We’ll always keep the door open if it’s snowing. In the summer, the birds are there to keep you company as the light starts to trickle over the Chevin. We’ll pop outside together – whoever is working – to look at the sky, as picturesque and tranquil as they seem in Turner’s paintings. The aroma of fresh-baked bread mixed with the morning air makes for a heady cocktail. There’s always a lull – it hits you at about three in the morning – but we turn the music up a little louder, have a singalong, and then carry on. If I can, though, I’ll head out to do some deliveries in the early hours of Saturday morning. It means I get to drive through the beautiful countryside before anyone else. Of course, if I’m in the van, I’ve got to stick to a schedule. But at the top of the Chevin I’ve been known to pull into a pub car park and take in dawn in all its splendour for a moment. You feel like you own the earth – and it’s wonderful. Not for too long, though, the bread needs to be delivered. And the bakery needs to be open again by 7am. After 30 years as a midwife, I’ve pretty much seen it all. One day you’re part of the happiest night of somebody’s life, the next you’re there to support them through tragedy. Ups and downs are part of the course, as is working 24/7. In a unit like ours, the lights are on day or night, you sometimes don’t even notice the difference. I suppose there are less managers, matrons and office staff around, but our job stays exactly the same. It means our tight-knit night team is totally patient-focused. We’re a sociable unit – we try to eat together when we can. If we’re being good, we might have a salad night, and occasionally we’ll order pizzas. Otherwise everyone brings different bits in and, when we can, we share. It’s awful for the waistline, but great for the soul. Nights can be long and hard, so spending time together is good for morale. The secret to making it through the night is sleeping between shifts. There’s nothing worse than being exhausted but needing to be awake and alert at three in the morning. You can’t falter: you’re responsible for the lives of women and their babies. I’m lucky, I’m a good sleeper at whatever time. I used to get out of bed for the kids. But mine are grown up now, so I can indulge myself. Although at night if I wake up for a wee, I can go back to sleep. In the daytime that can be a little harder. Sometimes it’s difficult to sleep if something upsetting has happened the night before. The warm fuzzy feeling you get from delivering a healthy baby is comforting, but there are scary nights, when something happens to a baby. You learn to switch off, but however long you do the job it can still get to you. Babies are robust creatures. It’s amazing what they can cope with, even if they need a little bit of help. They’re tougher than you might imagine. I never set out to be a midwife, but I’ve loved my time in the job. Helping bring life into the world, especially when outside the ward everyone is sleeping, gives you a buzz. And the excitement is that for 12 hours at a time anyone could walk in through the door, ready to start that journey. Even tiredness can be staved off when a baby is being born. You can get a call at anytime from the transplant coordinator. From then you have an hour to be at the hospital and ready to go. That is why I live close by. I do not have the luxury of time to travel or prepare when the phone rings. I’ll have already worked a full day in the operating theatre, so if you’re on call at night – as I am twice a week – I get to sleep after I finish a day shift as soon as I can. Sometimes I would not be able to get home. If something comes up at the end of the day I might be working close to 24 hours at a time. Everything is already prepared. We’ll get our kit together during the day and sort out the trolley. Two teams get called in at night, and I can be on either. One retrieves the liver for transplantation from deceased donors, the other will do the implantation operation when the organ arrives. It’s not a heart-warming operation to undertake, collecting an organ. But we know that it’s going to give someone else another shot at life. Generally we’ll take an ambulance and drive through the city, flashing lights on if necessary. But if other teams are busy we could end up travelling to other cities, or even abroad. People in the health service work incredibly hard, especially at night, but at times you cannot help but feel exhausted. You’ve got to stay awake and stay alert, so we try to nap whenever it’s possible. We look out for each other, work together and support each other. When you’re working a night, a patient may well never see you before you operate on them. I’ll see people recovering across the hospital who I’ve cared for who’ll never even know who I am. Sometimes a partner or a loved one will point us out and say: “Him! That’s the guy!” When I finally start to head home, I’m exhausted. I’ll sit in the ambulance and stare out the window watching the city pass by as I try to wind down. It’s a comfort to think people from all corners of the world are working through the night in our NHS. Teams of people in wards, determined to do all they can to save lives. When I come to work at 5.30pm, I spend an hour “reading in” – that’s radio-talk for taking in the stories from across the globe. Then we start putting the show together: we’re live until 5am, so even with pre-prepared parts, we have up to three hours to fill when we go live at 1am. As a journalist, it can be tough – the offices are basically empty at night. But that’s also a thrill and, being the BBC, people know who we are and trust us. It gives us extraordinary access into people’s lives. Take the night of the Manchester attack – I spoke to people who couldn’t find their friends, to eye witnesses and experts. We had to work out what to say – we can’t just spread rumours. At 3am the fire, police and ambulance departments all released information to say 19 were dead. That was a horrible moment. There’s a pause, and then you carry on. There’s a secret gear in the gearbox you tap into when you’re doing breaking news through the night. Nothing quite hits you at the time, it can’t if you’re going to do your job. But, of course, once the news stopped rolling and the adrenaline subsided, I just wanted to cry. I struggle to keep myself awake sometimes. I’ve never fallen asleep at the desk, but I’ve come close. Walking around the deserted office helps, as does sugar. Lots of sugar. I have been known to scour the empty desks for leftover packets of Haribo. We all have different theories on how best to make it through: mine is eating your last meal at 10pm – a giant bowl of pasta. You just don’t want to eat after that. Coffee is good, but at that time it tastes disgusting. That’s the hard thing about working nights, everything feels gross. By 3am you just feel grubby. We finish around half-five in the morning. I drive home in silence, and get into bed fully dressed. It doesn’t take long to switch off. By about 7.45am, my husband will send in one of the kids to wake me up. I have half an hour to drink a coffee, clean my teeth and get ready for the school run, still in last night’s clothes and make-up. I get them to school, come home, and then I don’t touch TV or anything. I’ll get into my PJs and go back to bed. Having someone live overnight is important. For all the podcasts and pre-records, there’s something irreplaceable about a real-life person coming out of a box in your house or your car. Our listeners depend on us. We know who’s listening: milkmen, posties, factory workers, lorry drivers. Some are struggling to sleep in the midst of depression. When I became a mum at 24, I was the first of my friends to have a child. Radio kept me sane on those lonely nights up feeding. We’re all leading more insular lives. If you’re isolated, on your own, or can’t leave the house for whatever reason, you can turn us on. We’re there for you – to keep you company while you’re awake, safe in the knowledge that whatever happens we’ll still be there. When I started out as a tea boy in the industry, we didn’t work as many nights. But as the country has begun to operate on a 24-hour basis, we’re drafted in to work on tight schedules after dark, to make sure what we do causes minimal disruption. I’m now the supervisor for resurfacing works: setting up jobs, checking quality to make sure specifications are as required. If it’s fixing the surface we’ll re-lay it, if it’s new we build from the foundations up. As a minimum we’ll have a low loader bringing in machinery, a paver, a roller and a JCB. Then there’s a sweeper, the muck-away trucks and a spray tanker. It makes for quite a convoy – but we need it all to keep the roads and runways safe. I’ve got four young kids and working nights means I get to spend a lot of time with them. I might miss them in the morning, but after school I’m around the house. I wouldn’t be if I was working days contesting with rush-hour traffic. If I’ve got to bed by 5am, I’ll be awake again by 11ish. I’ll check some emails, see what’s planned for later, and then head to the gym or sort out the house. A lot of my work is now at Heathrow, so I’ll be on site by about 10pm to get our team briefed for the night ahead. Once the final plane has left the runway we come out of the shadows and get to work. Whatever time we get started – and there are often delays – we have to be clear by the time the first flight is due to land at 4.45am. You get to see behind the scenes when you’re on nights: airports are a hive of activity once the runways are shut. It’s the same on the motorways. I work the M40 because it’s not far from our house. Sure, it’s a little quieter, but the world keeps on going with drivers heading to and fro from dusk until dawn. It’s hard to put my finger on it, but there’s definitely a different ambience when you work through the night. We enjoy what we do and everyone’s more focused. Maybe it’s because there are fewer distractions and there’s little wriggle room in our timings. Or it might just be the promise of getting into bed when it’s all done. If you’re working 12-hour shifts, four nights on and four nights off, you need to look after your mind and your body. When I arrive at Brown’s Hotel to start at 8pm it’s the busiest time for me: guests want tables that night at restaurants that get booked up weeks in advance and to be on the list at London’s most exclusive clubs. We provide a 24-hour concierge service, and we get requests you couldn’t even imagine. Our job is to always say yes – as long as it’s legal – even if something seems impossible. By 1am things tend to be a little quieter. At home before a shift I’ll make a meal and split it in half. Once the evening rush fades away I’ll eat my first meal. I’ll eat the other half before we get busy again, usually just before 5am. Diet is important – I eat healthily, lots of protein. I don’t drink coffee, so it’s nutrition that keeps me awake and focused through the night. After dark, it can be a challenge to provide everything our guests might wish for. But you build a network of contacts in the city and in concierge teams across the world. A couple of weeks back a member of a Middle Eastern royal family wanted Krispy Kreme donuts at 5am – long before any shop was open. The other day we were tasked with arranging a helicopter in a call that came in after midnight to pick up our guests at 7am. Then there was the time we were asked to bring a guest’s wildcat into the UK without separating it from its owner. We were faced with the legal requirement of it having to be kept in a “zoo environment” so we went ahead and had one built on his private estate. There’s no secret trick to the job. If you’re nice to people, to everyone you meet, everything becomes so much easier. My contact book is a manual, a guide to the city at night. I grew up on a council estate in Islington. The culture here was something of a shock at first. But serving in the army prepared me well for the job: never say no, present yourself immaculately, and high standards even in challenging circumstances are a must. To join the Golden Keys Society – an international network of concierges – you quite literally need to serve your time to earn your stripes. And then we finish at 8am – and it’s rush hour in the capital. It’s quite a nice feeling, getting into bed when everyone is going to work. You can tell who else has worked the night – everyone has their head down. You experiment in search of the easiest way home. It’s not just the fastest, but the quietest – where will you get a seat? I’m always tweaking the route. Anyone getting off the train with you at the end of the line has done a night shift as well. There’s a solidarity there amongst the group of zombies. Every call starts the same: “Hello, Samaritans, can I help?” From there anything can happen. You have to clear your mind, be in a positive headspace when you’re on shift. I’ve got a ritual for it now. My friend, who I volunteer with, picks me up in her car around 10pm – we have a happy playlist which we sing along to on the way in. At half-10 when we take over, we’ve already made a pot of tea, and sorted a tray of biscuits. Then we turn the phones on. From that point on it doesn’t stop. I was surprised at first at how busy we are. There’s so many people in so much despair, but I’m just glad they’re trying to reach out and talk to us. Callers talk about loneliness, depression, suicide, grief. It could be anything really. We don’t give advice, we just encourage people to open up – and then we listen. I don’t think most people realise how much that helps. Everyone is anonymous, sometimes they’ll tell me their name, but often they won’t. Either way I’ll never know who they are, or speak with them again. That can be the hardest part, especially after a really emotional conversation. It’s the best thing for it, though. I always just assume the best happened, you can’t let yourself think about the alternative. But it’s sometimes hard not to wonder what happened to them next. What strikes me sometimes is just how together someone’s life might sound on the surface: a caller might talk about their family, their friends, their job and their security – but in their mind there’s no light and nothing to live for. Anyone they might otherwise turn to is asleep – when you’re alone with nowhere to turn you can just keep on falling. That’s why we’re there every hour of every day. Doing the phones at night can make you feel quite isolated. There’s no hustle and bustle, nobody driving past the windows or chatting outside. When a call ends, I check in on my shift partner and we’ll have a cuppa. At the end we drive home in silence. We give ourselves space to wind down. You’ve been dealing with other people’s lives for hours – just minutes ago it almost felt like daytime. Now it’s pitch black and you’re all alone. When I get into bed I cuddle my partner. It can take a while – even when it’s so late – to actually fall asleep. I never called the Samaritans before I became a volunteer, but I know friends who did. Since starting, I’ve called in myself when I’ve been struggling. Having experienced the same feelings as callers is almost a superpower when you’re a Samaritan. People can hear in my voice that I really do understand them, and it reminds me that it’s normal to feel overwhelmed. In a weird way it’s like I’ve got relationships with people all over the country, but I’ll never know them and they’ll never know me. It also changes you. I ask people how they are at university, or when I’m on shift at Tesco. You learn the importance of checking people are OK.