In 1919 the German Dada artist Raoul Hausmann dismissed marriage as “the projection of rape into law”. It’s a statement that relishes its own violence: he is limbering up to fight marriage to the death. A strange mixture of dandy, wild man, provocateur and social engineer, Hausmann believed that the socialist revolution the Dadaists sought couldn’t be attained without a corresponding sexual revolution. And he lived as he preached. He was married, but was also in a four-year relationship with fellow artist Hannah Höch. Hausmann and Höch form one of the couples in the Barbican’s Modern Couples exhibition, which shows the freewheeling experimentation of interwar art to be inseparable from even more extravagant experiments in sexuality and coupledom. The exhibition includes several of the partly whimsical, partly grim collages Höch made at this time. Bobbing her hair and smoking in public, Höch was a self-styled “new woman” who shared Hausmann’s carnivalesque contempt for bourgeois morality. Her Bourgeois Wedding Couple (Quarrel) photomontage from 1919 satirises the married pair as ungainly children. The bride teeters on the boots of a grown-up woman, but she has the body of a mannequin and the face of an overgrown baby whose tantrum is observed by her childlike spouse. However, the alternative to bourgeois marriage wasn’t obviously promiscuity for Höch in the way it was for Hausmann. Years later, she described being “disappointed, crushed, destroyed” by the double standards of the Dadaist men, who wanted to free women while remaining obdurately patriarchal. At the time, she wrote a short story about an artist called Gotthold Heavenlykingdom who undergoes a spiritual crisis when his wife asks him to do the dishes. She also made The Father, depicting Hausmann as a male mother (Hausmann’s own face looms over female legs) holding a small baby who’s about to be hit in the eye by a boxer. The portrait is partly a comment on Hausmann’s double standards. Though he urged Höch to have his child, it was clear he wouldn’t be holding the baby or protecting his new progeny from harm. The surrealists lived out their commitment to the primacy of desire by taking new partners in a kind of sexual musical chairs Höch went on to have a relationship with a woman, the Dutch writer Til Brugman. She wanted to provide “a model of how two women can form a single rich and balanced life”. Their nine years together were a lot more peaceful than the years with Hausmann. Was her new relationship happier because of the gender equality? Or because she was no longer experimenting with free love? Is it possible to live out Hausmann’s vision of sexual freedom and be happy? Questions of this kind are invited by the Barbican exhibition, which gives visual form to a kind of sexual musical chairs. The surrealists lived out their commitment to the primacy of desire by taking new sexual partners with ease. We find Max Ernst coupled with Dorothy Tanning and Leonora Carrington here, Valentine Penrose with Roland Penrose and Alice Rahon, Lee Miller with Man Ray and Roland Penrose. Meanwhile the Russian constructivists put forward a vision of revolution very like Hausmann’s in which women as well as the proletariat were to be freed of their chains and marriage was to be consigned to the scrapheap of history. The exhibition includes a room on Lilya and Osip Brik, who lived in a 15-year ménage à trois with the poet Vladimir Mayakovsky, until he killed himself in 1930. The wall and catalogue texts remain studiedly neutral about this death and the many other suicides they report. Were these the costs of experiment? The Barbican show doesn’t quite decide how we should situate ourselves: are we voyeurs from a nostalgic but disapproving future, or participants in a continual present? Have we moved on from this era or failed to live up to it? And does a vision fail just because it ends? I have wondered throughout my 30s if my generation has sold out, counting myself among its ranks. Around me, everyone has seemed to be getting married with the expectation of monogamy; we’ve developed the notion of “cheating” in place of the notion of freedom; even the gay couples I know seem to aspire to something very like a traditional marriage. The women I grew up admiring – Virginia Woolf, Simone de Beauvoir, Doris Lessing – chose not to live in this way. They expected love to be something more radical. Maggie Nelson writes about the tapering off of risk in The Argonauts, her brilliant, passionate yet coldly analytical account of the process that led to mothering a child with the transgender artist Harry Dodge. She describes the nostalgia for an earlier era of homosexual life that leads some gay men to seek erotic adventures in countries where homosexuality is banned. They’re looking for the thrill of danger. When something is risked, even when it’s just misery or disapproval, the pleasure of what’s gained increases. But there’s something else, too, that we might be looking for in seeking sex beyond the domestic. I find that looking back on the riskier gay world of the 1980s, or on the 1960s commune, or on the incestuous constellations of the interwar avant garde, it’s the communal aspect that most appeals to me and that I worry is harder to find now. The surrealists, the constructivists, even the homelier set at “Bloomsbury in Sussex”, were creating worlds where people emerged from the closed doors of their separate families and allowed themselves to love, depend on – and be disturbed by – a larger circle of people. They were enabled to do this by utopian political visions that included sexuality. For the surrealists, desire itself was to be allowed to dictate everything from sex to politics. The constructivists, who shared the larger Soviet aim to collectivise life, wanted to discard ownership of bodies as they discarded ownership of homes. In Russia, these ideals were enshrined in law in 1918 when the new Soviet government ratified its Code on Marriage, the Family and Guardianship that abolished the inferior legal status of women, eliminated religious marriage, gave children born outside marriage equal rights to those born within it and made divorce an easy formality. The author of the Code, Alexander Goikhbarg, looked forward to the time when “the fetters of husband and wife” were obsolete and love could be enjoyed freely. The founder of the Soviet “Women’s Department”, Alexandra Kollontai published a book in 1932 insisting that as there was “neither morality nor immorality” in nature, the sexual act should be recognised as “neither shameful nor sinful … as much a manifestation of a healthy organism as the quenching of hunger or thirst”. Kollontai’s views were not quite this clear-cut. She was the daughter of divorced liberal intellectuals, which gave her a head start in rethinking marriage, but her own experience of marriage and separation were pretty difficult. Nonetheless, she still thought the ideal was worthwhile. Other Soviet officials were more critical. Lenin disliked the concept of free love because of its association with bourgeois promiscuity and because while it took “two people to make love”, a third person was likely to come into being as a result. By 1936, the family had been reinstated as the dominant unit in Soviet Russia and the divorce and abortion reforms had been rescinded. As the children of the 1960s generation grew up, it became clear that the communes too had come at a cost Nonetheless, for artists such as the Briks and their circle, belief in communism continued to entail belief in free love. These ideas were crucial sources of inspiration for the 1960s hippy communes, which redefined society, the family and the couple according to principles that Goikhbarg might have approved of, even if he might not have liked the results. There were similar ideas at play in the gay bathhouses in 1970s America that proved crucial in providing gay men not just with the opportunities for sex but with an alternative vision of community. This was given a political impetus in the run-up to the 1980 US election, when the New St Mark’s Baths in New York City conducted a voter registration drive on its premises. These experiments lost some of their credence in the Aids crisis. And as the children of the 1960s generation grew up, it became clear that the communes too had come at a cost. In her 2017 book, Future Sex, Emily Witt observed that her generation grew up viewing the experiments of the past as more a warning than an inspiration: “Obedient children of the 1980s and 90s saw the failures of the counterculture, took them as implicit lessons from our parents, and held ourselves in thrall to grade point averages, drug laws, health insurance, student loan payments … condoms, skin protection factors.” Visions of communal living now don’t often include sexual freedom, and sexual freedom doesn’t often come with utopian communal politics. In Witt’s tour of sexual freedom she found that today’s self-styled polyamorists were more often located within capitalism than fighting against it. Free love is less the territory of the avant garde than of Silicon Valley, its practitioners more likely to be found designing a new app than a photomontage. The rules of the polyamorists Witt met are carefully negotiated and lodged as shared Google documents. There’s much to be said for this. Certainly it seems preferable for any children created along the way. But it’s not a utopian vision. In The Argonauts Nelson opens up the question of how the more experimental aspects of modern sexuality relate to the radical sexuality of the past. It is a book that seems to question everything we once took for granted, from narrative structure to gender, right from the first sentence where we find Harry “fuck[ing] me in the ass, my face smashed against the cement floor of your dank and charming bachelor pad”. But at the same time, it can feel like a fairy story with a happy ever after ending. Even Harry’s son is co-opted into this new family that looks very traditional, with a mother and a father and their two children, the narrator overwhelmed by the quiet peace of domestic life, experiencing happiness with “a more palpable and undeniable and unmitigated quality than any I’ve ever known”. The strength of the book lies in its ambivalence. “There is much to be learned from wanting something both ways,” Nelson writes, talking about queer theorist Eve Sedgwick. Nelson tells us about the gay men who seek danger abroad partly because she knows about her own double standards. She’s interested both in testing the limits of coupledom and in reminding us how stubbornly powerful a force coupledom can be. Coupledom asserts itself just when she’s discovered that she’s happy to be alone, just when she’s committed to theorists who celebrate the provisional, appearing in the guise of two changing bodies, “two human animals, one of whom is blessedly neither male nor female, the other of whom is female (more or less)”. There’s no getting away from the power of coupledom as an arrangement. We’ve all experienced it: couples and quasi-couples form in the most unlikely places, meaning that there’s a loss after any holiday or large project undertaken with a friend or a colleague when you discover that the new couple has to be divided so that old couples can be returned to or new couples forged. The narrative of the Modern Couples exhibition is precisely this: free love not as the jettisoning of the couple but as a kind of speeded up square dance in which couples come together only to break apart and re-form, occasionally coupling up with other couples. Theories of free love like Kollontai’s have their limitations because however free we may learn to be sexually, we find it hard to resist coupledom and couples bring their own demands. I often think that the theory of free love that works best alongside the couple is De Beauvoir’s in The Second Sex. What makes this so powerful is twofold: De Beauvoir makes a compelling case for why sex matters, describing a more transformative act than the quenching of thirst; and she analyses not just sex but the structure of coupledom and the otherness that sexual coupledom first brings raging to the surface and then provides a way of surviving. Here’s her description of the ideal sexual act: “The words ‘receive’ and ‘give’ exchange meanings, joy is gratitude, pleasure is tenderness. In a concrete and sexual form the reciprocal recognition of the self and the other is accomplished in the keenest consciousness of the other and the self … the dimension of the other remains; but the fact is that alterity no longer has a hostile character; this consciousness of the union of the bodies in their separation is what makes the sexual act moving.” The alarming yet tender confrontation with the other takes us back to Höch’s collages of half male, half female figures. Perhaps these were not just acts of protest, but acts of registering both the oddness and the generativeness of coupledom. So how can we accept the grip of coupledom but stop it taking over our lives, if that’s what we want, retaining a vision of the communal? De Beauvoir believed that this kind of sexual intimacy charged by otherness could neither be sustained nor contained by marriage. Instead she advocated “a pact of freedom and sincerity” in which a couple granted each other openness and freedom. This was the kind of pact she had with Sartre, and it had its moments of crisis. In 1947 she fell seriously in love with Nelson Algren, an American writer whose Chicago gangster persona was part of his allure, fascinating and confusing the poised French intellectual he’d seduced. She experienced the kind of sexual passion she went on to describe in The Second Sex, but she wouldn’t give up Sartre and the relationship foundered. She depicted it in her 1954 autobiographical novel The Mandarins, which makes troubling reading in portraying a heroine left depressed by the onset of middle age, contemplating suicide because she’s unsure whether she can be fully embodied again. Yet this isn’t the whole story. Though she paid the price of loneliness, De Beauvoir retained her role as the high priestess in the communal world that she and Sartre had created, taking their place at the barricades in 1968 as the guardians of the new counterculture. If she has something to say to us now, if any of the couples on the walls of the Barbican have anything to say, then it’s not because they got it right or wrong but because they showed how high the stakes were in trying to move beyond the family structure at all – how much there was to be gained as well as how much to be lost in seeking a mode of living that incorporated the couple within the communal. Looking back on these experiments, many of them seem wildly flawed. But let’s revisit them not just with curious nostalgia but with urgent questions about how to live. • Lara Feigel is the author of Free Woman: Life, Liberation and Doris Lessing (Bloomsbury). Modern Couples: Art, Intimacy and the Avant-garde is at the Barbican, London EC2, until 27 January, barbican.org.uk.