Scotland continue to dazzle in attack while being susceptible at the breakdown and in defence. Huw Jones embodied both traits in their 26-20 defeat by South Africa at Murrayfield, laying on a try for Pete Horne but being stripped of possession for one of the Springboks’ scores. A first home loss for a year has not disheartened Gregor Townsend, who believes his team are still learning by the match, but the depth of their squad will be tested when the head coach makes changes for the visit of Argentina this weekend. South Africa go to Wales and must wait to find out if their captain Siya Kolisi is cited after what appeared to be a headbutt on Horne. Stuart Bathgate • Match report: Scotland 20-26 South Africa Wales have for most of this decade struggled against tier-two opponents in the autumn, making wholesale changes and finding too many of their reserves are not up to scratch. Not any more and as their head coach, Warren Gatland, contemplates a first clean-sweep autumn with his side seeking a fourth successive victory over South Africa in Cardiff, he is facing a rare dilemma before the World Cup. In the past, selection for the tournament has been a matter of finding players to make up the 31. His problem now will be who to leave out and as someone who has never been afraid to make bold choices, high-profile players know that reputation will not be enough to secure their place. Paul Rees • Wales 74-24 Tonga The way people were reeling and careening around Dublin on Sunday morning, it felt like the earth might have tilted beneath our feet. And maybe it really did. Steve Hansen thinks the ground has shifted. Ireland, he said, are now the best team in the world. Some thought he was kidding. It can be hard to tell when he’s pulling your leg, and after all the All Blacks will still be top of the rankings on Monday morning, just like they have been every week for the last 469 weeks. But consider this: in the last 18 months, the All Blacks have lost four Tests and drawn another, while Ireland have been beaten only once. Hansen might not have been playing mind games so much as just telling the plain truth. Andy Bull • Ireland 16-9 New Zealand Japan have profited from their greater exposure to tier-one nations. England provided their 12th such opponent since the last World Cup, and while the Brave Blossoms are clearly profiting from hosting next year’s tournament, the international fixture schedule from 2020 will guarantee emerging countries more matches against the leading sides. Japan are in the same World Cup pool as Ireland and so are in effect playing for second place. Scotland will be their target and while Gregor Townsend’s side are improving, their away form remains unimpressive and they will face a side who are robust in contact and innovative in attack. England were on the ropes in the opening half, Alex Lozowski’s tackle on Michael Leitch at the end of it almost match-turning. Paul Rees • England 35-15 Japan France’s third victory of the year was typically hard-earned and not sealed until the final 12 minutes. The wing Teddy Thomas is back in favour after being dropped for disciplinary reasons, along with the No 8 Louis Picamoles and flanker Arthur Iturria, after February’s defeat in Scotland. He scored two tries as France showed more ambition in their 28-13 victory than last season. The second was created by Gaël Fickou, a centre who has yet to fulfil his early promise. Here his ability to draw defenders and create space gave France an added dimension, but they remain some way behind Ireland and Wales. Argentina had pushed Ireland hard the week before but they are still seeking a balance between tight and loose. Paul Rees A taxing year for the Wallabies ends at Twickenham on Saturday when they will renew acquaintances with Eddie Jones. They duly recorded an expected victory over Italy, but not before they had been given an early refereeing reprieve and they lost their No 8 David Pocock with a stinger that makes him doubtful for the England game. They look a side in need of a break rather than another match, but they showed up in patches and in Taniela Tupou, making his second Test start, they had a lively, ball-handling tight-head who was surprisingly light on his feet for someone who is more than 21 stone. It was another hard-luck story for Italy, gallant and impressive at times but prone to familiar lapses in concentration. Paul Rees • Italy 7-26 Australia Richard Blaze, the former Leicester lock, has been brought into the England women’s set-up as forwards coach this season and his work is paying dividends. The Red Roses pack were impressive in the 27-19 victory over Canada in Doncaster on Sunday with a driving maul that would have gone down well at Welford Road. England have some new forwards who will make a big impact in the coming years. The young Saracens tight-head prop Hannah Botterman is a force in the loose and the switch of Shaunagh Brown from the back row to the front row will give Blaze more options in his pack. Brown, a replacement in Doncaster, brings an extra athleticism to the pack. Canada are no pushovers up front but England, with Abbie Scott and Sarah Hunter making a big impression again this autumn, are a match for any pack in women’s rugby. Ian Malin • England 27-19 Canada 15 Rob Kearney Ireland 14 Liam Williams Wales 13 Timothy Lafaele Japan 12 Bundee Aki Ireland 11 Jacob Stockdale Ireland 10 Handré Pollard South Africa 9 Fumiaki Tanaka Japan 1 Steven Kitshoff South Africa 2 Rory Best Ireland 3 Taniela Tupou Australia 4 Devin Toner Ireland 5 James Ryan Ireland 6 Peter O'Mahony Ireland 7 Hamish Watson Scotland 8 CJ Stander Ireland Aled Davies Wales v Tonga Jacob Stockdale’s for Ireland paid homage to Beauden Barrett’s try against Australia, Jesse Kriel and Peter Horne finished slick moves at Murrayfield and Michael Leitch scattered defenders at Twickenham, but an off-loading orgy in Cardiff ended with Aled Davies skipping out of tackles. Any one from a number in green but Peter O’Mahony was a giant among giants. Strong over the ball, he forced a number of turnovers, saved a certain try when anticipating Barrett’s kick and foiling Ben Smith, and read the game adroitly. A selfless, old-fashioned blindside flanker who gets his hands dirty. Jérôme Garcès’s decision to review Sam Underhill’s try at Twickenham was further vindicated in Padova when another French referee, Pascal Gaüzère, penalised Tito Tebaldi for offside when he intercepted after a lineout against Australia and scored. Replays showed the Italy scrum-half was onside, leaving his coach, Conor O’Shea, to lament the inconsistency.