Freya Parker: We started out as a trio called Lebensmüde. It was such a mistake to have a name no one can pronounce – or spell! Schadenfreude was already taken. I’d been doing a fringe play with my friend Ed who thought Celeste and I would get along. The three of us set out to write theatre together. The results were really worthy, just needlessly bleak. We booked a scratch night in Peckham. As it rapidly approached, we thought we couldn’t do this awful play about two little boys in a bunker. Instead, we did some sketches and jokes, then went to Edinburgh as a trio in 2013. After Ed went back into academia, Celeste and I did another Edinburgh – as Lazy Susan – and we got nominated for the comedy newcomer award. We spend an enormous amount of time together. In Edinburgh, we share a room and it’s quite intense. As soon as you open your eyes in the morning it’s like: “Hey! It’s me again! Hello!” In the first week of the festival, you’re up until the small hours every night rewriting. When we’re creating a show we’ll each come in with a scrap of an idea, a draft of a sketch or a character. We put music on and shoot the shit. We record ourselves improvising on our phones or jot things down. Friends have said to me: “Don’t put that in a sketch!” You can’t help but put your own life into your comedy but we’d never humiliate someone without their consent. Celeste and I find the same things funny, but my sense of humour is maybe a bit more surreal. I’m definitely the weirder one. Celeste Dring: Freya and I have got to a point now where we don’t take ourselves too seriously. There are jokes I can write about Freya that I feel she can take. We wanted to put more of ourselves into our new show. Freya is hyper-vigilant, and a few years ago I’d have felt like it was a criticism to draw attention to it. But the beginnings of this show were her hyper-vigilance and a joke about me being a bit sleazy. We wanted to write about fear and gender and make it personal to us. We started out doing comedy a bit tentatively because we were so bad at theatre. I’m quite terrified by how little I understand our process. You never feel like you really know how to do it. We usually work at Freya’s flat or mine. It’s important to be able to move around – we go outside and run about, do some stretching. If you’re in a coffee shop, you can get a bit too chatty. We wish we had a studio but we just can’t afford it. On acting jobs I’m quite spooked if people don’t have comedic impulses. Basically, what I’m saying is I get spooked if people don’t laugh at my jokes. I joke a lot in between takes because I’m so used to doing that in live comedy. I went on holiday for two weeks last year – that’s the longest I’ve gone without seeing Freya. It’s just like being in a long-term relationship. We have to block in time off together where we’re not working – like a couple who have been married for a long time and have to schedule in sex. We’re going bowling next week, but that’s mostly to enjoy the hilarity of Freya’s overarm bowl. Katie Norris: We’re shackled together. Sinead says I’m her blood supply and she’s my albatross. We weren’t sure of each other when we met at drama school in Manchester. Sinead’s quite shy; I was really ballsy and had a bad fake tan. We have the same birthday so were forced to plan a joint night out at Manchester’s Comedy Store where we watched loads of male standups. Sinead was horrified; I thought they were really funny. We pushed the boundaries of our friendship quite early on, getting drunk and dancing to Kate Bush, taking our clothes off and running around to Wuthering Heights. After we moved in it became like Withnail and I. We bought a rabbit that roamed around the flat and shat on our cardboard cutout of David Cameron’s face. To write material we sometimes book an Airbnb. As I’m the responsible one, I do the driving and the cooking. Sometimes I accidentally spoon Sinead when we sleep in the same bed. We improvise, watch really dark documentaries, laugh together. When we’re writing, Sinead will sit with a laptop. If I could have a chaise longue I would. This year in Edinburgh I joined a spa and went there every day. Sinead couldn’t afford the spa and decided to become an agoraphobic. She stayed in bed for most of the day and only got up at 9pm for the show. Sinead Parker: Neither of us had done comedy before we got together. I did a one-woman show when Katie went to Keswick on a theatre job after drama school. I felt like a limb had been amputated. Katie talks about it as the best time of her life – she went running, didn’t really drink, got paid regularly. Meanwhile, I was going through a horrible breakup and doing a solo show. I perversely enjoy the fear of standup, thinking I’m going to absolutely bomb. We have a similarly cruel sense of humour. That’s how we bonded. Our boyfriends always find us really intimidating together because we’re a horrible combination. But we also like silliness and finding the absurdity in everyday things. I’d happily live with Katie now we’re both in London, but I think she’d like boundaries. We do have sleepovers. We take baths together, we poo in front of each other. Katie came with me once to a colposcopy. Before we go on stage, I always have to check Katie’s catsuit for wet patches. Our new show took longer to write than we’d expected. At the end of it, we had a song that made no sense and cut it after the first preview in Edinburgh. Then Katie had a fever dream that she wrote up as our ending. A compere once called us The Fertile Girls. Norris & Parker is the most unimaginative name for a double act. As the more dominant one, Katie went first. But it has a better ring to it than Parker & Norris. • Lazy Susan’s Forgive Me, Mother! is at Soho theatre, London, 18 December-5 January. Norris & Parker’s Burn the Witch is at Soho theatre, 19-23 February.