When a losing run is as long as this, you do not care how it ends. Wales, after 13 consecutive defeats against Australia, finally managed a win. That the score was 9-6, a throwback to the bad old days, did not matter a jot to a raucous Cardiff crowd. Nor should it, but to the neutral this made for desperate viewing. A match that was meandering to a slow death at 3-3 was salvaged by three penalties in the last quarter of an hour, as well as a touch of controversy when Samu Kerevi’s attempted charge-down of Leigh Halfpenny’s clearance was adjudged OK, despite the dreaded contact with the head. Moreover, Matt Toomua kicked Australia level at the end of the same passage of play, only for Dan Biggar to seal the win with two minutes to go. It is difficult to know who should have been more disappointed with the first half. Halfpenny missed two, repeat two, penalty shots at goal, the second, on the stroke of half-time, more or less bang in front on the 22. He held his head in his hands. That just does not happen to him – or at least it never used to. But Australia might have felt they too should have turned round in front. No one dominated possession or territory, but the slickest moves were Australia’s. Kerevi had a tilt at the line down the left but left the ball behind him, distracted by the attentions of Gareth Anscombe. Michael Hooper and Tolu Latu combined down the blindside at one point and some nice midfield interplay sent Sefa Naivalu on a mini-break. But we are clutching at straws. Neither line was ever really threatened. It became, as ever, a battle of the breakdown, Justin Tipuric and David Pocock vying with each other. Tipuric eventually snuffed out the Naivalu attack with some classic poaching before he won the lineout from which Wales set up Halfpenny for his second miss. The lineouts were messy, Australia’s not surprisingly so, but Wales have been pleased with theirs of late. Australia pinched three in the first half alone. As it was, the scores remained level at the break, appropriately flat, Halfpenny landing the second of his three first-half attempts and Bernard Foley replying 10 minutes later. Both offences were for a No 6 straying offside. That is about as uninspiring as points-scoring gets. On it went into the second half – only without the points-scoring. Australia took not scoring points to absurd lengths in a third quarter that bent the mind. Australia managed to string a few successful lineouts together and it went to their heads. Twice, they were awarded simple penalties, twice they went for the corner, twice they made a mess of the resultant set pieces. Michael Hooper, the captain, seemed to point at the posts for the second penalty, but Foley kicked for the corner anyway, before Latu overthrew. Lack of direction does not do justice to the proceedings. Latu did not survive that indignity, and a double substitution in the front row seemed to improve Australian fortunes at the set piece. The referee had preferred the look of the Welsh scrum in the first half, but that changed with the introduction of Tatafu Polota-Nau and the Tongan Thor, Taniela Tupou. The narrative had been reduced to this. But it was Polota-Nau who supplied a plot twist vaguely worthy of the name, when he came in at the side to concede a penalty in the same position from which Halfpenny had missed in the first half. No question of kick to the corner this time. Halfpenny duly stepped up to earn Wales the lead with 10 minutes to go. It set the stage for the relative drama of the last 10 minutes. Kerevi’s attempted charge-down on Halfpenny was adjudged admissible – rightly – just as Pocock beavered over the ball to win his side their most difficult shot at goal, which Toomua slotted from wide on the right. With five minutes to go, after Ned Hanigan failed to roll away from a tackle, Biggar stepped up to put Wales – and the rest of us – out of their misery.