Ryanair is introducing yet another baggage policy, just months after the last one flopped because it caused plane turnaround times to stall, as wheelie bags piled up on the tarmac. The new rules are tougher and mean passengers will have to pay at least an extra £12 return unless their bag can be pushed under the seat in front. So here is our guide to what the new rules are and the sort of bags that should – with a push and a shove – meet Ryanair’s latest demands. What was the previous baggage policy? All customers could bring on board one standard-sized wheelie bag plus a small carry-on free of charge. But unless passengers had bought priority boarding (£6), the wheelie bag is tagged at the gate and put in the hold. Most travellers have been happy with this, but it has meant that as many as 120 bags have been left waiting on the tarmac to be loaded onto the plane. This has caused significant delays, with ground staff often not immediately available to load them. What is the new rule? If you are determined not to pay extra, you can only bring a bag that can be tucked under the seat in front From 1 November, passengers who have not bought priority boarding will only be able to bring on board a small carry-on bag, not a wheelie. Instead, the latter will have to be checked in at the airport for £8 (if purchased at booking) or £10. That means customers will have to suffer the hassle of queuing at the Ryanair check-in desks in the airport before going through security. But it does mean they will not have to worry so much about liquids being less than 100ml and it will speed up security screening. Should I buy priority boarding? Yes, if you are keen to take a wheelie bag (10kg maximum) with you. Priority-boarding customers will still be able to take on two free bags (one small carry-on plus 1 wheelie bag). Priority boarding costs £6 each way. Importantly, Ryanair will only allow a maximum of 95 (out of 189 potential passengers per plane) to buy priority boarding. Once this is sold out, customers will have to check their bag in before security, at a cost of £16-£20 return. The airline is hoping that many more travellers will opt for the priority option when they purchase their flight. What if I turn up with a wheelie bag at the gate without priority boarding? The airline will not let you board with the wheelie bag and you will have to pay £20-£25 at the gate to have it tagged and put in the hold. If you are travelling with Ryanair and have been affected we would like to hear from you. You can get in touch by filling in this encrypted form or contact the via WhatsApp by adding the contact +44(0)7867825056 Your responses will only be seen by the Guardian and we’ll be in touch if we are considering your response as part of our reporting. You can read terms of service here. What is the biggest carry-on bag I can still take? If you are determined not to pay extra, you can only bring a bag that can be tucked under the seat in front of you. Previously, Ryanair said that meant a bag with maximum dimensions of 35cm x 20cm x 20cm. But, from 1 November, this will increase to 40cm x 25cm x 20cm. An industry of Ryanair-approved small bags sprang up to meet the old baggage requirements and, no doubt, these are now being rapidly revised to meet the new standards. I have a small rucksack just a little larger than that. Will I get away with it? Some gate staff in the past were almost gleeful at rejecting oversized bags and it remains to be seen if those days will return. Airline employees are likely to be looking out for anything with wheels or hard sides, as these are unlikely to fit under seats. The key will be to make sure that your bag, if it is larger than the permitted dimensions, has soft sides and is not overpacked, so it can be squeezed under the seat. John Lewis Geneva small weekend holdall£65. Size: 40 x 21 x 20cmNot cheap, but an almost perfect fit for the new Ryanair size. It is an unstructured holdall with one main compartment and an internal zipped pocket, plus an adjustable shoulder strap. Reviewers on John Lewis’s website say it is relatively heavy, but durable, and big enough as an overnighter. Art Disco Arrow Emblem backpack£28. Size: 42 x 31 x 21cmThis is a few centimetres too wide, but don’t overstuff it and you should be OK. Art Disco is a Yorkshire-based designer that promises “hand-craft small batches of truly unique pieces”. The 18-litre bag comes with a zipped front pocket and padded shoulder strap. Zara bowling bag£49.99. Size: 44 x 30 x 24cmThis is definitely stretching it but, if you can get away with it, there is enough space in it for a weekend trip. The bag, which has two compartments, comes with a shoulder strap. Berghaus TwentyFourSeven rucksack £18.11. Size 44 x 25 x 21cmThe TwentyFourSeven rucksack range comes in various sizes, with only the smallest, the 15 litre, within Ryanair’s rules. It is sold for £30 on the Berghaus website, but a near-identical model is less on Amazon. Aerolite cabin holdall£6.99. Size 35 x 20 x 20cmThis one will definitely fit Ryanair’s under-seat size, as it was designed to fit the old, slightly smaller dimensions. It has a top carry handle, as well as a shoulder strap, though several reviews on Amazon claim the quality is questionable. Fjällräven Greenland Zip large backpack£105. Size: 40 x 28 x 18cmThis should just swing it past Ryanair, but maybe not your bank manager. Sweden’s Fjällräven has become a popular brand, known for its quality, but at a hefty price tag. Made from waxed fabric, the Greenland backpack has a 23-litre capacity and an inside zippered pocket for keys. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.