It doesn’t do to prod the sleeping lion. Roger Federer, who played as if he had been tranquillised in a desultory opening defeat by Kei Nishikori, then endured accusations that he has benefited from scheduling favouritism most of his career, swept away the limp challenge of Dominic Thiem in little over an hour here on Tuesday night. The impressive 6-2, 6-3 win saved the six-times champion from expulsion from the final big tournament of the season, although he probably still needs to beat a rampant Kevin Anderson in his third round-robin match on Thursday to reach the semi-finals for the 15th time in 16 visits. He will not lack for motivation – and it will not be easy. “It’s never easy to play again him, whatever the surface, as he showed against me at Wimbledon,” Federer said of Anderson, who beat him in five gruelling sets in the Wimbledon quarter-finals this year. It was a pointedly different scenario against Thiem. After half an hour Federer had secured the first set and Thiem, who has had a good season, lost all shape and confidence. When the Austrian dropped his serve at the start of the second set, it was all the encouragement one of the greatest frontrunners in the sport’s history needed. This was not the Federer who played so distractedly on Sunday night, before leaving the venue with embarrassing haste. He was making a statement, to the rest of the field, and, perhaps, to Julien Benneteau, the author of the claims about preferential treatment. The Swiss broke for a third time to wrap it up in 65 minutes – one more than it took Anderson to beat Nishikori for the loss of a single game earlier in the day. While at times Federer has looked to be playing from memory in the latter part of the year, his pedigree shone through on one of his favourite stages. Admittedly, it is some memory. He is still No 3 in the world, has won four titles this year, lost only 10 of 57 matches and earned more than $7m. He is not exactly on the scrapheap. Nevertheless, as Annabel Croft noted on Sky, there were signs of the tennis “yips” in his straight-sets loss to Nishikori, and the Swiss gave the impression he was out of sorts during the match and afterwards. “I don’t think I beat the best Roger,” the impossibly polite Nishikori reflected on Tuesday, after his own collapse against Anderson. Anderson produced one of the best performances of his late-blooming career when he reduced Nishikori to a hitting partner with irresistible, whirlwind tennis. The 32-year-old South African – alongside his former college rival, John Isner, 33, the oldest debutants in the event since 1972 – rated his blindingly quick match as “among the best I’ve played” adding “I kept at it the whole time”. There was little argument from the loser, who could only say later: “It wasn’t my day. I played one of my worst matches this year.” Anderson, powering down his serve from on high, full throttle, aced Nishikori 10 times and converted five of 12 break chances. Anderson, who has resurrected his career in a dogged fightback from hip surgery to stand alongside the best in the world over the past 18 months, knows he has an excellent chance of breaking through here, after reaching the US Open final and the final at Wimbledon. For years, he toiled on the fringes of the elite. He was always dangerous but only rarely disturbed the natural order of things. Now, as weariness hangs over his peers, he has a chance again. If the big, friendly South African were to win, it would be celebrated in all corners of the game. In the first evening match, Jamie Murray and his long-time Brazilian partner, Bruno Soares, sealed their advance to the semi-finals and looked sharp in beating the second-seeded Colombians, Juan Sebastián Cabal and Robert Farah 6-4,6-3. It was a deal easier than their first-round win over the sixth seeds, South African Raven Klaasen and New Zealander Michael Venus, and they can now play with some freedom in the redundant third match against Nikola Mektic and Alexander Peya, who lost in straight sets on Tuesday to Klaasen and Venus.