“Netflix viewing parties might sound lame, but they’re the future (and really fun),” screamed the headline of a recent article on the  Australian culture website Junkee, describing the apparent trend of friends streaming the same show at the same time in their own homes, while discussing it online. And the headline is right. It does sound lame. A Netflix viewing party sounds the sort of thing designed to make some people furious at millennials. “Look at them, messaging each other about The Princess Switch at the same time,” they will grumble. “This is exactly why they will never be able to afford a house.” On closer inspection, however, it becomes an ingenious way around a modern problem. In the past, TV was simple. You watched something and the next day you discussed it with friends. But that doesn’t happen now, because people watch shows according to their own schedules. You can’t talk about the ending of Better Call Saul with your friends, because they have been watching Succession. Or they have been watching Better Call Saul, but are only on episode three. You can’t tweet about what you are watching either, because you will offend some bratty little spoilerphobe who is saving all of Game of Thrones for the year 2022. A Netflix viewing party solves all these problems. You pick a show, so you know what everyone will be talking about. You pick the same time as your friends, so you don’t have to worry about rushing ahead. You message each other privately, so nobody spoils it for strangers. Best of all, you can stay in your own home eating Pringles sandwiches. A Netflix viewing party is a way of maintaining a common-interest community in an age that is heavily weighted against them. The whole thing is top-to-bottom perfect. Of course, it does involve a lot of steps – timekeeping, scheduling, synchronising, multitasking – so it might be easier just to go to a pal’s house and watch something on terrestrial TV, such as Celebrity Antiques Road Trip. But then again, who would ever want to do that?