Meg Wolitzer is the author of several acclaimed novels, including The Wife, The Uncoupling and The Interestings. Her latest, The Female Persuasion, explores the landscape of contemporary feminism. A much-praised film adaptation of The Wife, starring Glenn Close and Jonathan Pryce, was released this autumn. It’s been quite a year, with The Female Persuasion showered with praise and The Wife talked about as an Oscar contender. How does that feel?It’s funny the way things all happen at once sometimes, right? Especially since The Wife was published 15 years ago. So the film landing at the same time as The Female Persuasion does make it a pretty crowded year for me. But it’s always gratifying when people read something you’ve written or are brought back to a book because of a film. So I feel very lucky and pleased. How has it been watching The Wife go from the page to the screen?It’s kind of surreal sometimes, but very exciting because so much of what I do is alone in a room and this is an ensemble. It takes a lot of people to get a movie made and being part of something that’s a group effort, even in a secondary way, is very enjoyable. Was it hard handing the book over to the screenwriter, Jane Anderson?I wouldn’t want to adapt my own work. Why’s that?Well, I go through a very intense process when I’m writing a book, so the idea of repeating that for a film seems exhausting. You want to have a point where you are really done with something, you know? Besides, Jane Anderson brought some interesting new things to The Wife. First of all, the prize that the writer wins in the novel is a made-up prize called the Helsinki prize. It’s a couple of steps down from the Nobel prize and in the film it’s the Nobel. So right there you have the writer taking licence to do something fresh. I would be so faithful, I think, to my own work. I’d be a little rigid. Much better to let other people do it and then occasionally you show up and eat their food on set or come to their gala premieres and, you know, excitedly meet everyone. For me, that’s a good role. Did Glenn Close and Jonathan Pryce bring the characters to life in the way you imagined them?I totally recognised them. Weren’t they brilliant? It’s interesting, though, because I never see a character’s actual face when I’m writing a book. More kind of like a blurry idea of a face. But the minute they were cast they made sense to me as my characters. The Female Persuasion is dedicated to an eclectic selection of women including Nora Ephron, Mary Gordon and your mother, the novelist Hilma Wolitzer. What’s the story there?There are eight women in the dedication who mean a lot to me. That’s because one of the themes of the book is the idea that you might meet a person you admire who sees something in you when you’re young and changes your life. Once I’d finished writing it, I started thinking about the parade of women who, at different times in my life, didn’t have to do what they did, but did. Those women in the dedication are my mentors, the ones who changed my life. The New York Times called the novel a “feminist blockbuster”. Do you consider yourself to be primarily a feminist writer?Someone once asked the great writer Grace Paley if she wrote like a woman. Grace said: “If a horse could write a book it would write like a horse; I’m a woman so I write like a woman.” And I feel I’m a feminist so I write like a feminist. But I am interested primarily in following and exploring the stories of people who feel like real people, as opposed to writing a polemic. In this book, those stories happen to be about female power, making meaning in the world, mentorship, misogyny, a lot of things that remain compelling to me. How do you feel when people remark on the novel’s timeliness for the #MeToo moment? You wrote it before #MeToo kicked off.I wrote it four years ago when feminism was definitely a moving thing that had a lot of people talking about it but by the time the book came out we were in a very different moment and feminism was front and centre. But a novel isn’t just tracking what’s happening in the moment. It’s trying to peek around the bend and also look backwards, at why we got to this point and why we think and feel the way we do. It’s not trying to be the most up-to-date thing. An up-to-date novel almost seems like an oxymoron to me. You want a book to be able to last and to be reflective. As Mary Gordon said to me once, the novel is the opposite of a tweet. A few years ago, you wrote an essay for the New York Times about how women’s fiction is often taken less seriously than men’s. Do you think anything has changed?Look, until we’re not talking about this, and it’s not something to celebrate when a magazine or newspaper has gender equality in its books pages, then it remains a problem. There’s still a sense of struggling for equality in the literary world and it’s so disappointing that we’re still having that struggle. One of the things I talked about in the piece was the way books by men and women can look and I don’t think this has changed. Books by men still have big letters on the cover so you feel this book is an event but books by women – even Elena Ferrante – still have covers that look like what I call “little girl in a field of wheat”. Is that one of the reasons your books have gender-neutral covers, with bright stripes?Well, I don’t design the covers, but my publishers care about their writers feeling that their covers represent what their books are and what they think and care about. I feel very pleased with how my books look. It’s not that I want them to look male as opposed to female. For me, a book should be inviting for everyone. • The Female Persuasion by Meg Wolitzer is published by Vintage (£14.99). To order a copy for £13.19 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99