Brussels sprouts and fish sauce are the de rigueur combo of 2018, with everyone from David Chang and Martha Stewart to the Hong Kong hipster sandwich bars Bread and Beast and Little Bao spruiking it. Strangely, no one has yet invited lap cheong to this sticky party, which is a huge oversight, as you’ll find out when you make this recipe. I should add that my family is genetically programmed to obsess about these “doll’s house cabbages”, and the only time I’ve seen the woman I love shocked was when I informed her that Christmas lunch wasn’t complete unless there were at least a dozen sprouts a head. serves 4 1kg brussels sprouts4 lap cheong sausages, cut diagonally into 5mm thick slices2 celery stalks, finely chopped1 bunch coriander, leaves picked, stalks and roots cleaned and finely chopped 50g butter200g brown rice70g caster sugar2 tbsp fish sauce (the best you can find)2 long green chillies, thinly sliced2 limes80g salted roasted peanuts, crushed into a coarse gravel1⁄2 iceberg lettuce, finely shredded Kewpie mayonnaise or lime and miso mayo (see tip) to serve Preheat the oven to 200C/180C fan-forced. Trim the bottom of the sprouts and remove the tough outer leaves. If they’re small, cut a line into the base about 3mm deep; if they’re large, halve them. Heat a large frying pan over medium heat. Add the lap cheong, celery, coriander roots and stalks and fry for three minutes to colour, without letting them burn. You want the celery to still have a little crunch to it, so don’t be tempted to overcook this pan full of goodness. Use a slotted spoon to transfer the lap cheong, celery and coriander bits to a large bowl and set aside, leaving any rendered fat behind. Melt the butter in the frying pan, then add the sprouts. Cook, tossing, for one minute or until well coated in the butter. Transfer the sprouts to a large baking tray and spread them out in a single layer. If you don’t have a really large tray, it’s better to spread the sprouts over two trays rather than overcrowd them. Roast for 20 to 25 minutes or until the sprouts are soft in the centre but caught and a little burnt at the edges. Meanwhile, put your rice on to cook following the packet directions. Wipe out the frying pan with a paper towel. Make a caramel by stirring the caster sugar and fish sauce in the frying pan over medium heat. Jiggle the pan so the fish sauce dissolves the sugar evenly as it heats. Let it bubble away for two minutes or until a sticky caramel starts to form. Add the green chilli and bubble away for two minutes, then remove from the heat. Grate the zest of one lime, then cut the lime into quarters. Squeeze two of these quarters over the roasted sprouts. Add the sprouts and half the caramel to the lap cheong mixture and toss to combine. Transfer to a large serving plate. Drizzle over the remaining caramel and top with the crushed peanuts, coriander leaves and grated zest from the second lime. Cut this lime into wedges. Serve with the brown rice, lime wedges and shredded iceberg, and with the mayonnaise zig-zagged over the top of the sprouts. Tip: To make a lime and miso mayo, place one teaspoon salt, the juice of one lime, one tablespoon miso paste and a splash of mirin or rice wine vinegar if you have it, in the cup of a stick blender. Crack in an egg without breaking the yolk. Top with 350ml peanut or sunflower oil. Carefully position the blender over the whole egg yolk, and blend for one to two seconds until you see creamy ribbons forming. Bouncing the head of your blender up and down, gently pull up through the oil, incorporating it into a thick mayonnaise. • This is an edited extract from Yummy, Easy, Quick: Around the World by Matt Preston (Plum, $39.99). Next week, freekah salad