Once a layer of old coats and scarves had been scraped away, like soil from an archaeological dig, a large cardboard box reappeared in our storeroom. It was bigger than a tea chest and more awkward to handle: its contents’ weight was too much for its cardboard base. Inside were the relics of an entertainment that made its mark on industrial civilisation roughly between the years 1980 and 2005, to be remembered in my household for a little sign that once stood on the mantelpiece. My personal aide-memoire: “Total cost of evening out at cinema + supper at pizza place + hire of babysitter = £90, result misery. Total cost of evening at home with rented video + delicious Indian takeaway = £40, result happiness.” Not all the videos in those years had been hired. The box contained more than 100 that we’d bought or been given. It was surprising how completely they had been forgotten. Useless, you see. Open a mildewed book and it can still be read; clip a few frames from a cine film and you can see what’s in them; remove an old picture from its frame and it will still be a picture. The pleasures of the videotape, on the other hand, are locked away as securely as those of the wax gramophone record or the CD. They need a player, a VCR, to bring them to life. When did we last have a VCR? None of us could say. I unpacked the box to remember what we’d watched. It was eclectic. How typical I cannot say, but an anthropologist of British middle-class family circa 2000 might be puzzled or uplifted by its range. On the one hand, there was Father Ted and Pingu; on the other, Tarkovsky’s Andrei Rublev and Disney’s Dumbo. VHS was wonderful in most ways, and yet it has to be admitted that rare films became more ordinary Most came in plastic boxes shaped like books, with covers and blurbs. A few had simple cardboard jackets and contained films that had been recorded from TV broadcasts, with the title scrawled, sometimes illegibly, in a white panel on the spine. These dated from a time when it still seemed marvellous that programmes could be recorded in the viewer’s absence, by setting a timer. My estimate of the date would be about 1980. A British company, Nottingham Electric Valve, produced the first crude version of domestic video recorder – the Telcan (“television in a can”) – in 1963, but it was the big Japanese companies that from the mid-1970s began to turn it into a mass-market machine. In 1982, 10% of British households had one. By 1990, the figure was more than 50%. What happened during those years were two small revolutions in domestic and cultural life. On the home front, a couple with small children could now easily create a simulacrum of a night out by visiting the local video rental establishment and picking up a menu from the neighbourhood Taj Mahal. On the aesthetic front, a cinephile could now possess – for ever, if they chose to – a copy of a film they particularly liked or admired or believed they should see. The film-lover need no longer pine for a new release of Duck Soup, or set off in pursuit of Kind Hearts and Coronets as it fluttered, uncatchable as a butterfly, down a chain of obscure suburban cinemas that had agreed to take it on another outing. Films – TV programmes too – were no longer evanescent to their audience. Videos could capture and keep them for the viewer like samples in a lepidopterist’s cabinet. It was wonderful in most ways, and yet it has to be admitted that, when shorn of the thrill of the chase, rare films became more ordinary. Several of the videos I took from the box had as films been considered rare – as in hard to find. Oh, Mr Porter! for example: I think it may have been the first film I was ever taken to see, but for decades all I remembered was a scene where a train runs into a washing line which is flapping across the track. Only when the video appeared did I understand why the film, which dates from 1937, had stuck in the minds of older people who had insisted on telling me about it. “The bit where …” was an opening to many passages of film description. Now I could link the bit where a clumsy railwayman (Will Hay) accidentally soaks a pompous crowd of his company’s directors in a gush of water to all the other mishaps when, consequently banished to a remote piece of rural Ireland as the new stationmaster at Buggleskelly, he tries to inject some pride and order among his recalcitrant staff. What nobody had mentioned, and which came as a surprise, was that the sinister enemy in this comedy was the IRA, who were using the railway to run guns. When the box was finally emptied and its contents stacked neatly on the floor, the broad shape of our tastes became clear. We liked comedy. There were other Will Hay films – Windbag the Sailor, Boys Will Be Boys, neither of them as funny as the great film that had led us to them; all of Wallace & Gromit – I smiled remembering them; Buster Keaton’s The General; quite a bit of Laurel and Hardy; the Simpsons’ Greatest Hits; Mr Bean and Monsieur Hulot’s Holiday; the Vicar of Dibley and Dad’s Army; the Flintstones; the Ladykillers and everything else that came out of Ealing Studios. We liked Disney: Snow White and 101 Dalmatians as well as Dumbo. We liked musicals with Julie Andrews and Bond with Sean Connery. We loved the Railway Children – it was always hard to avoid a tear at the bit where Jenny Agutter sees her father reappear through a cloud of steam. We enjoyed animals, especially whales and dolphins when introduced by David Attenborough. The video, at least in our house, was obviously a great enabler of nostalgia. Just William, the Famous Five, Bagpuss, Watch with Mother: what had our children done to deserve such ancient entertainment? And yet they seemed to like these films, or at least liked them more than my educational screenings of Eisenstein’s Ivan the Terrible Parts I and II and Satyajit Ray’s Distant Thunder. The fate of the videos isn’t clear. They lie in the car boot together with a storage tower that can hold a few dozen of them. The municipal dump is their likely destination, with only a few spared for sentimental reasons. Thomas the Tank Engine and Dunfermline Athletic: the Golden Years belong in this small, select group – the first because, as a popular phenomenon, as books that became a television series, Thomas stretches across the 40-odd years that separate my childhood from my children’s. As to the second, I was there in 1961 when the team won the Scottish Cup and there, too, that same evening when the team appeared on the balcony of Dunfermline’s town hall to the approving roar of the crowd. In my memory, the town’s provost, slightly tipsy, wears a wing collar that makes him look like Neville Chamberlain. What I can’t remember is whether the video supports this view. And as I never want it unsupported – because I like this memory – I never intend to buy the DVD. • Ian Jack is a Guardian columnist