If you follow the restaurant scene on Instagram, you’ll possibly think of Two Lights in Shoreditch as “the fishtail hanging out of a sandwich place”. All restaurants in 2018 must have a dish to provoke Instagram users. I don’t make these rules; I am but a conduit. You may recall Red Farm’s Pac-Man dumplings or Kerridge’s Bar & Grill’s lobster omelette. And it is reported that at new Notting Hill mega-opening Caractere, Emily Roux is agitating – excuse me, enticing – diners with a Bourbon biscuit filled with mushed sardine butter. This, let’s be frank, sounds like something one might have been tricked to eat while blindfolded at an 1990s children’s birthday party. Hence, at Two Lights, a small, breaded sardine lies between two slices of purposefully bog-standard white bread, with its wispy tail draping out à la Tom & Jerry’s supper. It’s a sardine katsu sandwich for £4.50, a play on Japanese junk food. In the maze of morality that is food-scene cultural appropriation, a loophole allows the Japanese to play with the drab 70s British way of making a sandwich and flog it back to us via Shoreditch. You eat this sardine sandwich in a rather noisy room with white brick walls and delightful service, as part of a menu of modern American sharing plates, hewn of intriguing, deeply pre-trend foodstuffs: hen-of-the-woods mushrooms, fennel pollen, bottarga butter, mussels served on a flatbread with brussels sprouts. Two Lights is an important London opening because Chase Lovecky is a young, earnest, imaginative chef known for his work at The Clove Club in Shoreditch, Momofuku-ko in New York and with Jean-Georges Vongerichten. Expect askew slants on seafood, Japanese influences, relaxed shack vibes and high-end American swagger. You may laugh at his dressed crab balanced precariously on two beef-fat chips or his spindly carrots draped beside duck, but these are dishes that other chefs will riff on, rip off or simply bitch about who invented them first. Maitake mushroom – a feathery, meaty, satisfying ’shroom that, as its nickname suggests, could be mistaken for chicken – is served with egg yolk and dulse, a seaweed that tastes a little of bacon. The dish costs £18.50, it is complex and elegant, yet at the same time, it is also the world’s most expensive quiche filling. This is a dinner that educates me, rather than one that makes me drool, but, marvellously, there will always be a place for this kind of thing in Shoreditch. We whip through dish after dish from the single-sheet, A5 menu printed on Farrow & Ball Elephant Breath-coloured card. Soft potato rolls appear with a small pot of fishy bottarga butter, then the obligatory sardine sandwich – which is largely forgettable, but did its job of luring us through the doors. A whole roast artichoke arrives prettily with a sweet, sunflower-seed miso dip. We pull and dip, and pull and dip, then cut the soft innards, enjoying the ceremony possibly more than the vegetable itself. A wobbly, bulging burrata sits, ready to erupt, in a vibrant green, delicious puddle of creamed kale and seaweed. A highlight is delicate, lightly flamed slices of bonito topped with a splodge of American mustard and a suggestion of pickled onion. Still, the more I ate, the less convinced I became. Carbs are thin on the ground at Two Lights; their nods to “sides” are a lettuce wedge with a pale and interesting tarragon dressing or chunks of roast celeriac smeared with a walnut butter that is either revolting or revolutionary, which neither myself or my friend Lyndsay could decide on, despite clearing the plate. The grilled shortrib with sweet beetroots is gorgeous and a reassuring crowd-pleaser for guests not quite down with the whole WTF-ness of Lovecky’s vision. They may be a little more irked by his guinea fowl, which arrives in sausage form, cuddling into a bed of sausagemeat stuffing and a citrus yuzu sauce. Two Lights’ custard tart has also became Insta-famous, although it left me a little cold, much like its icy muscat grape granita and the pumpkin ice-cream with persimmon and popcorn. As Chas Hodge might have said if he’d seen me eating these puddings, “Oh darling, there ain’t no pleasing you.” But I’m still glad I went to Two Lights, and I’ll enjoy watching Chase Lovecky’s work filter through the country’s kitchens. I wasn’t sated, but I was educated, and that’s absolutely the next best thing. • Two Lights 28 Kingsland Road, London E2, 020-3976 0076. Open Weds-Sat, noon-2.30pm, 5.30-10.30pm, Sun noon-9.30pm. About £40 a head plus drinks and service. Food 7/10 Atmosphere 8/10 Service 8/10 Grace Dent’s restaurant reviews appear in the award-winning food magazine Feast, along with recipes by Yotam Ottolenghi and more top cooks, with the Guardian every Saturday.