So farewell England, welcome back Great Britain – or maybe the Great Britain and Ireland League Lions. Anyway, after a damp squib finish to a handsome series win over the Kiwis, it seems England are to be mothballed for 23 months. An England XIII may play France or Wales next year and the RFL will send a team to the new Nines World Cup in Parramatta the weekend after the Super League Grand Final. But straight after that Great Britain will arrive in New Zealand to play Tonga, the Kiwis, Fiji and Samoa and come home via Papua New Guinea. Well, that’s the plan. Let’s be honest, the return of the Great Britain team is primarily a marketing move by the RFL, one based on exploiting the game’s rich heritage. I’m all for that, as are thousands of others. Richard Lewis suspended the League Lions after the 2007 series for good reasons. There was little sense in England only playing at World Cups, and Great Britain, this epic, touring legend, had stopped touring. Lewis promised to bring it back. The sabbatical has lasted 12 years. Two quick history lessons. One: the four-yearly Lions tours ended with the internecine Super League war. Great Britain travelled for Ashes Series in 1984, 1988 and 1992, also playing Tests in New Zealand and Papua New Guinea. They even went back to play the Kiwis and Kumuls alone in 1990. The 2019 trip will be similar to 1996, when Great Britain played everyone but Australia on a five-Test tour. There was no tour as such after that. Great Britain played 16 consecutive home games in the early 2000s! Lesson two: union going openly professional in 1995 was like switching off a talent tap from the celtic nations. Having recruited from the Valleys and the Borders for a century, just a year after union went “open”, Workington’s Welshman Rowland Phillips was the only non-English player in the 1996 Lions squad. There were Ireland and Wales internationals in Great Britain squads every year, even a couple from Scotland, but they all had English accents. Irishman Brian Carney was the only Lion not born or bred in England between Phillips’ last cap in 1996 and Lewis bringing down the curtain. The clock had been turned back half a century. Having begun as the Northern Union, the national team became “England” in 1924 and only adopted “Great Britain” after the second world war because there were so many Welsh, several Scots and the occasional Irishman in it. If the Lions squad next year is entirely English, what would be the point of calling it Great Britain? Crucially, will the RFL take the best possible squad, or a squad that represents the British Isles? Given that the suggested schedule implies there will be some midweek games, a bigger squad than usual will be required. As well as appointing a head coach – which the RFL seem to have assumed is Wayne Bennett despite not consulting their constituent bodies in Wales, Scotland and Ireland – the performance unit have some major policy decisions to make. I would take either the strongest eligible squad, which would therefore include some Antipodeans who from the Celtic nations, or the strongest 20 and ensure the rest of the squad reflects the British Isles. That should include Saints’ Welsh winger Regan Grace and you could argue the case for his clubmate Morgan Knowles and Wigan prop Ben Flower, or Ireland trio Louie McCarthy-Scarsbrook, Michael McIlhorum and Oliver Roberts. Opt for proportional representation and players at the level of the King brothers, Joe Philbin, Kyle Amor, a fully fit Joe Wardle, could all give Samoa and Fiji a game. Bennett could even rattle some serious cages by luring ex Wales forward Tyson Frizell from the Kangaroos. There is one other issue: Scotland and Ireland could request their best players stay behind to help them qualify for the World Cup! An easy win for the RFL would be to collate a Lions staff that has representatives of all four nations. Castleford masterminds Daryl Powell and Ryan Sheridan could fly the Ireland flag, and I would find a role for the former Scotland coach Steve McCormack, now Player Welfare Manager at Wigan Warriors, and Wales supremo John Kear. Those two know more international tours than almost anyone, other than Bennett himself. Raising awareness of the challenges facing people living with a stoma, Team Colostomy UK are using our game to empower ostomates to reach their potential. As spokesman and prop Giovanni Cinque says: “If you can play the toughest of contact sports with a stoma then you can do anything.” Theirs is an “inclusive” team: some players have a stoma, some have friends with the condition and some just want to help raise awareness. Team Colostomy headed to Featherstone for a game of Tag last weekend. Coached by Halifax hooker Ben Kaye, they drew 8-8 with PDRL United. You can join England internationals Josh Charnley and Oli Holmes as well as Ireland’s Api Pewhairangi in showing your support for the cause at their website and on Twitter. USA and Jamaica meet on Jacksonville on Saturday for a place at the 2021 World Cup. The USA predictably smashed newcomers Chile in their semi-final with a four-try debut from Brooklyn Kings winger Brandon Anderson and a hat-trick from his centre, Barrow’s Ryan Burroughs. Sheffield Eagles veteran Mark Offerdahl notched two first half tries, Hull FC star Bureta Faraimo two in the second for a Hawks side featuring players from half a dozen USARL teams. Jamaica, conversely, had players from seven Yorkshire clubs, Wakefield winger Ben Jones-Boshop and Leeds full-back Ashton Golding among the tries as they held off Canada’s challenge in their semi. A quartet from Jamaican champions Duhaney Park are gaining vital experience in the squad. The next World Cup will kick off on 23 October 2021 and culminate with the final on 27 November. When the draw is made, the 2017 semi-finalists will be in Pot 1 and the losing quarter-finalists in Pot 2. Wales and France are in Pot 3 and will be joined by the winners of USA v Jamaica on Saturday. So if Ireland and Scotland make it through next year’s qualifiers, one or both will be in Pot 4 and may have to win two games to emerge from a group that could include Australia, Fiji and France. Good luck with that. If one of Danny Addy’s late kicks against Samoa had gone over in Cairns, or McCarthy-Scarsbrook had held on to the ball as he crossed the tryline in Papua New Guinea, Scotland or Ireland would be sitting comfortable in Pot 2 now. Very Sliding Doors. There are some new members of the “League Dad, Union Son” club. Gary Graham of Newcastle, son of former Carlisle and Scotland league forward George, has finally been called up by Scotland to play union. And Bath’s Zach Mercer has joined Owen Farrell and George Ford (and former England rugby league international Chris Ashton) in Eddie Jones’ latest England squad. Gary Mercer played and coached at both Halifax and Castleford before accepting a tempting offer from union. While Gary was coaching at Glasgow Warriors, his son Zach was playing union at boarding school in Edinburgh and league in Glasgow during the summer. Zach admits he still dreams of playing for Leeds Rhinos. “My dad always jokes I’m not hard enough for league – he thinks he was harder.” Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook