Theresa May survived her “darkest hour” , with a guarantee of more trouble ahead in the coming weeks. As the cabinet shredded itself over the proposed withdrawal deal, her DUP allies deserted her and the wheels of a no-confidence vote ground into motion, the May paradox was on display – she is at her best when at her weakest. “Keep buggering on,” is the Churchillism one of her cabinet allies applies to her plight – and a capacity to do that is the reason that she is still there at all. The qualities that have so often frustrated her colleagues – stubbornness in the place of flexibility, and aloofness – have one upside: May is determined in adversity, and self-reliant to the point of tolerating isolation better than more gregarious politicians. That is just as well given her friendless position over Brexit. Yet in the past few months she has constructed a personal defence system from the shards of her battered dignity. Her statement after a cabinet session of tears, tantrums and table banging was, as one of her aides discloses, “A raw pitch for survival, live on TV news”. Another Downing Street insider adds: “Nothing happened by accident – she was positioned far out from the No 10 door, under a single bright light – it all signals that she’s talking to the country, not her own side. She knows she has more support among the ‘normals’ than the London political class.” This is a show with a tactical purpose – to portray May as the bruised prize fighter who just keeps on going and use that grudging respect for indefatigability to see off challenges. Many of the strengths it takes to be a first-class politician in a media age do not come naturally to “TM” (even the nickname of her few intimates sounds like a memo sign-off). She miscalculates, often at crucial moments, as in the early general election. She prevaricates, notably on a Brexit policy that swung from hard exit at the bullish Lancaster House speech in January 2017 to the post-Chequers plan that shredded her cabinet’s will and has led to the Brexiter backlash. Her communications style is reliably described as “wooden”; her cultural references tend to stem from a different era, from the Abba-mimes at Tory conference to a hoary cricket metaphor featuring Geoffrey Boycott at last week’s lobby press conference: “He stuck to it and got the runs in the end.” Great stuff – but Boycott’s run-getting Test career finished in 1982. May has been on the brink for most of her accident-prone premiership – and she knows how to walk the knife-edge in those kitten-heel shoes. In the Commons on Thursday, the pummelling continued from all sides – an hour passed with barely a kind word about the deal and an acidic assault was made on her leadership from Jacob Rees-Mogg. May looked grey with fatigue, but still in full command of her notes. “No one beats her easily on the detail,” concedes a Labour figure that shadowed her. On she rolled to an LBC interview, painful to hear, because the exhaustion in that clipped, control-freak voice was so apparent and her words were frequently mangled with fatigue. It should all add up to a messy goodbye – and one day, it surely will. And yet – somewhere in the midst of the disaster movie, sympathy has begun to creep up on the beleaguered leader from unlikely quarters. It caught the imagination of Richard Littlejohn, the Daily Mail’s most excoriating scribe, who concluded, “there was a certain magnificence about the way she did her Dido impersonation – She will go down with the ship.” At the other end of the political spectrum, actress Michaela Coel tweeted after the parliamentary onslaught, “I did not vote for Theresa May, but that chick is handling her shit right now in house of commons like a QUEEEEN.” A campaign to build on these kinds of unexpected declarations is now attempting to “humanise” May with the wider public; in an interview with the Daily Mail yesterday aimed directly at Middle England she praised her husband, Philip, as her “rock” and revealed that she had recovered from the cabinet ordeal last week with a large whisky (Margaret Thatcher’s favourite tipple). Later, after a party at Clarence House for Prince Charles’s 70th birthday, “Philip cooked beans on toast. (I think I opened the tin!)” May has long channelled a kind of tough femininity. As the first female party chairman, she took on the Tory right by brandishing the “nasty party” tag. Her strengths and weaknesses are directly intertwined – she’s often brave, but narrow. She has few warm relations in cabinet – a mutually respectful one with Jeremy Hunt, the foreign secretary, and Gavin Williamson at defence is her personal bodyguard in the rough and tumble. Amber Rudd, another loyalist, rejoined the ranks last week. Even those with close access, though, describe the relationship with May as “professional”. Those who resign, even on friendly terms, receive a phone call “and no follow-up”, says one recently departed. May knows full well that her time in office is limited. “She wants to leave with things in better order,” says an old university friend. “And she enjoyed sticking it out, to spite the critics.” The friend last week sent her a note, citing dogged Carlotta’s torch song in Sondheim’s Follies. “Good times and bum times, I’ve seen ’em all and my dear, I’m still here.” Somehow, it’s always Mayday – and she’s there the morning after. Anne McElvoy is senior editor at the Economist