Fourteen years ago, Penny Woolcock was mugged in a London street. “Someone ran up behind me and was punching me and I stupidly fought back,” she says. “There was this moment when I caught his eye and we had this very strange connection.” Though her assailant managed to wrestle her bag off her, it was found the next day on top of a nearby car. It was a life-changing encounter: “I didn’t want to become a frightened person, so I thought I would have to get to know some robbers.” At around the same time, she started noticing “these little bunches of flowers where kids had been stabbed, and I realised something was happening that I knew nothing about”. She got some development money from Channel 4 to go to Birmingham and investigate the “postcode culture” in a city that had become renowned for gang warfare between young black men. At first it didn’t look promising. “Nobody trusted me because they thought I was working for the police.” But gradually, she managed to talk her way into the confidence of first one gang and then another. Both the Johnsons and the Burger Bar Boys began to see her as “certi – it means you are what you say you are”. The result was two films, the fictional 1 Day and a documentary, One Mile Away. Both allowed gang members to play themselves. “Three years of my life were swallowed up in that and it nearly killed me – literally,” she says. “I had guns pulled on me [by gang members] – and I was constantly worried about what was going to happen to them, because they were much more vulnerable than I was.” The project led to enduring friendships with the young men she cast, one of whom, Zimbo, was reunited with her on stage at London’s Roundhouse three years ago during a season of pop-up shows curated by Woolcock in and around a towering installation of cardboard boxes. In a live-streamed session of Utopia: Live Lates, Zimbo rapped alongside Charlotte Church and a trio of string players from the English Chamber Orchestra. “If we hadn’t met, there would be a lot of people dead who are now alive,” he said, between numbers. “She’s big in ‘dis ting’.” The season’s title, Utopia, came from Thomas More’s 16th century political satire, which was read out loud by eight people picked off the streets of London. A looped, six-minute film of the readings is part of Woolcock’s latest project – a multi-installation takeover of Modern Art Oxford, which takes her lifelong investigation into the repercussions of social inequality back to the fine art world from which she started out. The show is also a geographical homecoming to the city where Woolcock found herself as the single mother of a small baby, after a dramatic teenage rebellion had swept her away from her expatriate family in Argentina in the late 1960s. The most autobiographical work in the show makes clear what she was running from. It’s a giant stocking puppet called Big Girl, which was constructed with the help of 27 friends and transported to Oxford in two Luton vans. “She fills the whole room, and has a big bottom and quite a big vagina, which I’m hoping will be completely visible from the door,” says Woolcock. The accompanying soundscape is about her own stifling suburban childhood as part of a community that prided itself on being unable to speak the language of the country where its members had lived for generations. Her grandfather had been a bank manager and her father worked as an accountant for a multinational company. Argentina itself was in ferment and, at 17, Woolcock ran away to join a radical theatre group, fleeing to Amsterdam when it began to get dangerous, and “drifting around Europe for a bit with other Latin Americans” before the birth of her son gave her an abrupt reality check. Realising that “I’d jumped from the frying-pan to the fire”, she escaped to England, where she settled on Oxford as a good place to bring up a child because they could travel around by bike and the local schools would be full of dons’ children. There, she became involved in revolutionary politics and co-founded the Oxford Printmakers’ Workshop, while working as a painter and supporting herself through “very menial jobs” in factories and a hospital kitchen. She stayed in Oxford for 15 years, and credits that period with informing the direction of her later work. “It gave me a way of being with people from very different backgrounds on an equal basis.” After starting to have qualms about the commodification of the art world, she joined a film-making workshop. “The thing about being a fine artist that worried me was that to be successful you’re selling stuff to go in rich people’s houses, while film or TV can be seen by anyone and you don’t have to behave in a certain way, or clap.” I realised I was really good at being with the kind of teenagers other people were afraid of She did some youth theatre work and “realised I was really good at being with the kind of teenagers that other people were afraid of, because I’d been somewhat delinquent myself”. A “clunky” film of some of the teenage girls she worked with, made on borrowed equipment, brought her to the attention of Channel 4, which offered her a chance to edit it properly and gave it a TV screening. Her breakthrough came with the Tina Trilogy, three films set on a Leeds estate, which were released between 1999 and 2006 (all three starring Kelli Hollis, who went on to become a professional actor). But, though she has continued to work in television – and is about to direct a third series of the Channel 4 drama Ackley Bridge, set in a Halifax secondary school – Woolcock became frustrated with television’s “tyranny of narrative. It has to have a beginning middle and end, and everything has to be constantly explained”. Her search for different ways of telling stories took her to opera, starting with a film version of John Adams’s The Death of Klinghoffer, and continuing with a co-production between English National Opera and New York’s Met of Bizet’s Les Pêcheurs de Perles, which has had her criss-crossing the Atlantic for the last eight years, with a new Met run opening this week. While she was in Los Angeles to restage it for LA Opera last year, she went walkabout, and was horrified by what she saw, using her cellphone to film homeless people on Skid Row. The resulting 14-minute film has become part of the title triptych of the Oxford show, Fantastic Cities. Its two companion pieces take her to Oxford itself, interrogating the historic distance between town and gown. One is a dreamlike evocation of student life set to classic Oxford texts; the other disrupts this self-aggrandising mythology by trailing two rappers from the city’s impoverished outlying housing estates around some of its most famous tourist sites. The London flat to which the 68-year-old polymath retreats in the interludes from her globetrotting life is perched on a street corner, with floor-to-ceiling windows looking out in two directions along a leafy road. But its peacefulness is deceptive, as she demonstrates in another film being premiered in the show. When The Same Road is a Different Road was scripted in alternating paragraphs with a youth leader friend, and used a camera drone to map her daily routes to the shops or the tube station against those of the young people who hang around the same space. Woolcock herself voices one strand and the other is narrated by a teenager from a nearby youth centre – her middle-class insouciance starkly contrasting with the paranoia of young men for whom every street corner may be their last. Though her inquiries have taken her to some of the most dystopian corners of western civilisation, she refuses to be defeatist or cynical. “It’s interesting how people survive when their main source of employment is gone,” she says. “The kind of films that tend to be made about them are very mournful, but my experience is that actually it hasn’t left a void. People don’t just lie down and take it, they create a whole new economy. It may be generally criminal, but it’s very disruptive and inventive, and there’s something about this life that I’ve always found very attractive.” In Tina Goes Shopping, the title character pushes her baby around a weekly shoplifting circuit for her friends and relatives. “All my life I’ve seen Aunty Queenie hiding from men who want money off of her. That’s why I’ve decided to start my own business,” she says, cheerfully. As to whether art can make a genuine difference, Woolcock agrees with Zimbo that their Birmingham work saved lives, though she’s aware that, nearly a decade on, the cycle of violence is starting starting all over again. “In the 70s there was a dismissive attitude [among the revolutionary left] towards any attempt to do anything that didn’t topple the whole system,” she says. “But I believe that is very disempowering. It’s worth trying to do the things we can, and if the thing we do is art, then that’s what we can do.” Penny Woolcock: Fantastic Cities is at Modern Art Oxford, 17 November-3 March