What Glossy American sitcom du jour from the producer behind The Office (US) and Parks and Recreation.Why everyone loves it Ted Danson has never put in a bad performance in his life; every member of the cast is basically a model; the conceit – that four complicated characters have died and have to puzzle out the afterlife – is better than the usual “six quirky people sort of live together in New York!”The case against The Good Place is very wholesome and interesting and nice, and in this dark bleak world there’s a lot to be said for having a mild, watchable show where four characters you root for and also quietly want to have sex with go about their days. Sadly, there isn’t a single joke in it, and I feel as if I’m the only person talking about this. The Good Place doesn’t have any jokes! It’s never had a joke in it! It has sentences with the cadence of jokes, and spaces for laughs! But it isn’t funny! It’s just nice! It’s all a trick! Am I the only one going mad? Who Androgynous bop-merchant and truly the only real pretender to the vacant Prince throne. I mean, who else are you going to give it to? Louis Tomlinson? Grow up.Why everyone loves her Everyone likes “pop”, the most widely beloved music genre on Earth. But what if pop were … interesting as well? Friends, that’s where Janelle Monáe comes in.The case against If you actually listen to the words over the horny guitar bits, there are some incredibly corny lyrical concepts in there – “Let’s get screwed! / I don’t care / You fucked the world up now / We’ll fuck it all back down” is particularly “A-level art student gets praise for their poetry from their peers”, isn’t it – but her flawlessly uplifting live shows do tend to make up for that. The only real worry is that we’ve seen this all before: genre-busting fashion icons go one of two ways, and it’s either Grace Jones-style for ever legacy or the next album is just her talking about the moon and asking to be called “Jantifer” or something like that. What Extremely dramatic Netflix series where the Queen gets into a number of fun scrapes and fumbles, such as “navigating the Suez canal crisis”.Why everyone loves it It’s annoyingly rare these days that a 10-hour series actually lives up to the time invested in it – everyone wants to be a prestige drama but not everyone wants to put the work in to make it interesting enough for that long, do they, Westworld? – and The Crown has managed that for two seasons and promises another four. Game of Thrones for people with exactly one history book in their toilet.The case against Not real, though, is it? The Crown may be based on historical characters and touchpoints but, even for a historical drama, it’s very Not Real. The main worry is, being as it is on Netflix, American teens will get carried away with the whole thing, start changing the Wikipedia pages for the people involved, and genuine history will end up getting fully erased. We’re a year away from having her name officially recognised as “Queen Baelizabeth”. What Essentially a musical episode of Jeremy Kyle: Amanda Seyfried doesn’t know who her dad is, and Meryl Streep keeps singing to avoid answering the question about it. By the end of the film, no one is any the wiser.Why everyone loves it The music of Abba is timeless and reminds people of getting drunk at weddings, plus Colin Firth singing makes for one of the most uncomfortable scenes in modern cinematic history.The case against DNA tests exist; this whole thing is a waste of time. Who Pseudonymous Italian author of the gripping and internationally bestselling Neapolitan Novels. And now, TV.Why everyone loves her Because the books are sun-soaked ponderations on the minutiae of female friendship, like taking a bath together or holding a grudge for 45 years.The case against It is basically impossible to know how much of Ferrante’s writing is thought-provoking, core-cutting portraits of the human condition and how much of it is just brief sentences afforded an added layer of spooky glamour by her anonymity, which is cursed to drive the literary world mad for ever. Is this good because it’s good? Or is it good because there’s no author photo? I simply don’t know. This is like Banksy all over again. What Japanese anime studio that specialises in cosy-but-weird feature-length animations where the cats are always evil or the woodland creatures have chubby little testicles or something like that.Why everyone loves it Like Disney in the west, Studio Ghibli just sort of gets the experience of being a wide-eyed and amazed child, and their films transport you back to a place where monsters could live under your bed, your dad was the tallest man on the planet, and Christmas was good.The case against Studio co-founder Hayao Miyazaki famously often works without a script, creating a few characters he’s very empathetic with and making it up once animation production starts, which means a lot of the time a cosy 100-minute film is resolved with “and then some magic happened, THE END”. What A thing people say whenever someone at a party mentions that Friends is on Netflix and they’ve been rewatching it again and, Ross being annoying aside, it still stands up.Why everyone loves saying it Frasier is the connoisseur’s choice of early-aughts behemothic US comedy, because Friends is too obvious; plus it was repeated to death, then repeated again a few times for good measure, by E4.The case against It feels redundant calling for a critical re-examination of Friends, the most popular sitcom ever produced, but even for non-believers it really does hold up: six actors completely perfect for their roles; somehow enough frisson to keep going for 10 seasons; an actually worthwhile finale (looking at you, Seinfeld); a show that defined a generation. Listen, Frasier is good, but quite often it is just two soft lads squabbling about wine glasses. What Americans have this thing where they can’t understand a single thing unless it’s translated into English, stars an upcoming blond starlet, and is set for some reason in Oregon.Why everyone hates that Because the originals of the movies are as the director intended and a shot-for-shot remake is often unnecessary and more frequently worse than the original, somehow sullying the source material as it goes along – and yes I’m thinking about Oldboy (2013) right now.The case for It’s so, so, so much easier to half-watch a film while also scrolling Instagram when you don’t have to read the whole thing in subtitles. People forget that when they are pursuing true and meaningful art. Think of all the Lean in 15 recipes you could bosh while that’s on in the background. Come on!