The big coats are out and the nights are drawing in. Winter is coming. It is time to seek comfort in warming, hearty one-pots – and, in particular, the restorative power of chicken soup. The jury is very much out on whether the subject of this month’s How to Eat (HTE) might “do stuff” to you medicinally – the so-called Jewish penicillin likely exerts a strong placebo effect – but as we shiver through chilly commutes, hacking and coughing our way towards Christmas, arriving home to a steaming bowl of chicken soup indisputably lifts the soul. That bone broth warms the marrow. But only if it is done properly, which is where HTE – the series examining how best to eat Britain’s favourite dishes – comes in. So what is the ultimate expression of chicken soup? For sanity’s sake, this piece will limit itself to chicken soup prepared in a broadly European and North American style. Not out of chauvinism, much less xenophobia. But simply because exploring the full panoply of Asian, African and Latin American chicken soups in a way that does them justice would make this article balloon into an unmanageable, indigestible sprawl. An epic so vast it would make War and Peace (that “loose, baggy monster”, as Henry James put it) look like an offhand tweet. Bits. It should have bits in it. This broth should be dense, with visible pieces of chicken, vegetables, pulses and pasta. You may not be able to stand your spoon in it, but your spoon should definitely encounter some firm resistance. That heft, that ruggedness is central to this soup’s ability to banish the blues – both in the solidity and safety it suggests, and in the textural and flavour variation it provides in each mouthful. You need to chew here. Think of it as rewarding work. Eating chicken soup should feel like you are taking on a hot, generously filling fuel, laying down essential fat and protein for the cruel winter ahead (hence a gelatinous bone-broth base, speckled with globules of fat, is preferable). Chicken soup should never be smooth. Cream of chicken soup, that pallid, sweet concoction – that looks more like a milkshake and in which the chicken meat has invariably gone AWOL – is utterly childish. It may sound more sophisticated, but chicken soup given the velouté treatment is similarly vapid. A velouté might be a smart way to showcase a single vegetable (say, Jerusalem artichoke), but its silky mouthfeel is jarring in a context where you want body, chunks, meat. Similarly, there is something eerie about clear chicken consommés. That is an awful lot of cheffy work for a soup that will leave any right-thinking diner asking: where’s the rest of it? It is as if someone has stolen, if not chicken soup’s soul, then its crown jewels. Soup served in a cup will always, as Danny Dyer might put it, leave you feeling mugged off. The idea that all soups should be blended into a smoothly drinkable texture is infantile, and there is something about hurriedly slurping down gulps of warm, viscous savoury liquid (in contrast to the way a spoon moderates the pace of consumption) that is actively nauseating. Ideally, chicken soup should be served in a wide, deep bowl and consumed with a round soup spoon (using an oval dessert spoon, on the basis that it is more elegant, is a real Hyacinth Bucket move). Such a bowl retains its heat, acts as a reassuring visual representation of how thoroughly your hunger will be sated and gives you plenty of space to root around. According to this historic – and hopefully satirical – piece from the Guardian from way back in [blows dust off file] 2002, etiquette dictates that you should only ever fill your spoon to 75% of its capacity, sip only from its sides and never bang it against the bowl. It is a set of rules that threatens to suck all the joy from what should be the most informal of dishes. This is chicken soup. It is proper tie-off, elbows-on-the-table, dig-in troughing. No airs. No graces. Get stuck in. Likewise, there is no practical reason to tilt the bowl away from you as you finish the last dregs of your soup, other than as some coded middle-class signalling to people around the table that you too unthinkingly adhere to petty bourgeois niceties. It is awkward nonsense. Ignore it. Apart from the chicken, which is firm enough that it can overhang the edges slightly, everything should be chopped into small enough pieces that a few of them can comfortably nestle together in each spoonful. Including long, floppy strands of difficult to control ingredients (spaghetti, flat noodles, cabbage etc) will likely leave you wearing half of your soup. In a noodle soup, you sign up for that; it is a different proposition. But in chicken soup, keep it tidy. For instance, use smaller pastina (orzo, anelli, sorprese). Real pieces of chicken This may sound obvious, but it is a suggestion widely ignored by many commercial manufacturers of canned and fresh soups. Get some darker meat in there for additional flavour and do not shred the chicken. In a soup, shredded chicken becomes waterlogged and woolly. Instead, cut it into firmer chunks. Vegetables Onion, sweetcorn, celery, carrot, cabbage (darker, challenging varieties, for example, kale), celeriac, parsnip. Feel free to char or part-roast some of those vegetables first to build in further layers of flavour. Chorizo Used sparingly as a seasoning (this is not chicken and ham soup), a small amount goes a long way. Bulking agents A scattering of chickpeas, rice, red/yellow lentils, pasta or barley (perhaps even a mix of several of these) will add textural variety, a satisfying bottom-end weight and further nutty, iron-y flavours. Cream Just a drop or two, swirled through. Turkey The most disappointing meat on the market: accept no imitations. Bacon Unless safely marooned on a central island of ingredients, above the waterline and used strictly as a garnish, bacon becomes curiously mealy in soups. Likewise, chicken crackling: if immersed in all that liquid, it ends up not crisp and salty, but unedifyingly soggy and slimy. Mushrooms In a chicken pie, all good, but in a hot soup, the flavour of mushrooms is muffled and, like leeks, they achieve an altogether unpleasant level of slipperiness. Needless to say, even before we get to the issue of including prunes in a savoury soup (ye gods!), HTE is not a fan of cock-a-leekie. Potato In a soup, chunks of potato are always either undercooked or mush. There is no in between. Moreover, in a soup in which you need to work hard to avoid blandness (see flavour boosters, below), potato is a noncommittal shrug of an ingredient that adds body without flavour. Broccoli Water gets trapped in the heads of the florets and superheats so that, even as the soup cools, those pieces of broccoli maintain a thermonuclear temperature that could strip fire-resistant paint from a garage door, never mind the roof of your mouth. Not that you are likely to use them here, but as a general warning, tomatoes pose a similar danger. Peas Pointless, in this context. Egg Which came first: chicken soup or the idea of gently cooking strands of egg through it? HTE cannot say, but it is an ineffectual and unnecessary addition. It is rare that HTE strays into the realms of seasoning specifics. The how-to-cook nitty gritty is Felicity Cloake’s domain. But is worth reiterating that from salt, pepper, garlic and white wine upwards, chicken soup benefits enormously from some added va va voom to lift its somewhat beige ingredients. The more obvious herbs (parsley, thyme, bayleaf) can be too domineering, but if judged correctly, a little heat (ginger, chilli) can bring everything into sharper focus. Masala spices, harissa or ras el hanout can also be effectively deployed, but that is to take chicken soup on its travels in a way that HTE promised to avoid at the top of this piece. Even when stuffed to the gills, wiping your bowl clean with a piece of thickly buttered bread is the pinnacle of the chicken soup experience. Mopping up every last drop of those magical savoury juices is a must – like an impromptu roast chicken sandwich at the end of your meal. Who could say no to that? Remarkably, many people swear by chicken soup as a hangover cure. In a fragile state, and certainly before midday, HTE could think of nothing worse. Even the thought of it makes HTE bilious. Chicken soup is even wasted at lunch, arguably. It is best eaten after dark, in deepest winter, when rain is lashing against the windows and, if only for a few hours, you are determined to hibernate from the world and its endless horrors. Self-care starts with chicken soup. So, chicken soup: how do you eat yours?