The Democrats’ seizure of the House of Representatives and other advances in the US midterms are hugely welcome and a great relief. But Tuesday’s vote did not see the hoped-for blue wave, and was not a turning point in itself. What matters is what the Democrats, and the president, do next. Donald Trump was predictably ungracious and combative in what he claimed as a “big victory”, despite his improbable suggestion that it “could be a beautiful bipartisan type of situation”. He thrives on the divisions that saw more than a third of voters in battleground districts describe themselves as “angry”. The record turnout (up 31 million votes on the 114 million votes in 2014) testifies to his ability to fire up his base as well as galvanise resistance. Candidates embraced his nativism, with nakedly racist and antisemitic campaigns. Mr Trump has boasted of the strengthened Republican hold on the Senate – an unsurprising outcome, given how strongly this round of contests favoured the party, but especially concerning given that overall Republican senators have shifted rightwards. There were deep disappointments for the Democrats: rising stars Beto O’Rourke and Andrew Gillum fell short despite making striking inroads in Texas and Florida. In Ohio, as critical as the Sunshine State in 2020, Democratic senator Sherrod Brown held on but Republicans triumphed in other races there. Republican governor Scott Walker was ousted in Wisconsin, but his party held the legislature. We can expect Mr Trump to run against the Democratic House in 2020: it will make a convenient enemy. That is precisely because the Democrats have ended the era of unchecked Republican power and can now frustrate his agenda on everything from tax cuts to healthcare and immigration. The resistance has moved into the legislature; but they need to show they can be more than the resistance, and can win over opponents. Critically, they now have the power to investigate him; this is not “presidential harassment” but sorely needed oversight. Mr Trump has threatened retaliation, but the biggest challenge for Democrats may be picking the right targets with so many in sight. Overshadowing all is the pending report from Robert Mueller into Russia’s role in the 2016 election and the alleged collusion of the Trump campaign. Russian trolls appeared to be at it again in this contest. Preliminary exit polls gave House Democrats a 21-point lead among women, while men split almost evenly. Despite some signs that suburban, college-educated women are peeling away from the Republicans, 60% of white women backed Ted Cruz in Texas; in Georgia 76% picked Brian Kemp over Stacey Abrams, seeking to become the first black female governor. But a record 272 women ran for Congress, and at least 95 were elected to the House: the best showing ever, if still far too low. They include the first Muslim and Native American congresswomen (Rashida Tlaib and Ilhan Omar; Sharice Davids and Deb Haaland), and the youngest, Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez. Jared Polis is the first out gay man to be elected governor, in Colorado. Such victories give the Democrats a much-needed morale boost. But mobilising support is not enough when the system is so thoroughly rigged against them. The extent and impact of gerrymandering and voter suppression is increasingly obvious. Democrats won the popular vote in four of the five presidential races this century – yet two of those produced Republican presidents. Democratic senators represent around 3.65 million voters and Republicans around 2.5 million. This week shows that electors are waking up. Michigan approved a non-partisan redistricting commission and automatic voting enrolment. Florida passed an initiative restoring voting rights to 1.4 million felons, disproportionately black men; Mr Trump won there by 113,000 votes. The Democrats won’t just need the right candidate and agenda in 2020, but a fairer system too.