At this stage in the process, I simply did not believe it was possible. But miraculously, it is. I have found it – the only Brexit take I can still bear. Behold: Rob Lowe, in Boston – the Lincolnshire town that recorded the highest leave vote in the EU referendum – holding a tray of flesh items that we shall come to shortly. For now, you will have questions. Primarily: what is going on? Secondarily: where do I buy a ticket to this particular meat raffle? And in a distant third place: why on earth have you brought Brexit into this? So let me summarise the television commission that got us to this magical space. The photo was taken this week, on the set of a forthcoming ITV drama called Wild Bill. Premise: Rob Lowe plays a high-flying US cop who is appointed chief constable of East Lincolnshire. How? Why? I genuinely can’t imagine. But I do have ITV’s press release on the matter in front of me, and consequently can tell you that “Wild” Bill Hixon has a first-class degree in criminology, a master’s in psychopathology, a doctorate in statistical mapping and a traumatic recent past that he and his 14-year-old daughter, Kelsey, are trying to put behind them. He was the US’s top metropolitan police chief three years running – so by telly logic, the market town that skewed 75% Brexit is the next career step. As the show’s writers put it: “Wild Bill gives us a chance to write about modern Britain and modern crime through unique eyes … Displacing Rob in Brexit Britain and specifically in Boston, Lincolnshire, allows us to tell stories that are leftfield and unexpected.” Well, I mean … yes. I don’t think any of us truly expected this. In fact, if I had to come up with something I liked about this commission, I would say: everything. Absolutely every single thing about it. It is as if the creators had a brilliant evening coming up with random combinations, achieved by picking one card from each of four piles labelled: “US actors”, “UK market towns”, “Subgenres” and “Issues”. They ended up with “Rob Lowe”, “Boston”, “Fish-out-of-water cop” and “Brexit”. But it could just as easily have been “Keanu Reeves”, “Saffron Walden”, “Bodyswap comedy” and “Automation”. Or “Emilio Estevez”, “Dewsbury”, “One last job” and “Failures of neoliberalism”. I would obviously watch all of them so hard. Frankly, I couldn’t love these creators more if they’d simply turned up to the commissioning meeting, looked the head of ITV drama right in the eye, and gone: “Young Guns, but in Ludlow. BOOM.” And then dropped a little pretend mic. Take eleventy million pounds and get writing NOW. You can expense as much Adderall as you like. According to ITV, Wild Bill is “funny and dangerous in equal measure”. And on the basis of this set of pictures alone, I strongly agree. Hats off to Lowe, who looks to be in very deep indeed, in what is easily his edgiest gig since Bad Influence. And so to Boston, Lincs, where Tuesday saw the production out and about on a location shoot. Thanks to an enterprising photographer, we have a full series of snaps of Rob enchanting locals in the breaks between plying his trade. That trade is acting, and these pictures serve as an eternal reminder that – short only of journalism – it is the most dignified of all the professions. My only complaint is that we don’t have access to live footage in which the comments of passing market shoppers are picked up by the sound equipment. Presumably some of them took a similar tone to one Daily Mail commenter, who I can picture drawing long and ruminatively on a Lambert & Butler before typing the deathless verdict: “I wouldn’t say ‘no’ to a portion of Rob’s pork loin.” Whichever way you slice it, this hilarious picture only adds to the gaiety of the nation. Which is hardly long and strong in gaiety at the moment. Incredible that I imagined my years of affixing Rob Lowe posters to the wall were behind me. (At my school we were thrilled when his sex tape came out, because it meant he was definitely open to sex with 16-year-old girls.) I need this image printed A1 size as a matter of urgency – and this time it won’t have to jostle for space with Johnny Depp, Prince, Lee Sharpe, River Phoenix, Imran Khan, Brad Pitt in Thelma and Louise, Gary Lineker, Jeremy Guscott, Bobby Brown, Matt Dillon, Rupert Everett, Madonna in the Express Yourself video or the aforementioned Keanu Reeves. (Don’t write in; I couldn’t be expected to know how one or two of those would turn out.) In days of yore, of course, Rob would have been playing a saxophone in a yellow vest. Or leaning against a pillar with his vest riding up (dog tags: model’s own). Or being revealed as the poster inside Corey Haim’s wardrobe in The Lost Boys in a very meta movie moment. But life moves pretty fast. These days, I like to see Rob Lowe standing in front of a stall selling dog beds and compost – that reminds me, I must get some compost for the Christmas hyacinths – and proffering a plastic tray with the words: “Tell you what, madam, I’ll chuck in a couple of kidneys and I’m still only asking nine pound the lot.” Very reasonable. And now that fish pie’s gone I’ll have space in the freezer. Probably need to move the choc ices up a shelf. Having said all that, I am aware that drama requires conflict. So I would be perfectly happy to stalk on screen and deliver a line such as: “Hixon, I am sick of defending your screwball antics to the commissioner! Hang on … you are the commissioner. Right: we’ll do this another way. Internal affairs are going to be so far up your ass you’ll be serving them tripe. Something something Andy Garcia. Something something meat locker.” As for what else we can glean from the picture, it seems Hixon has somehow been allowed to transfer his US police medals of valor to his UK police uniform. Not sure if this ends up being a specific episode plotline, but I am afraid the chief constable will find there are rather fewer law enforcement award shows in this backwater of a country. (Back in the day, the Sun used to run the annual Police Bravery awards, but I believe they declined to continue with their partnership after the police bravely arrested several of their senior staff.) Anyway, on with the show. According to ITV’s pre-publicity: “Rob Lowe has a magnetic screen presence which is perfectly suited to bring the character of Bill Hixon to life: a blunt, take-no-prisoners police chief who shakes up the Lincolnshire force.” Wait – he takes no prisoners? That seems slightly eccentric, in his line of work. But given everything else, perhaps the least of it. “From the outset Bill isn’t about making friends,” we learn. “He’s here to get the job done and get the hell out as quick as his spin-class-toned legs will carry him.” Sure. But does life have other plans? “But this unfamiliar, unimpressed community will force Bill to question everything about himself and leave him asking whether it’s Boston that needs Bill, or Bill that needs Boston.” I think we both know the answer to that one. He may be some goddamn Quantico quarterback punk – but he’s going to end up their goddamn Quantico quarterback punk. All that remains is to ready our slankets and crisps – and to warn the BBC that even considering scheduling Line of Duty against this would literally be why remain lost.