Real Madrid found solace in the Champions League once more as a 2-0 win at Roma confirmed top spot in Group G. The champions took a 47th-minute lead through Gareth Bale, who capitalised on Federico Fazio’s mistake. That came after Cengiz Ünder’s woeful miss at the end of the first half and Real doubled their lead when Lucas Vázquez struck to secure top spot in the pool. Viktoria Plzen’s earlier 2-1 win at CSKA Moscow meant both sides were through before kick-off, with top spot in Group G and a favourable last-16 seeding becoming the target. Roma needed to beat Real by four clear goals to usurp them at the top of the pool, which was always an unlikely outcome. Bale lined up on Madrid’s left, but the visitors struggled to assert themselves in the first half. A Luka Modric foul on Stephan El Shaarawy led to the winger’s substitution, with Justin Kluivert on in his place. Patrik Schick shot straight at Thibaut Courtois from an Aleksandar Kolarov free-kick as Roma created few chances. The best of the first half came in stoppage time, when Ünder missed from close range. Nicolò Zaniolo’s cross from the left beat Courtois and Sergio Ramos and, with the goal gaping, Ünder sent the ball over the bar from four yards out. The miss was to prove even more costly when Bale scored his 20th goal in 58 Champions League appearances, punishing a poor clearance from Robin Olsen and a misjudged header from Fazio. The Welshman was on hand when Olsen sent his kick high into the air and Fazio’s header only went as far as Bale, who rolled a left-footed shot in. Madrid’s second came on the counterattack following a Roma corner. Karim Benzema fed Toni Kroos and Modric crossed from the left towards Benzema. The France striker headed the ball down for Vázquez to finish. Bayern Munich produced the biggest win of the evening as they beat Benfica 5-1 in Group E, with Robert Lewandowski and Arjen Robben both scoring twice in Germany. Juventus beat Valencia 1-0 in Group H thanks to a Mario Mandzukic goal just before the hour mark. While Manchester City were drawing in Lyon, Group F rivals Hoffenheim twice came from behind against Shakhtar Donetsk. But after Ádám Szalai was sent off for a second bookable offence in the 59th minute, the German side succumbed to an injury-time effort from Shakhtar’s Brazilian midfielder Taison, who scored his second of the night to bring up a 3-2 away victory.