Miami runs on Cuban cafecitos, Cuban sandwiches and “Cuban time” – a favorite excuse for being 45 minutes late. As the largest group of Latinxs in Florida and Miami, Cubans are credited with giving the city its cultural core. A bit of Cuba can be heard in the Miami accent, tweaking a local’s tongue to round vowels and cut syllables. And Cubans are also heard through their politics, or so the cliche states: they will always push Miami, and Florida, to the right. More than half of Florida’s Cubans voted for Donald Trump in 2016. But younger Cubans are splitting from their parents and grandparents on politics, and analysts say the power of Cuban conservatism in Florida is now waning. Andrew Gillum will be hoping that’s true as he races to defeat Republican Ron DeSantis in the midterm elections on 6 November. If Gillum wins, he will become the first Democrat to occupy the governor’s mansion in nearly two decades. Andy Vila, a 20-year-old who came from Cuba with his mother in 2004, shed his conservative beliefs during Trump’s 2016 campaign. Cuban Republicanism “is mostly just tradition”, he said. “I realized that a lot of ideas I grew up with didn’t make sense.” The first group of Cuban immigrants who fled the 1959 communist Castro-led revolution, were able to quickly engage in American politics through the 1966 Cuban Adjustment Act. In the first month’s of John F Kennedy’s presidency, the CIA backed a failed attempt by counter-revolutionaries to overthrow Castro. Older Cubans, or “the exile” as they call themselves, came to see the Bay of Pigs Invasion as symbol of treachery of American left. Already distrustful of leftwing politics, Cuban immigrants were naturally drawn to the Republican party, which has depended on their votes since 1980, when Cuban Americans helped lift Ronald Reagan over Eisenhower by 17 points in Florida to win the presidency. That habit is changing, though, pushed by their children and grandchildren. Nearly half of Cuban Americans in Florida voted for Obama in 2012, a titanic shift from the 78% of the vote won by George Bush in 2004. In 2016, Trump lost the district containing Miami – which holds most of the state’s Cuban population – by the largest margin a Republican candidate has ever lost there. Vila is the chairman of the Young Democratic Socialists of America on campus at Florida International University(FIU), much to his mother’s chagrin. Vila says Gillum gives him “hope” and he will be voting for him because this election is not just about Cuba or DeSantis or Trump. Gillum’s policies attract him. “He talks about what Floridians really care about, Medicare for all and allowing the state to focus on its people rather than the profits of the agriculture industry.” For others, however, the pain of the Castro revolution nearly 60 years ago has not been forgotten. Armando Ibarra’s father was a political prisoner in Cuba. Though born in Florida, he stands firmly against leftwing politics as the president of Miami-Dade Young Republicans (MYR). He will vote for DeSantis. He says that for many in Miami “foreign policy is domestic policy” but admits that national level issues do not attract young voters to the party. The club holds forums and debates with college students on local and state issues such as legalization of medical marijuana, transit and county mayoral elections. Still they cannot ignore immigration. MYR has hosted forums on the issue as well. “In our party there is a diversity of opinion on immigration. That reflects the fact that our party tries to find a best solution,” says Ibarra. Professor Dario Moreno of FIU’s Cuban Research Institute predicts higher turnout among Cubans over 65 on Tuesday, but says that if the young crowd comes outright for Democrats, despite a likely lower turnout, they could tip the scales. Both groups account for a wide margin of 200,000-300,000 votes. Cubans are only one part of the picture, however. Puerto Ricans are now the second most populous group of Latinxs and, according to Pew, they now represent as much as a third of eligible Latinx Floridian voters. Past elections demonstrate that Puerto Ricans are overwhelmingly Democrat-leaning, and given that they nearly match Cubans in population numbers, some expect they could offset the Cuban-Republican vote. Over the past decade, thousands of Puerto Ricans have relocated from the island to central Florida, pushed by the financial crisis there and more recently, the devastation brought by Hurricane Maria. Sixty per cent of Puerto Ricans in Florida now live in the I-4 corridor, an area that spans both coasts including Tampa, Orlando and their working-class suburbs. Danna Zayas Torres is a mother who came to Orlando exactly a year ago with her husband and two teenagers after Hurricane Maria’s winds toppled her home in Adjuntas, a mountainous region in midwest Puerto Rico. Now, she’s ready to vote. While other immigrants must wade through the expensive and painstaking seven to 12-year process of becoming an American citizen, Puerto Ricans, much like Cubans, do not. They are already citizens. They can register with proof of residency. She called Trump’s visit to the Island last October “a disgrace”. “What he did in Puerto Rico was a show of disrespect to Boricuas [Puerto Ricans] and to all other Latinos. He is self absorbed. People that are without papers work so hard for this country. He’ll realize that he needs them later. We’re all the same here.” It’s clear that Trump and immigration are issues for her, but that’s not why she’s voting Democrat. She looks to candidates that engage honestly with her community. “I was asked what party I wanted to register for, I said: ‘I belong to Victor Torres’ party.’” Victor Torres is a Democrat in the Florida senate representing Kissimmee, a town bordering Orlando. During the time that Zayas Torres and her family were trying to find jobs and lay down roots, they stayed in motels with many others who were in the same situation. The senator made a point to visit the motels and his presence and care activated Zayas Torres politically. “That’s what we look for in politicians. Without knowing us or asking for our vote, they spoke from the heart,” she said. Frederick Velez of Alianza for Progress, a non-partisan group mobilizing Latinxs in Central and South Florida, says that there has been an “unprecedented surge” of registration among Puerto Ricans. In 2016, Trump lost the Puerto Rican vote by 20 points, but Dan Smith of the University of Florida says just 62% of Puerto Rican voters turned out. Is Trump’s rhetoric enough bring them out for a second round? Latinxs are 19.8% of the state’s eligible voters. Cubans and Puerto Ricans combine for 50% of that figure (28% and 22% respectively). The other half is distributed across all other national origins, largely Mexicans, Venezuelans and Colombians. Latinxs cannot possibly be a single-issue group or a single group. Voting patterns of the different groups hinge broadly on their country of origin, as well as their age, their year of arrival, work and education. “It’s complicated to have a strategy for each nationality,” said Dr Eduardo Gamarra of Florida International University. “But Hispanics in Florida of many colors and stripes are here to stay the more attention you pay to them the more likely your party is to win.”