Returning from a two-week hiatus, the show kicks off with a special report from Fox News’s Laura Ingraham – Kate McKinnon, appropriately wooden and soulless – on the migrant caravan. According to Ingraham, “dozens, maybe millions” of immigrants, including “Guatemalans, Hondurans, Mexicans, Isis and the 1990 Detroit Pistons” are set to cross the border at any moment. Joined by Fox grotesques Jeanine Pirro (Cecily Strong) and Sheriff David Clarke (Keenan Thompson), she uses stock footage of white people rioting and crabs crawling along the beach, and a clip from the Brad Pitt zombie movie World War Z, to spread fear and misinformation. The sketch is a subdued but solid takedown of American’s latest bout of racist hysteria, as well as Ingraham herself. The sharpest jokes make references to her show’s loss of sponsors following her attack on the Parkland survivors, the only ones left including “Warm Ice Cream”, “My Hemorrhoid Donut” and White Castle (“A castle for white people? Yes Please!”) McKinnon inserts a quick joke about “disgraced actor Alec Baldwin”, via an out-of-context still from his infamous Canteen Boy sketch from 1994. Disappointingly, this will be the show’s only reference to Baldwin, who was arrested on Friday for assault, which he denies. Jonah Hill, whose directorial debut Mid90s is currently in theaters, hosts for a fifth time, joining the ranks of SNL royalty: Steve Martin, Tom Hanks and Justin Timberlake, among others. Carrying on a tradition of sketches given to other five-time hosts (including Timberlake, Dwayne Johnson and Melissa McCarthy), he’s inducted into the Five-Timers Club. This time, the alumni is represented by Tina Faye, Drew Barrymore and Candice Bergen. They reveal that all the male members have been kicked out for being perverts. (“Justin Timberlake ripped a lady’s top off at the Super Bowl,” Bergen reminds us.) It’s a light-hearted but still pointed bit of self-effacement that gives proper due to women who have been so integral to the show over the decades. Hill then reprise his popular character Adam Grossman – the motor-mouthed six-year-old (going on 40) who frequents Benihana. He berates his nanny (Leslie Thompson), a patient, but exhausted woman who is forced to endure his screeching renditions of popular reggae songs (Adam mistakenly thinks she’s Jamaican). Hill’s gusto keeps the sketch on just the right side of endearingly obnoxious, never allowing the character to become insufferable. The first of four commercial parodies, Midterm Ad, introduces us to a cross-section of Democratic voters, all of who betray their utter fear over the party’s electoral prospects while trying (and failing) to put up a brave front. Their ratcheting desperation (which has them drinking heavily, stealing joints from passersby, berating and even slapping their children, screaming into the void) makes easy work of the “blue wave” pipe-dream liberals have been clinging to for months, serving as a much-needed reminder not to take anything for granted on Tuesday. It’s the most brutal – and effective – political sketch of the season. After a silly but enjoyable sketch about a TV weather forecaster being proposed to on-air by her loser boyfriend, we are treated to another barbed indictment of liberal sanctimony, by way of a commercial for Divided We Stand, an off-broadway musical that was “definitely written by the actors”. Smug, cloying and “dangerously oversimplified”, the production (which features Hill as an embarrassing Lin-Manuel Miranda wannabe), leaves audiences and critics cringing and asking: “Whose parents paid for this?” Much like the Midterm Ad, its specificity makes it effective. On the opposite end of the spectrum, specificity-wise, we come to Teacher Day, a bizarre entry that finds a prostrate driving instructor (McKinnon) delivering dramatic excerpts from her tragic life to confused and horrified students, none of whom she allows to help her up off the ground. The sketch starts out promising, with McKinnon in her element playing an anachronistic weirdo, but it’s too unfocused. The entire cast consistently breaking throughout doesn’t help. Musical guest Maggie Rogers performs Leave the Light On, garnering a quick (and, frankly, undeserved) online backlash for being slightly off-key for some verses. Weekend Update devotes most of its first half to the migrant caravan and its second half to the midterms. Unlike the previous sketches covering these topics, Colin Jost and Michael Che’s blithe disregard for the political process feels neither pointed nor earned. Che’s smugness is doubly off-putting, especially when he admits to never voting before assigning blame for the current state of affairs to blue state transplants from the Midwest. Continuing this annoying trajectory, Pete Davidson, newly interested in politics now he’s “had to move back in with [his] mom”, joins the hosts for a rundown of some candidates up for office. His jokes revolve solely around their physical appearances (he admits he shouldn’t be making fun of how anyone looks, given that he resembles “a Dr Seuss character who went to prison”), and the whole thing feels like an excuse to get him out so he can address the elephant in the room: his broken engagement with Arianna Grande. As far as that goes, he respectfully wishes Grande the best before imploring people to vote. While you can’t fault Davidson for wanting to address his troubles as succinctly and quickly as possible, his remarks about it being “nobody’s business” come off pretty hypocritical given how keen he and the show were to milk the engagement while it lasted. Given that Grande herself dropped a new single mentioning Davidson a mere half-hour prior to SNL airing, this feels like an even greater missed opportunity. Thankfully, Weekend Update is saved by Melissa Villaseñor as “Every Teen Girl Murder Suspect on Law & Order”. Ostensibly on hand to discuss young adult literature, she instead gives a dead-on run-down of the arc and mannered performance of countless Dick Wolf productions. Next, an overly long parody of America’s Got Talent. Maggie Rogers returns to the stage and belts out Falling Water. Answering the question Sarah Huckabee Sanders (Aidy Bryant) gets asked on a daily basis – “How do you sleep at night?” – we watch a commercial for her preferred sleep medication, HuckaPM. Containing “melatonin, extra-strength quaaludes and what Micheal Jackson’s doctor called ‘One and Done’s’”, the drug succeeds in zonking out the morally bankrupt White House press secretary so she can go to work refreshed. Although the commercial parody format feels increasingly tired, this quick and effective dose of political spleen makes the night’s political sketches four-for-four. The final sketch of the night, Dog Infomercial, sees a Long Island couple (Strong, Hill) and their extended family hawk Pug Wigs (a “legitimate business” and definitely “not a front”) on public access television. Although it’s the weakest segment, the pugs earn plenty of fawning from the studio audience. Even though a sense of deflation could be felt for the show’s back half (par the course for this and recent seasons), Hill’s confidence as host, along with a string of sharp political sketches and welcome cameos, combined to make this by far the strongest episode of the season.