Anyone who has ever stepped into a boxing ring knows it is generally not a good idea to drop both hands below your waist, stick your chin out, and dare a much bigger opponent to knock you out cold with their best shot. Yet that is what Aiba, amateur boxing’s governing body, appears to be doing after an extraordinary presidential election in Moscow. Aiba knew the International Olympic Committee had “grave concerns” about the governance and direction of the sport. And that it really did not want Gafur Rakhimov, a man accused by the US treasury of being one of “Uzbekistan’s leading criminals” – something he strenuously denies – to be made president. So what happened? Rakhimov was elected on Saturday after defeating his sole rival, Serik Konakbayev, by 86 votes to 48. But only after the electronic system had refused to work and Aiba was force to construct a makeshift voting booth made with tables stacked together and covered with sheets. To make matters worse, ballot papers needed to be put into a cardboard box with the logo of the French gardening company Leroy Merlin on it. As one onlooker put it to me, all that was missing was the Benny Hill theme tune playing on loop. Now the dust has settled, two things are clear. Rakhimov rules Aiba and the IOC has to quickly decide whether to bite the bullet – or fire it by suspending Aiba from international sport. Its decision, which is likely to come this month when the IOC meets in Tokyo, could have huge ramifications for boxing. For now, however, neither side is backing down. To his supporters, Rakhimov won fair and square, despite what they see as the naked IOC threats. They also insist the Uzbek is rescuing the sport after it was close to bankruptcy after the Azerbaijani company Benkons had demanded immediate repayment of a $10m loan last year – and say the issues of the previous regime, under the former president CK Wu, should not be held against it. Wu denies any wrongdoing. But it is not so simple. Much of Aiba’s executive committee under Wu is still in place after the latest elections – including the vice presidents – and the IOC may legitimately wonder why a body that did not adequately scrutinise Wu will ensure good governance this time, or implement the reforms it is demanding. Incidentally one new ExCo member is the Chinese businessman Di Wu, which comes as something of a surprise given I reported last year he served documents on Aiba demanding it pay back an 18.99m Swiss francs (£13.6m) investment which his company First Contract International Trade put into Aiba’s marketing arm, BMA. In a letter seen by the Guardian, Wu also accused Aiba of “mismanagement” and “greatly infringing on my rights”. Yet little more than a year on, Wu is on Aiba’s executive committee – and the organisation has 18.99 million reasons to be grateful he has withdrawn his claim. Some argue this is a brilliant piece of realpolitik from Rakhimov but not everyone agrees. Critics say that for Aiba to convince the IOC it has changed it must show it is being run by the best of the best lawyers, accountants and business brains – not just on patronage and understandings. Others note with concern that Russia, which is paying £3m to host next year’s world championships – double the previous highest hosting fee – has a far greater influence, too. At what price? Incidentally, there has been a lot of misleading talk about boxing been banned from Tokyo 2020. That is not going to happen. This is about the fight for the soul of the sport – not the sport itself – and the prospect of a new governing body. Depending on who you speak to, this would either be an organisational nightmare or entirely feasible but the IOC, which hands Aiba £13m after each Olympics, does not intend to come out of this looking weak. As one observer put it: “Aiba seem to have this delusion this is a debate with the IOC but the IOC largely bankroll you. The IOC picks who it wants to work with. And if you want to take its money, you play by its rules.” Of course Aiba is far from alone when it comes to issues with sports governance. In the past week the International Weightlifting Federation has allowed four lifters from Turkmenistan to compete in their home world championships even though they did not fill in their “whereabouts” status . And there have been ongoing issues at Fifa as well as rows over the World Anti-Doping Agency’s conduct over Russia. Yet all too often this stuff swims above people’s heads. For much of the public the words “sports politics” operate not so much a call to action as an immediate snooze button. As a result it is too easy for sports bodies to chug along without scrutiny or institutional checks. As recently as 2015, for instance, the respected Play the Game organisation found no federation published reports on remuneration, including per diem payments and bonuses, of its board members and senior officials. How can this be? How can people not care? These eyes, however, will remain on Aiba and the IOC as it continues its game of chicken. The fascinating question is, who will blink first?