Homeless people are so easily dehumanised, labelled as “the other” and therefore not worthy of our attention. Yet with figures last week showing that more than 5,000 people are living on the streets, while 320,000 people in Britain are homeless and living in temporary accommodation, we need to urgently rethink our attitude to destitution. Many rough sleepers are made homeless due to mental health issues or family bereavements. So often we simply speed-walk past them or look down at our phones rather than engage. When I was younger I, too, just walked past the 30 rough sleepers near my home in north London. That was until 2015 when my university was looking for volunteers to take part in the Big SleepOut in Uxbridge, west London, hosted by Trinity Homeless Projects. The charity is responsible for providing housing, coaching and work placements for homeless people, helping them lead a healthier and better life. The Big SleepOut involves spending one night in a cardboard box with just a woolly hat and jumper for warmth. The aim: to raise awareness of just how difficult it is to be street homeless and to fundraise for the charity. It could be seen as “glamorising” homelessness: you sleep in a box for the night then go back to your nice, warm home, post a few pictures on Facebook about your “enlightening experience” and forget about the whole ordeal. But this was not the case for me. After a sleepless night in the freezing cold at the height of winter, I stepped into my hot shower at six in the morning, remembering that rough sleepers do not have this luxury. They have no home, let alone a warm bath or shower. Instead, they have to repeat the whole process – day after day. Sleeping in a box for one night obviously can’t compare to sleeping rough every night, but it helped me to understand better. We need to stop ignoring homeless people and hear their stories. Just starting a conversation with someone you see on the street could go a long way to making them think somebody cares. • This year’s Big SleepOut takes place on 30 November.