A much-loved Québécois literary prize has been suspended after the five finalists for this year’s award publicly protested at its sponsorship by Amazon. The CA$5,000 (£3,000) Prix littéraire des collégiens, running since 2003, is intended to promote Québécois literature and is decided by a jury of hundreds of students who select their winner from a selection of five works of fiction written in French by Canadian authors. But after this year’s finalists, the writers Lula Carballo, Dominique Fortier, Karoline Georges, Kevin Lambert and Jean-Christophe Réhel, discovered that Amazon Canada would be the prize’s new principal sponsor, they wrote to Le Devoir urging organisers to reconsider. “Our great unease comes from the dangerous competition this giant has with Quebec bookstores. Need we remind you of the precariousness of the book trade and literary publishing? Need we mention the inhumane methods of this online giant, which constitute a danger for small traders and culture at large?” they wrote. The authors said they had not been made aware of the partnership before they were announced as finalists, and the “painful shock” of the discovery made some of them consider withdrawing from the prize. But they decided this would affect both their publishing houses and the students, and so decided instead to air their discomfort in the hope of finding another solution. “Could the [award] do without the money from Amazon? Find sponsors more in line with the values ​​it stands for?” they asked. “Unfortunately, we believe that by uniting with Amazon, the prize is failing in its principal mission, which is to ‘promote Québécois literature today’ … We believe that the defence of Québécois literature and the promotion of a multinational that harms bookstores … cannot go together.” After the letter was published, organisers announced the prize would be suspended. In a statement, co-founder Claude Bourgie Bovet said the decision was the “direct result of the distressing reaction of many parties in the Quebec book trade following the recent announcement of major support”. According to the Montreal Gazette, organisers of the award have said they will meet with the literary community and relaunch the prize if they can find enough support. Hundreds of Canadian teachers have signed a letter calling for government intervention to save the award. Amazon has been approached for comment. The online giant had said, when it was announced as sponsor for the award, that it shared the programme’s “commitment to fostering a love for Québécois literature, both in the region and abroad”.