Political and public life feels so inverted these days, it was forgivable to wonder whether this episode would, or could, reach its logical conclusion. Cricket Australia chairman David Peever had been long untenable, but there was always the sense that didn’t make his departure inevitable. Until Wednesday, he had been unabashed as he personally zigzagged his way through the mounting hazards, all the while reinforcing his air of that classic figure in private sector life: the corporate survivor. But by Thursday he had found that long lost sword, and then fell on it. As a result, Cricket Australia now has a little light and air. The game will be better for it. Each of James Sutherland, Pat Howard and Peever were the primary protagonists of this muscular corporate-heavy era, and with Peever’s departure, the governing body regains a social licence to operate. Though a product of the old regime, new CEO Kevin Roberts has already struck a softer, more conciliatory tone in his public utterances. He presents as personable, and for that reason alone his association with the Peever, Sutherland and Howard cabal always felt a little incongruous. In contrast, Peever infrequently exhibited any semblance of the common touch. Through the MOU negotiations, broadcast negotiations, and over-engineered re-election, he cut the figure of the classic corporate alpha: combative, bullish, never taking a backward step. But while James Sutherland and Pat Howard initially copped the brunt of that characterisation, their respective departures – both in Sutherland’s recent case and Howard’s pending case – hastened the emergence of Peever as the walking, talking embodiment of Cricket Australia’s cultural toxicity. It was for good reason. Presiding a period of compounding tumult, his forays into the public sphere rarely endeared him to the masses. Both Monday’s press conference and his ensuing performance on the ABC will live long in the memory, and could form case studies for media training consultants nation-wide on how not to run an interview. He was a kind of wooden Gordon Gecko, and his public appearances merely reinforced the view CA was being run by a cold, corporate automaton. Now, the lessons must be learned. Like the corporate tide that goes in and out, Cricket Australia has the opportunity to tilt itself away from the optics of a pragmatic, profit-motivated machine, and back toward something a little more whole. While the last few years have blazed harsh floodlights on the darker elements of Australian cricket nature, it should be remembered that the country retains many excellent, principled people within it. Whether the now-refreshed leadership can harness the nation’s better angels, at all levels, is the overarching question, and one that will endure for some time. In the immediate term, people will now want to know if the original ban given to the Cape Town trio will be reassessed. Following the ACA’s pronouncements on Monday, there’s already a hint that such a move would fail to pass the great intangible pub test. It certainly provides Roberts an opportunity to showcase the sort of “principled leadership” Simon Longstaff urged in the culture review. Looked at simply, it’s hard to see how any move to alter the ban could be well received by the public, and it would take a focused campaign to convince people any change is not secretly and cynically motivated by the sheer will to win. There may be a world, however, where Cricket Australia earnestly explains how they got that decision wrong. How, when re-examined away from the moral panic of March, the “disrepute” that informed the bans were partly of their making. There is no doubt Smith, Warner and Bancroft’s bans were about more than the incident at Cape Town. They were about everything Australia had done wrong. In this new light, that is manifestly unfair. And, if explained sincerely, CA would immediately signal a departure from the “arrogant” and “controlling” era, as coined by Dr Longstaff, to something a little more humble. This, coupled with the inevitable pain of a first Test defeat at the hands of a rampant Virat Kohli, may soften the public’s posture.