Until this week the main claim to fame of the quiet Dorset village of Wool, complete with thatched cottages and an Elizabethan bridge, was its status as the setting for key scenes in the novel Tess of the d’Urbervilles by local author Thomas Hardy. This changed on Monday when the parish council received a letter making an offer: if they would rename the village as Vegan Wool, the People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (Peta) would send 2,000 “cruelty-free” fake wool blankets to residents. Inadvertently, the village had been sucked into the incredibly effective PR outrage machine which Peta has run for many years. The story made headlines in Britain in print, online and on television including ITV’s Good Morning Britain. Peta had been ridiculedand mocked, the stories said. And yet, somehow, the charity was delighted. “It it takes us looking silly in order to get these issues into the public domain, so be it,” said Peta’s UK director, Elisa Allen. “It’s not controversy or criticism that’s our biggest enemy; it’s silence and ignorance.” Allen said Peta had previously struggled to gain coverage for its undercover filming of the treatment of animals at sheep farms. “We went to the media and most outlets refused to run it because it’s too gory and violent to be seen. We went back to the drawing board and we understand that we have to be creative to get these issues out into the public domain,” she said. Veteran PR Mark Borkowski said publicists have a “heroic heritage” of generating coverage by hijacking a city or town with a quirky name. “This was first deployed by the arch-publicist Jim Moran back in the 50s. He used Fleatown, Ohio, to launch a chemical which could eradicate animal mites. Hell in Michigan was the test bed for a quit smoking campaign. Intercourse, Pennsylvania, was the unfortunate city to launch a prophylactic,” he said. He said stirring up controversy and angering Peta’s opponents was an easy way to gain coverage. “I am sure those who enjoy ribbing the woke vegans will generate ink and commentary giving the subject a wider discourse. All light and shade in search of a debate.” The campaigning organisation has a reputation for going to any length to gain media attention, headlines and heavy criticism for its recurring campaigns in which celebrities strip off for photoshoots, starting with an infamous campaign from 1994 featuring a nude Naomi Campbell and four other models under the heading “We’d rather go naked naked than wear fur”. Since then it has sent scantily clad models to Wimbledon, convinced Pamela Anderson to pose labelled with different cuts of beef, dressed up as Ku Klux Klan members at a US dog show and proposed ice cream made with human breast milk. Most locals saw the funny side of the proposal to rename Wool, according to district councillor Laura Miller, a former vegan who only occasionally eats meat. “There is a slight resentfulness because we’re a small rural community and we’ve got a butchers and farm shop so we’ve got more of an idea about animal welfare that most,” she said. “We don’t particularly want to be used as a gimmick but we’re not going to overreact. We didn’t really get a choice in the matter, which is why I’m speaking to people and saying that it’s a wonderful village and a great place to live.” Miller said the village’s name had nothing to do with wool, despite the existence of sheep farms in the area. Instead, it is derived from the historic word “welle”, believed to relate to the springs in the area. Despite this, the councillor confirmed that the renaming proposal would be duly considered at next week’s parish council meeting: “It would be a nice gesture now that they’ve got their publicity if Peta could give those blankets to a homeless charity given we didn’t ask to be dragged into this campaign. Our local farmers would be horrified to see any suggestions of cruelty to sheep while they’re being shorn.” Peta insists it has no plans to change tactics and is delighted with the coverage of this week’s stunt. “The fact that we have got the nation talking about an industry that previously people didn’t associate with animal cruelty speaks volumes,” said Allen.