World Rugby believes the controversial decision to disallow Sam Underhill’s late try in England’s one-point defeat by New Zealand was correct and the governing body is satisfied the referee Jérôme Garcès did not contravene its new TMO law trial during the incident. Underhill scored what looked like being the match-winning try after 76 minutes, having gathered the loose ball after Courtney Lawes had charged down TJ Perenara’s kick. Garcès at first awarded the try but then consulted the television match official, Marius Jonker, who ruled: “It’s offside so you need to change your on-field decision to a penalty.” Under World Rugby directives a TMO trial was introduced for the most recent round of matches to give back responsibility to the on-field referee and it states that “try scoring should be an on-field decision with the referee being responsible but the team of four [officials] can all contribute”. Although Garcès was within a few metres of Lawes at the time of the incident, he appeared to go against the directive by consulting with Jonker. Allowing Jonker to make the final decision would also seem to contravene the directive that requires “compelling evidence” for the TMO to intervene with World Rugby considering Lawes to have been marginally offside. Ultimately however, the governing body believes a number of mitigating factors meant Garcès was within his rights to defer the final decision to the TMO, chiefly the poor weather which made visibility of Twickenham’s big screens more difficult. Debate has also raged as to whether Lawes was offside but World Rugby believes he was at the moment Perenara lifted the ball. Precisely this sort of incident was a key focus of last week’s meeting between referees and coaches with a re-emphasis on the definition of when the ball is out – namely a lifting action rather than placing hands on it. Even that is a bone of contention, however, with some arguing the ball was already out of the ruck. Offside or not? Different angles provide different answers as to whether Courtney Lawes was in an offside position when TJ Perenara lifted the ball. There is also debate as to whether the ball was already out of the ruck, meaning Lawes could not have been offside. World Rugby believes that Lawes was marginally offside. Garcès passing the buck The French referee, Jérôme Garcès, was just a few metres away from the incident and let play continue with Sam Underhill seizing the loose ball, turning Beauden Barrett inside out and going over for a try. Under World Rugby’s directives began over the weekend, it can be argued Garcès ought to have taken responsibility for the decision himself. World Rugby, however, believes that in such bad conditions Garcès was within his rights to consult the televisioin match official. Compelling evidence? Perhaps the most controversial aspect is whether the TMO, Marius Jonker, should have been so forthright in advising Garcès to award a penalty. Under the new directives, for Jonker to interject there needs to be 'compelling evidence' and it is questionable there was. Again, World Rugby feels that Jonker was right to interject. Frustrations These are manifold. Firstly, for the second week in a row the major talking point has been an officiating decision upon which consensus cannot be reached. World Rugby, aware that too many TMO referrals was a key criticism of the last World Cup, has introduced its new directives with a view to make Tests more spectator friendly less than a year before Japan 2019 but in this instance has had the opposite effect. Frustration is also borne out of the fact that marginal offsides such as that of Lawes are 10 a penny during any match. Gerard Meagher The wider point is this is the second high-profile match in a row to feature late controversy around officiating. Seven days earlier it was Angus Gardner who ruled Owen Farrell’s tackle on Andre Esterhuizen was legal. He asked for a replay of the incident but then took the decision himself – ironically before the new TMO trial had started – whereas Garcès did not. In both instances the decisions directly affected the outcome of the result and in both cases consensus is nigh-on impossible to come by, and all at a time when rugby union’s exposure is at its highest and casual supporters are left confused. Sir Clive Woodward believes it was decision‑making rather than the officials which cost England victory. Woodward said they were wrong to kick to the corner rather than at goal in the second half and questioned why they did not attempt more drop-goals. “That was a game England should have won and I’d be pretty cranky this morning if I was in Eddie’s shoes,” Woodward told the BBC. “If you are five points up, you drop a goal and you’re eight points up and you win the game. Build the score. Everyone is harping on about the try or no try by Sam Underhill but for me not to take those points was a big error. These leadership decisions on the field of play are absolutely key, especially as the clock counts down. They are what win or lose you a World Cup and we need to get a little bit better.”