For weeks, a string of awkward remarks and investigative reports had placed race squarely in the center of Tuesday’s Mississippi Senate runoff election. There was talk of “public hangings” and Confederate symbology, and what that all meant in an election between a white woman and a black man in the US state that, rightly or wrongly, has long been held in public imagination as the nation’s most racist. Then, on the eve of the contest between the Republican senator Cindy Hyde-Smith and her Democratic challenger, Mike Espy, the racial subtext burst open when trees at the state capital were found adorned with nooses and “hate symbols” on Monday afternoon. It was an almost cartoonish final stanza to a contest that was once viewed as the possible vanguard of a “blue wave” during the midterms as voters turned out for Democrats nationwide. Instead, with control of the Senate already in Republican hands, the race has collapsed inwards to Mississippi and into a referendum of sorts, on what place traditional “old south” racism has in the Senate in 2018. “Her victory would say that Mississippi has not changed,” said Wesley Bridges, president of the Lawrence County chapter of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). “It would say that Mississippi is still like the stories that we heard and were taught growing up – that Mississippi is a predominantly racist state.” Hyde-Smith, who was appointed to the Senate in April after the retirement of Thad Cochran, enters the runoff far more politically battered than when she entered the first round of the midterm three weeks ago. First she received waves of criticism after video emerged of her remarking publicly that if invited to a “public hanging” by a constituent she would “be on the front row”. The off-kilter remark rang loud in Mississippi, which holds the dubious distinction of having lynched more black Americans than any other state through the late 19th and early 20th century – usually in a public hanging spectacle. More than a dozen high-profile corporate donors including AT&T and Major League Baseball asked Hyde-Smith to return campaign donations in the wake of the comments, for which she issued a half-hearted apology during a debate with Espy last week. Then reports began to emerge about Hyde-Smith’s apparent affection for the southern Confederacy, which fought the Union in defense of slavery during the US civil war. A picture of Hyde-Smith in Confederate regalia was discovered on Facebook with the caption from Hyde-Smith: “Mississippi history at its best!” Then a CNN review of Hyde-Smith’s legislative work as a state senator found that she “once promoted a measure that praised a Confederate soldier’s effort to ‘defend his homeland’ and pushed a revisionist view of the civil war”. Affection for the Confederacy and appropriation of its symbolism, especially its battle flag, is common among white conservatives in the south, despite the fact that many Americans, especially black Americans, find it offensive. The runoff was triggered when no candidate received more than 50% of the vote during the election day contest earlier this month. Hyde-Smith led that race with 42% of the vote to Espy’s 40%. Virtually all the remaining ballots were cast for Chris McDaniel, a conservative Republican whose voters are unlikely to move to Espy in the runoff. Still, the seat in this reliably Republican state has been seen by many as a possible, if longshot, Democratic pickup after Democrat Doug Jones’s surprise victory in a 2017 special Senate election in neighboring Alabama. The two deep south states share similar political, cultural and demographic fundamentals. Races for statewide office between Democrats and Republicans are not typically very competitive in either state, but in both cases anti-Trump resistance was seen as a force that could skew turnout rates and eke out a victory for the Democratic candidate. Like in Alabama, prognosticators have said that a Democratic victory in Mississippi would require record turnout from black voters, and for Espy to take 20 to 25% of the expected white vote. The Alabama race, of course, also tilted heavily after numerous allegations of sexual predation were levied against Republican candidate Roy Moore. Conversations about Hyde-Smith’s past continued last week when the Jackson Free Press revealed that Hyde-Smith had attended an all-white high school that was founded in 1970 for the purpose of skirting federal orders for Mississippi to desegregate its school system. The Free Press also noted that Hyde-Smith had elected to send her daughter to a similar school that had, by that time, technically desegregated, but had just one black student out of nearly 400, despite residing in the majority-black city of Brookhaven. “In 2018 it is still very evident that people are sending their kids to different counties, and to different private schools because they do not want their children engaged with African American kids,” Bridges said of Lawrence county, where his NAACP chapter resides and where Hyde-Smith’s segregated high school academy once did too. “You have the right to send your kids wherever you want to … but to teach that this kind of hatred is all right is just terrible.”