Theresa May’s allies in the Democratic Unionist party have warned her that the government’s proposed Brexit deal risks breaking up the UK, as the opposition masses against the prime minister on a potentially treacherous day for her plan. With the cabinet due to meet at 2pm on Wedneday amid speculation that some Brexiter ministers could quit in protest, the DUP reiterated its opposition to the proposals, while Labour and Tory remainers also told May that she could not expect to count on their support. Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme, the DUP’s chief whip at Westminster, Jeffrey Donaldson, said his party, which supports May in government, could not back the deal as it stands. “This is not the right Brexit,” he said. “It doesn’t give the United Kingdom as a whole the opportunity to do free trade deals and to take control of its own future.” He continued: “The problem is that this fundamentally undermines the constitutional and economic integrity of the United Kingdom. “The UK will be faced with a choice in the future. If it wants to get out of this binding agreement then it will have to leave Northern Ireland behind. And if it leaves Northern Ireland behind, I think that will inevitably put pressure on Scotland.” Donaldson said the DUP did not “fear a general election”, even one where Jeremy Corbyn could enter No 10. He said: “It’s not about who is prime minister. It’s not about who governs the country. It’s about the constitutional and economic integrity of the UK, that is fundamental for us. “And it is not just us. The DUP does not stand alone on this. We have many friends within the Conservative party and indeed in some other parties, who believe this deal has the potential to lead to the breakup of the UK.” In one positive sign for May, Andrea Leadsom, the Commons leader and Brexit supporter, said she was hopeful, telling ITV’s Good Morning Britain: “I’ve had a good conversation with the prime minster and I’m looking at the details of the deal today and I’m extremely optimistic that we’ll have a good deal, but I’m looking at the details today.” Other ministers were still being summoned to Downing Street one by one to be briefed on a draft withdrawal agreement reached with the EU after months of tortuous negotiations, with Penny Mordaunt arriving around 8am. The former Conservative leader William Hague said he would advice Brexiter cabinet ministers to “look at the big picture”. He told Today: “If what you want is to deliver on leaving the European Union, and have frictionless trade in goods at the border, for the next few years until a future free trade agreement comes into force, and have control of our own immigration policy, and keep the United Kingdom together, all at the same time, well then a deal is going to look pretty much like this one seems to look like.” He added: “What you really have to worry about here is that if you don’t take this opportunity to leave the EU, to get Brexit over the line, if you like, you might never leave at all.” The full agreement, reported to reach 500 pages, is expected to be released on Wednesday evening. Tory Brexiters have objected to leaked elements of the plan, notably the idea that Northern Ireland should have special status in the agreed UK-wide backstop plan for what would happen to the Irish border in the event of no permanent deal being reached. The shadow business secretary, Rebecca Long-Bailey, told Today she would “dissect the 500 pages that are hopefully going to be put before us very soon”, but said it seemed very unlikely May could expect any Labour support for the plan. “We haven’t seen the proposed deal yet, and we’ll look at the detail very, very closely, but my honest view at the moment is that from the shambolic handling of the negotiations that we’ve seen so far it’s unlikely to be a good deal for the country,” she said. Anna Soubry, a leading Tory remainer, said it would be far better for the government to offer people a second referendum on whether they wanted May’s deal, or to stay in the EU. “What I think is very important in all of this is, the best deal, of course, that we have with the European Union, is the deal that we currently have with the European Union,” she told Today. “I think there are a lot of people who as they’ve seen Brexit unfold, they’ve looked at the reality of it, they are now understanding and realising that this country has made a terrible mistake, and we should have the right to revisit the decision that we made over two-and-a-half years ago.”