The polls may have closed last week, but close races in three states mean a number of pivotal races in the 2018 midterms have yet to be declared. As Donald Trump continues to propagate false allegations of voter fraud, here’s the latest on elections results in Florida, Georgia and Arizona that are still too tight to call. What is happening? On Saturday the Florida secretary of state ordered a full machine recount in the US Senate race between Democrat Bill Nelson and Republican Rick Scott, as well as the governor’s race between Republican Ron DeSantis and Democrat Andrew Gillum. The statewide recount, which also includes the election for agriculture commissioner, is the first in Florida’s history. Scott, the incumbent governor of Florida, has accused election officials in two Democratic-leaning counties of “rampant fraud” and requested state law enforcement – which he partially oversees himself – to commence an investigation. The governor has cited no evidence for the claims, which have also been refuted by election monitors. Why is it happening? The Republican candidates’ leads in the US Senate and governor contests has shrunk significantly since election night, both holding less than 0.5% of the vote over their Democratic rivals, therefore triggering machine recounts. Scott holds a tiny 0.15% lead, while DeSantis is ahead by 0.41%. What happens next? The machine recounts – meaning a mechanical retabulation of ballots – must be completed by 3pm on Thursday. If the margins shrink or remain below 0.25%, a manual recount – meaning a recount done by hand – will be triggered. What is happening? The governor’s race in Georgia has been embroiled in controversy after Democrat Stacey Abrams refused to concede to Republican Brian Kemp, who has claimed victory despite a razor-thin margin. On Sunday, Abrams’s campaign filed a lawsuit against two large counties in Georgia, claiming a large number of provisional and absentee ballots had been improperly rejected. Abrams has said she will not concede the election until “all votes are counted”. Kemp on the other hand, has already named members of his transition team. Why is it happening? Kemp requires a 50% plus one vote margin to avoid a runoff election in December. His lead has gradually shrunk since election night and he now holds 50.27% of the vote, with an unknown number of provisional and absentee ballots to be counted. Kemp’s campaign insists there simply aren’t enough votes left to count for Abrams to make up the deficit – but, as of Saturday, about 40 counties in the state had yet to report their final tally of provisional ballots. Provisional ballots are cast when there are unresolved questions about a voter’s eligibility, which must be resolved shortly after the election in order to count. What happens next? The election is due to be certified on Tuesday, the deadline for counties reporting all ballots cast. But Abrams’s lawsuit has also sought to extend that deadline, so a cutoff in this election is still up in the air. What is happening? The race for the US Senate seat has swung since polls closed last week. Republican Martha McSally initially held a lead of over one point over Democrat Kyrsten Sinema who has since taken a 1.49% advantage. Three days after Tuesday’s election, as Sinema took the lead, Donald Trump stated without evidence that votes in Arizona were being counted “out of the wilderness”. It is, however, normal for postal votes in Arizona to be counted days after polls close. Why is it happening? Reports suggest there are about 200,000 votes still to count in Arizona, with Sinema increasing her lead each time a new batch of ballots is declared. Although the Democratic campaign has argued their candidate’s lead is insurmountable, McSally has not conceded. What happens next? Counties must declare their final vote tallies to the state by 3 December with a recount triggered if the deficit between the leading candidates is closer than 0.1%. A result could be declared far sooner, however.