This year’s Deutsche Borse photography prize shortlist is a considered choice of four artists whose approaches draw on documentary, archival appropriation and conceptualism. They are: Susan Meiselas for her retrospective exhibition, Mediations; Laia Abril for her deeply-researched book, On Abortion; Arwed Messmer for his archival exhibition, RAF: No Evidence and Mark Ruwedel for his show, The Artist and Society. Meiselas, an acclaimed Magnum veteran, is by far the best-known and most-renowned photographer on the shortlist and if the £30,000 award were a documentary prize she would win, for a career that has seen her chronicle violent political upheaval in South America and the diaspora of the Kurds, as well as Italian-American teenagers in downtown New York. The Deutsche Borse prize does not tend to favour humanist documentary, though – British veteran Chris Killip lost out to the conceptual duo, Broomberg and Chanarin, back in 2013. Thus, the other female photographer on the shortlist, Abril, is perhaps better placed for her thought-provoking book, On Abortion, itself part of a bigger project called The History of Misogyny. Here, the archival, the documentary and the conceptual come together, as Abril constructs a powerful broadside against countries in which abortion is still illegal and examines why the risks to women’s physical and psychological health are high and sometimes fatal. Which leaves Rudewel and Messmer, the former making photographs steeped in the conceptual formalist rigour of a certain kind of 1970s land art, the other trawling police and state archives to reconsider the violent legacy of the 70s German group, the Red Army Faction – better known as the Baader Meinhof gang. The contrast between the two – and indeed all four contenders – highlights the continuing dilemma of a prize – and indeed all photography prizes – not based on generic styles. How do you measure an artist who is solely using archival material against another who is documenting the impact of humans on landscapes, and, in the process, addressing the history and methodology of landscape photography? In the end, I suspect, personal taste will out. The shortlist acknowledges photographers whose work is “perceived to uniquely address and expand the fluency and capabilities of the medium”. On that basis, Abril, the youngest artist here and the only one nominated for a photobook, looks to be the likeliest winner. Her merging of styles and approaches – text, archival images, objects, testimony – combine to make work that is, in the current political climate, both topical and highly charged. Personally, I would have liked to have seen Sohrab Hura on the shortlist for his installation, The Lost Head and the Bird, which has a rare kind of visceral, edgy hallucinatory energy that is absent from the shortlist. This is a thought-provoking, if not entirely groundbreaking selection, that may reflect more the values of the jury – only one artist, and four director-curators – rather than the state of contemporary photography. • The winner of the Deutsche Börse photography prize will be announced on 16 May 2019 at the Photographers’ Gallery, London