It has been described as the cliffhanger of the year, a battle that has left Germany – and Europe – on the edge of its seat. At stake, say some, is nothing less than the future direction of both country and continent. On Saturday 8 December, Germany’s conservative Christian Democratic Union (CDU) will vote on a successor to Angela Merkel, one of the world’s most formidable leaders, who is stepping down after 18 years in charge of the party and 13 as chancellor. The contenders are Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, a Merkel ally and CDU general secretary, Friedrich Merz, who left politics for the world of finance more than a decade ago, and Jens Spahn, the health minister in the federal government and the youngest in the race, who was once seen as the party’s poster boy. On Wednesday, at a crucial round of hustings with the party base in Düsseldorf, in the western state of North Rhine-Westphalia (NRW), the trio laid out their visions for Germany. The tabloid newspaper Bild likened proceedings to a “well-organised group therapy session” after months of disagreement both within the party and with its traditional ally the Bavarian CSU over Merkel’s migration policies. Dubbed 'Merkel’s secret favourite heiress' by Die Zeit, 56-year-old AKK, as she is known (because even Germans find her name hard to pronounce), is the former leader of Saarland and currently the general secretary of the CDU. Her comments on the Merkel era - “one cannot arbitrarily continue it, neither can one revoke it" - have become something akin to a slogan for her candidacy. Like Merkel, restraint appears to be one of her characteristics. She is reluctant to criticise her opponents or to give interviews. She is generally supportive of Merkel’s migration politics, but would like to see a ban on criminally convicted refugees being allowed back into Germany. The 63-year-old lawyer left politics for the financial industry about a decade ago after Merkel ousted him as parliamentary leader of the CDU in 2002. Many have said he has never forgiven her, though he has downplayed the idea of any lasting resentment towards her. Merz has built up a personal fortune of millions, including two private jets, which has caused controversy, particularly after he claimed that he remained a member of the middle class. He promises to return the CDU to its former strong position. He says he can win back millions of voters who drifted to the AfD and has presented himself as more liberal than in the past on issues such as gay marriage. Now a clear outsider, having not so long ago being repeatedly referred to as a possible Merkel successor, the 38-year-old has been pushed to one side by Merz, who has managed to steal from him the role as the potential Merkel heir he has enjoyed for several years. Even Wolfgang Schäuble, the former finance minister, has transferred his support from Spahn to Merz. The health minister and youngest member of Merkel’s fourth cabinet, Spahn portrays himself first and foremost as a critic of the chancellor’s refugee policy, calling it “the white elephant in the room”. He is married to his long-term partner Daniel Funke, the editor of society magazine Bunte. NRW is seen as a vital stamping ground for the candidates. It is Germany’s most populous state and home to about a third of the 1,001 party delegates eligible to participate in the leadership vote at the CDU party conference in Hamburg. Among the 4,000 party faithful in the audience in Düsseldorf, Christel Hellersberg, 72, a retired teacher, said she was looking for clarity as to who could best lead the party she had voted for all her life. “Germans in general want a change but they are also very cautious about what they wish for. I need to know that the person chosen will ensure the continued stability of Germany, and will be committed to the European project,” she said. “I’m here to get a feel for who the best person for the job might be.” Merz won the toss and went first. The 63-year-old economics lawyer, who comes from the region and was therefore effectively on home turf, drew cheers as he appealed for a shift away from social democratic-style policies. “We don’t have to adopt every viewpoint held by the Social Democrats,” he said, in a clear dig at Merkel, who stands accused of moving the party too far to the left during its years as the main party in a grand coalition. Wiry and slick, delivering his arguments with a pointed finger, Merz presented himself as the outside saviour who due to his experience in the banking industry would be able to rescue both the party and Germany by shaking it out of a state of complacency resulting from nine years of continued economic growth, which he said was unlikely to continue. Predicting an economic downturn in the next weeks or months, he asked: “What will people do when the party is over? How will things look when that happens?” German stability, he said, was under threat due to ailing infrastructure, weak security and a lack of long-term environmental and sustainability policies. Half the room, mainly populated with dark-suited men over 55, stood to applaud and cheer as Merz waved and left the stage to join his wife Charlotte, a district judge. Kramp-Karrenbauer, popularly known as AKK, whose loyalty to Merkel is both one of her trademark strengths and seen as a potential threat to her candidacy, stressed her goal to recreate the CDU as the “true political Heimat (home) of many” by winning back the millions of voters the party had lost to the Greens on the left and the populist Alternative für Deutschland party on the right. The CDU received just 32.9% of the vote in last year’s federal election, its second worst result since 1949. “The stronger we are, the fewer compromises we have to make with a coalition party,” she said, stressing the messy fallout over the renewed CDU-SPD coalition that was belatedly formed in March after weeks of turmoil. A staunch Catholic, she drew applause after expressing her shock over reports of designer babies in China this week, and for saying she would continue to support an advertising ban on doctors who carry out abortions – a debate that the AfD has more or less dominated. Kramp-Karrenbauer referenced the more than one million mainly Muslim immigrants who had entered Germany since 2015 and the strong Turkish diaspora, urging more courage in party debates about Islam and its place in German society. It was appropriate that Spahn came last in the speaking order ballot, commentators observed, reflecting his decline from frontrunner to underdog. Nevertheless, he seemed to revel in the debate, abandoning the lectern to pace the stage with a microphone and paint a picture of how he would like Germany to look in 2040. His emphasis was on reducing taxes and non-wage labour costs, as well as developing a healthy patriotism and urging Germany to “think bigger” in terms of science and technology. Spahn, also an NRW native, appeared as reluctant as the other candidates to directly attack Merkel, in recognition of the immense amount of respect that remains for her in the CDU. But he stressed that the open borders policy she had advocated “only works if we protect our outer border”, arguing for controls on Europe’s frontiers. After two and a half hours of intense audience questioning, ranging from digitalisation to coal phase-out and the future of care workers, the party faithful stood for a rousing version of the national anthem. “I could take all of the candidates seriously,” said Margret Paprotta, 63, a teacher, as she left the hall with her 94-year-old mother-in-law, Erna. “But I tell you, regardless of who we choose, we’ll definitely be mourning the loss of Merkel before long.” Based on the applause, Merz was the victor of the night. Hellersberg, the retired teacher, said: “On the basis of what I heard, I think he was, rhetorically at least, the best candidate tonight, although I think that Kramp-Karrenbauer is more able to appeal to people on an emotional level.” In October Merkel said she would not be standing for re-election as party leader at the conference on 8 December, nor seeking another term as chancellor at Germany’s next federal elections, due in 2021. After being held up by a queue of party supporters seeking selfies, Kramp-Karrenbauer told the Guardian she was determined to forge her own path. “I share a lot of Angela Merkel’s political ideas, but there are also things on which we have differing points of view. What I certainly won’t do is distance myself from her in an artificial way in order to get more votes.” Intercepted as he left the hall flanked by bodyguards and advisers, Merz said he felt buoyed by the debate. “There were 4,000 people there today and the atmosphere was terrific. The party is thoroughly enjoying the fact that there are three alternative choices for the election as chairperson. It really makes the CDU strong, regardless of whoever wins.”