If you’ve spent time on London streets, you’ll have seen the scrawled Notes to Strangers, as omnipresent as the blue plaques and as eye-catching as billboards, despite their A4 size. You may even have wondered about their common theme. What worldview, after all, connects the statements “Windows of opportunity close quickly” and “Sloths defy logic”? There isn’t one, says Andy Leek, a former advertising creative and creator of Notes to Strangers – except his own. Leek designs the poster, pastes it publicly (mostly in London, but also wherever he travels), waits for someone to post a photo of it on Instagram, then shares their picture on his account. The project was born of professional burnout. Leek says he had fallen victim to the London lifestyle of long commute, longer hours and fixating on career progression: “I was just living to work, really, which I think is a major city kind of thing.” Returning to work after a month off in 2015, Leek reframed that punishing commute as an opportunity to create. “It started off just me writing small, positive notes that I’d leave in newspapers, folded up on seats for people to discover. I hoped that a positive message reaching them on their way to work would make some small difference in their day.” Writing the notes forced him to think positively: “It became a form of therapy, a way that I could express myself.” Leek had been leaving the notes for eight months before he was fired from his job. After six months of freelancing, he had the idea to take his notes to the next level by turning them into posters. He stuck the first lot up around London one night in late 2015. By morning, one had appeared on Instagram, shared by a stranger. Since then, tens of thousands have shared shots of Leek’s work on Instagram with the #NotesToStrangers hashtag, while his own following has grown to 110,000. The scope of the project has expanded, too, from life-affirming messages (“Happiness is worth the struggle”, “You can’t do it … yet”) to silliness and non-sequiturs (“I wonder if a cow would try to eat astroturf”, “Some foods make excellent spoons”, “Avoid big decisions when horny”) and even some that only make tenuous sense (“Fakeness can be enjoyable when it’s honest”, “Clowns are Neanderthal comedians”). Then there’s “Screw you! (Not really, I’m sure you are lovely)”. As searching the hashtag reveals, Notes to Strangers draws polarised responses. It seems churlish to begrudge any efforts to spread positivity – but his messages can smack of a jollying stranger telling you to smile. Some can even come across as judgmental, such as “Sober stories are better because you can remember every detail”, in shouty capitals over scarlet. Someone responded calling it “judgey”. Another wrote: “Nonsense”. But Leak doesn’t distinguish between his earnest messages of empowerment and “something silly about pigeons”. “Notes is never meant to be purely for advice or purely for comedy or purely for mental health,” he says. “I’m just expressing myself.” Notes to Strangers is Leak’s full-time job now, with framed prints of his posters listed – and, he says, selling – for £60 to £180 on an online store (“Selling to Strangers”). One glittery limited-edition work of three, reading “You can be a feminist and enjoy spanking”, is listed for £1,400. The other arms of his livelihood are walking tours, speaking engagements and the occasional brand collaboration. “I have a very short attention span,” he says, “but Notes keeps me interested – that freedom to flex the project from something silly to make people smile, to quite challenging political statements.” He cites three that run the gamut. The poster that got the most ever likes he has framed on his wall: “Always keep in mind when you’re sad, there will be a time when you will be happy”. The most comments: “For a laugh, think about your first email address”. And the most controversial: “It’s no picnic being a man either sometimes”. “That one really split people,” he says. “It wasn’t universally hated, but it definitely touched a nerve.” Instagram metrics tell Leek 75% of his followers are women, among them – he knows from reading their comments – many feminists. He says he had to hold himself back from responding to his critics: “With it being art, I have to just say it and let the reaction be.” Though Leek is prepared to give his opinion publicly, he shies away from being characterised as some kind of urban agony aunt or self-appointed cultural critic, saying: “It does scare me a little bit when people start to look to me for real advice.” Anyway, he adds, he doesn’t feel guilty for offering advice and opinions you didn’t ask for: “You can always just ignore it.” Guardian Cities brings together the best in urban photography on Instagram at @guardiancities. Share your shots with us on Instagram with the hashtag #guardiancities