The comedian Bill Bailey once told me about his favourite Christmas. He and his family headed off to a sunny island where, on Christmas Day, they ate jam sandwiches and played on the beach. Bailey didn’t have a name for his rebellion against the 57 varieties of A Christmas Carol, the Christ-awful seasonal dishes, tinsel and the craving for something at 11am on 25 December to obliterate the pervading sense of buyers’ remorse. But now we do. What Bailey felt, even as sand got into his beard and lunch, was Jomo, the Joy of Missing Out. It is the antidote to the curse of our age: Fomo, the Fear of Missing Out. Fomo rises exponentially from now to the end of the year, as we begin our descent via the hellish portal of Black Friday towards the moment we celebrate what – be still, irony – turns out not to have been the birthday of Our Lord. The society-wide pressure, always intense throughout the year, is to achieve what we assume everybody else is experiencing – perfect happiness in the bosom of our families, ideally with our brats thrilled that Santa’s bought them the evident piece of junk that retailers are touting as this Yuletide’s must-have, namely Poopsie Unicorn Slime Surprise (£49.99). Guess what the surprise of the Poopsie Unicorn Slime Surprise is? Magical multicoloured poop comes out of the unicorn’s bottom. I don’t know if toy unicorn faeces can be composted, but it’s unlikely. If that’s the best we can manage to celebrate Christmas, heaven knows it’s no wonder we’re miserable now. For we are miserable in the age of Fomo. Is there anything more miserable than trolling through your friends’ Instagram to torment yourselves over the fact that you didn’t holiday in Martha’s Vineyard, have smug-looking, beautiful children or teeth whitened on Harley Street? Of course there is, but park that thought. Even though, most likely, those Instagram images are works of familial performance art, as true to what happened as Stalin’s airbrushed snaps with his murdered colleagues. For what is axiomatic in our world of Fomo is that everybody looks like they’re having a better time than you, even when they’re not. Take the ad starring Martin Freeman for a mobile phone company. His train carriage is filled with boneheads staring into their handsets; even in the loo he finds the guard furtively watching something on his phone when he should be checking tickets. “What is wrong with you!” Freeman yells. And then a beat, before he realises that what’s wrong is him. He doesn’t have a two-year data deal to get unmissable TV, music, movies and sport promised in the voiceover. Freeman winces – and there it is, Fomo in the face. Like the adjective “must have”, unmissable is one of those weasel words of the Fomo age designed to make you panic into buying things that prove eminently missable by the time the payment has cleared. A recent study by academics in the UK and US defined Fomo as “the uneasy and sometimes all-consuming feeling that you’re missing out – that your peers are doing, in the know about, or in possession of more or something better than you” and argued that nearly three quarters of young adults reported experiencing the phenomenon. It’s easy to blame Mark Zuckerberg for making this situation worse and for every other first-world problem, but that won’t stop me. In the case of Fomo he has clearly made things worse. How? Think of multicoloured unicorn faeces for one last time. Ideally, that thrill your kids feel on getting this year’s must-have Christmas present can be experienced by you if you post pictures on Facebook of them manufacturing poop with their new toy. This is how social media weaponises our experiences, escalating the continuing war to make your friends miserable – a war that we started because we believe that only by increasing others’ misery can we be happy. It’s not enough that we enjoy jam sandwiches on the beach, we need others to be made miserable by shoving our jam-related joy down their virtual throats. And so we continue on the Sisyphean hedonic treadmill, never quite getting where we want to be. Everywhere we turn we are encouraged to experience as much as possible, for as long as possible, in as many ways as possible. What’s the answer apart from coming off social media and not buying evident rubbish? Can jam sandwiches on the beach really be the answer? Perhaps not. Jomo can become a luxury product, consumable only by the fortunate. A former Guardian literary editor, someone with impeccable leftwing credentials, once told me that they always left Christendom for Christmas. Which, however you look at it, involves a long-haul flight and thus quite a surprisingly large disposable income. And there’s another problem. Sometimes Jomo collapses into Faux Jomo. By that I mean, as a response to the ubiquity of Fomo one virtue signals one’s escape from the prevailing toxic order in which everybody is mired in the fear of missing out. If, for instance, Bill Bailey had posted his Christmas pictures online, he wouldn’t really be motivated to share his joy, but rather to make miserable those looking at their phones as they fell into post-Queen’s speech stupefaction. Unhelpfully, there’s a book coming out called The Joy of Missing Out: The Art of Self-Restraint in an Age of Excess by Danish psychology professor Sven Brinkmann, offering suggestions on how to do things better. Why unhelpfully, you ask? Because it’s being published in February, when it’ll be too late to do anything about the rest of 2018. • Stuart Jeffries is a freelance feature writer