If you’ve got a great shot that reveals something intriguing about a city, culture or landscape, enter it in our monthly competition. We’ll publish the best, and the winning image will receive a £200 voucher that can be used against an i-escape stay at one of 1,500 boutique properties worldwide. The winner will be entered for the overall annual prize, a nine-night trip to West Greenland for one person with Wild Photography Holidays, worth £3,950. Photos from the winner’s trip will be published in the Guardian Travel section and on our website. Annual prize sponsor Wild Photography Holidays is a Shropshire/Iceland-based family-run company that offers small-group photographic tours and workshops with individual tuition in all aspects of image making, from composition and capture to development. They run trips to locations in Iceland, Greenland, India, Asia, Norway, Spain, Ireland and the UK, often to little-photographed locations. With offices in Bristol and London, monthly prize sponsor i-escape is a booking site for boutique hotels, guesthouses, eco-retreats, safari lodges and self-catering properties in over 50 countries, all personally chosen and described in first-hand detail. There are no monthly themes, just send us your best image. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here. Please read this before you post your image: • You must be a UK resident to enter. • You must upload the highest possible resolution of your shot via this page and no longer through GuardianWitness. • We’ll only consider one photograph from each person, so don’t submit more than one. • We can’t consider photos that have been published elsewhere (either online or in print), apart from those on your personal social media pages and non-commercial personal websites. • You’ll also need to provide a caption of up to 50 words on where it was taken, what’s happening in the shot, what inspired you to take it, any technical details if pertinent. You must also supply your full name with the caption. Don’t forget to read the terms and conditions before you enter. • Click here to see previous winners. The closing date for entries is 11pm on 25 November 2018. 