Labour should think again about its opposition to Theresa May’s Brexit deal, says the MP Ian Austin, one of the party’s few MPs to suggest the deal meets the six tests set by the shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer. Austin, a former parliamentary aide to Gordon Brown, represents the marginal seat of Dudley North in the West Midlands, which registered the highest vote to leave of all English regions. Writing for the Guardian, he said that it was easy to see why his colleagues opposed May’s deal but said they should think “long and hard”. “The leadership are against the deal, most members hate it, and MPs are being inundated with emails from both hardline Brexiteers and passionate remainers urging them to vote it down,” he said. “The strength of the Tory response has made it even more difficult. Why take a risk? But we should still think long and hard.” Austin said he believed that May’s deal “delivered on the substance behind most, if not all” of Starmer’s six tests for backing a Brexit deal. He said that even the hardest of those tests, delivering the “exact same benefits” as the single market, went some way to being met by May’s deal. “In as far as this is not a test designed to be failed, the answer seems to be a qualified yes,” he said. “It delivers an implementation period and a commitment to negotiate a new relationship with tariff and quota-free trade.” Austin said he believed the views of the Labour leadership were being coloured by representing seats that voted heavily for remain. However, he said he believed it was more likely that the result of voting down the deal would not be a softer version or another election, but a no-deal exit or a harder deal more palatable to the DUP. Should the party eventually back a second referendum, Austin said Labour would lose the trust of many voters. “Areas like the Black Country, the coalfields or Potteries have lost industrial jobs and struggled to find new ones to replace them,” he said. “The referendum was their chance to have their voice heard. They would be furious if the result was overturned. Why would they accept it?” The MP said that Labour’s manifesto had promised categorically to uphold the result of the referendum, which he said meant the party was committed to securing some form of exit deal. “Keeping our commitments to our constituents, and protecting their jobs, employment rights, environmental standards and public services would always mean agreeing a deal with the EU,” he said. Austin said it was “clearly not a perfect deal, but there was never going to be a perfect deal”. “My constituents voted to leave. They expect us to sort this out and we need to think carefully before rejecting it,” he said.