Hello, Warren Murray here with a few bits of news for the many. Labour would give customers, workers and shareholders of Britain’s 7,000 biggest companies the right to vote on the salaries of top executives if it adopted recommendations for a radical overhaul of boardroom pay. Other suggestions include scrapping share options so executives are paid only in cash; a ban on golden handshakes; fines for directors whose companies fail to pay the minimum wage; and forcing larger companies to name employees who get more than £150,000 a year. The Labour proposals come from a report prepared for the party by Prem Sikka, professor of accountancy and finance at Sheffield University, and others. Sources said not all suggestions would make it into a Labour manifesto. The party is seeking to show it is ready to fight a snap election if Theresa May’s government collapses over Brexit. Nils Pratley, the Guardian’s financial editor, questions whether having a Tesco Clubcard should get you a vote on the CEO’s £5m pay packet. “One could call the agenda hopelessly idealistic or crudely populist … Labour would be wise to stick to the more realistic goal of getting employee representation in boardrooms.” But he warns that bosses would be ill advised to ignore the Sikka report altogether: “The head-in-the-sand approach on pay inequality is a serious long-term problem for business.” Brexit debate takes shape – Labour is pushing for Jeremy Corbyn to face Theresa May in an hour-long head-to-head Brexit debate on ITV on Sunday 9 December, before the finale of I’m a Celebrity … Get Me Out of Here. The BBC has offered to instead air a debate on the Thursday before the Commons vote and says it would include other participants. Labour is demanding to see the full legal advice on the Brexit deal as the government is accused of trying to sidestep a House of Commons resolution by publishing it only in the form of a “position statement”. As the PM struggles to pull together enough votes for her plan, here are the Tory Brexit factions – the Gang of Five, the Pizza Club and others – who are thinking about a plan B. May will be in Scotland today on her Brexit deal sales tour while back in Westminster the Tory whips are pressing the argument that none of the alternatives – from a Canada-style trade deal to a second referendum – can command a majority. Midweek catch-up – Time to roll out some updates … > Ukraine’s president, Petro Poroshenko, has warned that Russia’s detention of Ukrainian navy vessels in the Kerch strait could lead to “full-scale war”. Donald Trump says his G20 meeting with Vladimir Putin is up in the air because of the crisis: “I don’t like that aggression. I don’t want that aggression at all.” > The academic Matthew Hedges has returned to Britain into the arms of his wife, Daniela Tejada, after his release by the UAE where he was jailed on spying charges that are denied. An Emirati source said the case should have been resolved back in July. > In the US, Nancy Pelosi is due to be reinstalled as House Speaker by her Democratic party. The White House is accused of not letting the CIA boss brief the Senate on the Jamal Khashoggi murder. A report says Paul Manafort’s attorney tipped the president’s lawyers to questions that the Trump-Russia investigation might ask. > A vaginal mesh implant was marketed for seven years by Johnson & Johnson despite concerns its could harden and roll up like a “folded potato chip” inside patients, emails shared with the Guardian’s Implant Files investigation reveal. > The Mars InSight lander has sent back its first discernible photos from the red planet – here is one of them. ‘Dire picture’ of racism – People of African descent in the EU face discrimination in housing, work and everyday life, according to the union’s fundamental rights agency. Perceived racial harassment was highest in Finland and Luxembourg, and least prevalent in the UK and Malta (though still around 20%). Across the EU, people of African descent with a degree were twice as likely as the general population to work in low-skilled jobs. One in 10 respondents overall said racism had stopped them renting an apartment or house – in the UK the rate was 3%. Most people taking the survey were first and second-generation immigrants from, or with at least one parent from, a sub-Saharan African country, or from British and French overseas territories including the Caribbean. Grade inflation – Universities are to hold an inquiry into why they are handing out increasing numbers of first-class and upper second-class degrees. The Quality Assurance Agency for Higher Education has found that improvements in student performance and teaching “only explain a certain proportion of the uplift”. The number of graduates gaining an upper second-class (2:1) degree has risen by 55% in the last decade, while the number of first-class degrees alone has doubled to 26%. About three out of every four graduates at UK universities are now awarded a 2:1 or above. Damian Hinds, the education secretary, said: “We want and expect to see results improve over time, but the scale of this increase in firsts and 2:1s cannot be proportionate to improving standards. Universities have a duty to maintain the value of the degrees they award.” In France, protests sparked by anger over fuel tax rises have mushroomed into demonstrations against the ruling class. The Guardian’s Angelique Chrisafis has been covering what were supposed to be peaceful protests. Plus: Owen Jones on the danger that the far right could capitalise on any sense of “Brexit betrayal”. “The way the British used to meet, we all used to go into a pub randomly with friends, everybody would get way too drunk, and three years later you’d wake up one morning and realise you had a boyfriend,” says Emily Hill, who was written extensively about the life of a single woman. “Alcohol is kind of the antidote to the stiff upper lip – it starts to wobble, feelings start to come out and sexual frisson starts to happen … I say this all the time, but dating apps have done to love and romance what machines did to humanity in Terminator 2.” The endless stream of strangers being served straight to your phone means it has never been easier to have no-strings-attached sex, if that’s what you’re looking for, writes G2’s Elle Hunt. The real problem is finding connection – today, Hill says, people are less likely to spend their Fridays mingling with friends of friends at their local, fostering, in weekly increments, the kind of attraction that might only come with time and familiarity. So is the decline of the British boozer coupled to young people having less sex? Marouane Fellaini might have been Manchester United’s stoppage-time saviour but José Mourinho paid tribute to goalkeeper David de Gea after the narrowest of victories over Young Boys of Berne. In Lyon, Manchester City also secured qualification from the Champions League group stage with a game to spare, thanks to Sergio Agüero’s 83rd-minute equaliser. There has been nothing to separate Norway’s Magnus Carlsen and Fabiano Caruana of the United States over the last three weeks but the historic deadlock will be resolved today when the world’s top two chess players compete in a series of quickfire tie-breakers to determine an outright winner in the €1m (£880,000) match. England cricket coach Trevor Bayliss has praised “exemplary” Ben Stokes before the Cricket Discipline Commission decides whether any further action is to be taken against the player and Alex Hales after that episode in Bristol 15 months ago. Premiership rugby club owners are likely to vote for a proposal to give a minority stake to the private equity firm CVC in return for more than £200m, two months after they turned down a takeover bid. And Jonathan Neale, the chief operating officer at McLaren, has warned the result of a no-deal Brexit may put the ability of teams to get to Formula One meetings at risk. The pound has suffered another tough night on the foreign exchanges where it has been the worst-performing major currency thanks to continued pessimism about Theresa May’s hopes of passing her Brexit deal through parliament. It is currently buying $1.273 and €1.128. Stock markets were fairly subdued in Asia with most attention now focused on the outcome of trade talks between Donald Trump and Xi Jinping at this weekend’s G20 summit in Argentina. The FTSE100 is seen opening up about 0.3%. The Guardian’s lead story today is “Labour plan to give customers of big firms vote on boardroom pay”. Brexit continues to make the front page of the Telegraph with “The Brexit backpedalling begins” and the Mail, which has a poll showing begrudging voter support for May’s Brexit deal: “So now will MPs listen?” The Times continues its coverage of a rapist being contacted by social services about access to the victim’s child: “Rotherham rape victim reveals new care scandal”. The Express has the same story, which it confusingly labels as an exclusive: “Scandal of rapist given rights over victim’s child”. The i has a story on “Tech giants in the dock” and the FT reports: “Danske scandal spurs crackdown on misuse of limited partnerships”. There is royal news on the front pages of the Mirror, “Harry and Meg’s £5m new home security bill”, and the Sun, which reports on rumours of a rift between the duchesses of Sussex and Cambridge: “Meghan made Kate cry”. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com