The Florida man accused of sending pipe bombs to prominent critics of Donald Trump was indicted on more than two dozen new charges Friday, including ten which carry a possible life sentence if convicted. The 30-count indictment against Cesar Sayoc was filed in Manhattan federal court, where Sayoc made an appearance earlier this week. Sayoc, 56, was initially arrested on 26 October on five charges carrying a potential sentence of nearly 50 years. Friday’s announcement from the Department of Justice makes good on a promise prosecutors made to upgrade the charges against Sayoc after completing a more thorough investigation. Sayoc is accused of sending improvised explosive devices to Democrats, critics of Trump and CNN. The scare heightened tensions before the midterm elections. “Sayoc’s alleged conduct put numerous lives at risk. It was also an assault on a nation that values the rule of law, a free press, and tolerance of differences without rancor or resort to violence,” said US Attorney Geoffrey Berman in a statement, who also referred to the mailing spree as a “reign of terror”. The new 26 page indictment includes five counts of use of a weapon of mass destruction, and five of “using and carrying a destructive device in furtherance of a crime of violence”, all of which carry a possible life sentence. The document said Sayoc mailed 16 improvised explosive devices though the US mail, aiming to “kill, injure and intimidate an individual and unlawfully to damage and destroy a building, vehicle and other real and person property”. None of the devices exploded. A message left with Sayoc’s lawyer was not immediately returned. Sayoc was held without bail, after being arrested outside a south Florida auto parts store. He had been living in a van covered with stickers of Trump and showing images of some Trump opponents with crosshairs over their faces. In the indictment, prosecutors noted that an improvised explosive mailed to former Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton in Chappaqua, New York, contained a picture of Clinton and members of her family marked with a red “X”. The indictment said others received similarly marked pictures. Others targeted included former president Barack Obama, former vice-president Joe Biden, California senator Kamala Harris and New Jersey senator Cory Booker. Packages were also mailed to CNN in New York and Atlanta. Prosecutors say evidence against Sayoc includes DNA linking him to 10 of the explosive devices and fingerprints on two of them. It was not immediately announced when Sayoc will be arraigned. At that time, he will enter a plea.