Businessman and Brexit campaigner Arron Banks has been removed from the panel of next week’s BBC Question Time following a furore over his interview on the Andrew Marr show. The National Crime Agency is investigating allegations of multiple criminal offences by Banks and his unofficial leave campaign in the EU referendum. The Electoral Commission said last week that there were reasonable grounds to suspect Banks was “not the true source” of £8m given to the Leave.EU campaign, and that it had referred the matter to the NCA. Days later, the insurance magnate appeared on the Andrew Marr Show, prompting criticism that the BBC was giving a platform to someone under criminal investigation, and that he was given an easy ride. Since that appearance, the commission has confirmed that Leave.EU, which was co-founded by Banks, and Eldon Insurance, which he owns, face fines totalling £135,000 over breaches of data laws. On Wednesday, Banks tweeted that his invitation to BBC Question Time had been rescinded, adding: “Clearly the Andrew Marr interview went too well!” At the end of last Thursday’s Question Time, the host, David Dimbleby, said: “Believe it or not, at the moment, at any rate, Arron Banks is going to be on the panel so, we’ll see, we’ll see, that’s two weeks from now.” In response to Banks’s tweet, a BBC spokesman said only: “Question Time panels are never fully confirmed until broadcast.” But the Guardian understands that he is no longer due to appear at the show in Milford Haven. Before the Marr interview, Lord Adonis, a former cabinet minister and leading remain campaigner, said in a letter to the BBC that Banks’s planned appearance was the result of “a very serious editorial misjudgment, influenced by a culture of accommodation to extreme Brexiteers now deeply embedded within the BBC”. Caroline Lucas MP and Molly Scott Cato MEP, both Green party politicians, wrote an open letter criticising the decision to allow Banks to “spread misinformation at our expense”. The BBC replied that there was a strong public interest in interviewing Banks about the allegations and that it was “legitimate and editorially justified”. After the interview, Adonis said it had proved damaging as it had “provided Banks with a platform from which to attack his accusers and muddy the waters”. Banks insisted on the Marr show that there was was “no Russian money, no interference” in the £8m he gave to Leave.EU, but refused to go into detail about how the cash was generated.