The villa in Casteldaccia that floods turned into a coffin for a family of nine last Saturday should have been demolished two years ago. The property in Palermo, Sicily, was built too close to the Milicia River in an area of high hydrological risk, but the owners had appealed against the order and the demolition, which could have prevented the tragedy, was never carried out. The nine members of the Giordano family who died, including three children aged one, three and 15 seem to be the latest victims of illegal Italian construction and illegal homes that have so far led to thousands of deaths. Men, women and children have lost their lives trapped in houses built without proper authorisation, thrown together in areas of high seismic risk, a few steps from rivers or at the foot of hills under hydrogeological risk. According to data from the Italian Territorial Agency, 1.2m homes in Italy are completely illegal. The Italian National Institute of Statistics (Istat) says that in 2015 alone nearly 20 illegal buildings were built for every 100 authorised. “We have built and continue to build in areas where we shouldn’t ever have,” Maurizio Carta, professor of city planning at the University of Palermo, told the Guardian. “We have erected villas and buildings in fragile areas, along riverbeds, in areas prone to landslides, along cliffs, and in high-risk hydrogeological and seismic areas, which increases the risk for people living there – in essence, where they should not be living in the first place.” We have erected villas and buildings in fragile areas, along riverbeds, in areas prone to landslides According to magistrates, a building that collapsed on the night of 7 July 2017 in Torre Annunziata, in the province of Naples, where eight people lost their lives, was illegal. Collapsed buildings in Piazza Sagnotti in Amatrice, in which 19 people died, after the tragic earthquake that devastated the city on 24 August 2016, were also outlawed. Many houses that collapsed in Ischia, during the earthquake of 21 August 2017, had been built without proper authorisation. The mayor of Casteldaccia, Giovanni Di Giacinto, said the villa where nine were killed last Saturday had a demolition order put on it in 2008 and could have been demolished two years ago, but the order was never executed. Prosecutors in nearby Termini Imerese have launched an investigation. Magistrates who visited the villa on Sunday morning suspect the property was built illegally. According to data reported by the newspaper La Stampa, in 2012 Italian prosecutors ordered the demolition of 46,700 buildings but only 10% of that plan was executed. The Corriere della Sera, which has combined official data from Istat, non-profit enviromental association Lagambiente and Cresme, the Italian Institute for Economic Research, says 80% of the demolition orders issued from 2004 to 2018 have not yet been executed. In 2016, Angelo Cambiano, the then mayor of Licata, in the province of Agrigento, tried to enforce the law and presented a demolition plan for dozens of houses in the city that had been built without regular authorisation. He said that, as a result: “They burnt down two of my houses; I received three letters containing death threats and an envelope with bullets.” Cambiano said he was forced to live under police escort for over a year. Despite the threats, Cambiano was not intimidated and carried out his demolition plan. But then his own city council decided to get rid of him. Seven of the councillors who demanded and supported a vote of no confidence against the mayor were owners of houses that had to be demolished. “I was kicked out for trying to enforce the law,” says Cambiano, who returned to teaching mathematics. “But unfortunately today the policy is of consensus and people obviously do not like demolitions. There are regional deputies in Sicily who have been elected because in the election campaign they promised to put a stop to my demolition orders.” Instead of ordering the demolition of houses, Italian politicians have often adopted regulations that save engineers and owners from convictions, enriching the pockets of the state at the same time – a process called “condono edilizio”, which translates as “amnesty building’”. The process is that the owners of an illegal building have the opportunity to save their home from demolition by paying a sum ranging from €60-€150 (£53-£131) per square metre of their house. In return, the state abandons criminal prosecution. From 1985 to 2004, the Italian governments decreed three nationwide building amnesties (the last one during the government of Silvio Berlusconi), collecting a total of about €16bn. “We should have thought about building in safe areas; we should have carried out demolitions to guarantee first of all the safety of the inhabitants,” says Piero Pelizzaro, chief resilience officer for the city of Milan. “Instead, for many years, the state has traded our own safety for money. We saved our homes from demolitions but we could not save our children’s lives.”