Amazing Grace, a documentary film about Aretha Franklin directed by Sydney Pollack, will premiere in New York City almost 50 years after technical issues scuppered its original release and three years after Franklin’s lawyers blocked its premiere. Shot over two nights in January 1972 at the New Temple Missionary Baptist Church in Los Angeles, the film shows a 30-year-old Franklin return to her gospel roots. The resulting album, Amazing Grace, sold more than 2m copies in the US and remains the highest selling live gospel album of all time, as well as one of Franklin’s bestselling albums. The sound recording could not be properly matched with Pollack’s footage, leaving 20 hours of raw film gathering dust in the Warner Brothers vaults. Producer Alan Elliott bought the reels in 2007 and had it restored digitally. Elliott intended to screen the documentary at the Toronto and Telluride film festivals in 2015. Franklin reportedly loved the film, yet her lawyers blocked its release, arguing that permission to use Franklin’s likeness was only granted to Pollack – who died in 2008 – and so Elliott did not have the right to exhibit the film. Following Franklin’s death in August, Elliott staged a private screening of the film for her family and estate. Franklin’s niece and executor, Sabrina Owens, told Variety that it is “very moving and inspirational, an opportunity for those individuals who had not experienced her in a gospel context to see how diverse her music is”. Since that screening, legal clearance has been granted and the film has been entered for consideration for the 2019 Oscars. Guardian music critic Alexis Petridis described Amazing Grace’s medley of Precious Lord, Take My Hand and Carole King’s You’ve Got a Friend as “six minutes of music that even the most committed atheist would struggle to remain unmoved by”. New Yorker editor David Remnick said the album is “perhaps [Franklin’s] most shattering and indispensable recording”. Amazing Grace will premiere on 12 November at the DOC NYC festival in New York.