Across the 26 pages of the political declaration, outlining a plan for the post-Brexit EU-UK relationship, the word “consider” is used 19 times. You can almost hear the thwack as the major issues are booted, one by one, into the long grass of the Belgian countryside. From customs to security, fisheries and a future trade in goods, there is a commitment for the EU and the UK to consider a whole host of options. The political declaration, which is not legally binding, has long been seen in Brussels as a sweetener for some of the less palatable elements of the withdrawal treaty, on citizens’ rights, the £39bn divorce bill and the Irish border. The European commission has been disciplined in its language to avoid any weakening of their position that a country outside the EU cannot enjoy a status as good as one inside the bloc. They have also looked to pin down, where they can, the direction of the talks to come. But EU diplomats, echoing the phrase used by the former Brexit secretary David Davis to describe his own negotiating style, admit the document’s 8,192 words offer a great deal of “constructive ambiguity”. Trade in goodsLong grass rating: •••• When the long-awaited UK-EU trade deal becomes a reality, the two sides will be “separate markets and distinct legal orders”. With this starchy legal phrase, the EU demolished Theresa May’s ambition for frictionless trade and the common rulebook, the centrepiece of the Chequers plan. British access to European markets will depend on the UK respecting EU standards on competition, tax, environment, as well as social and employment protection, but it is not clear whether that involves non-regression or dynamic alignment. Negotiators have agreed to ensure no tariffs and avoid “unnecessary barriers”. In a section likely to infuriate Brexiters, the UK “will consider aligning” with relevant EU rules on goods to “ease” trade. Quite how that will work is not explained. Northern Ireland and customsLong grass rating: ••••• A chief task for the prime minister has been to insert what was once described by a senior EU official as “magical thinking” into the political declaration. The withdrawal agreement has laid out the terms of an open-ended EU-UK customs union to ensure that there is no need either for a hard border on the island of Ireland or a customs border in the Irish Sea between Great Britain and Northern Ireland. Theresa May sought to offer Brexiters, who hate the idea of being locked into a customs union, the hope that another technological solution could be found in time that would supersede such an arrangement. She has managed to do this with the inclusion of paragraph 27: “Facilitative arrangements and technologies will also be considered in developing any alternative arrangements for ensuring the absence of a hard border on the island of Ireland on a permanent footing.” Financial servicesLong grass rating: • The City of London will be disappointed but not surprised by the stark picture emerging in the joint declaration on financial services. Instead of “passports” that make it easy to do business in the EU, bankers and traders will have to rely on “equivalence”, a stricter regime used by the US and Switzerland, allowing market access to be withdrawn at 30 days’ notice. There is a commitment to complete equivalence assessments by the middle of June 2020. The two sides have also agreed to “appropriate consultations” on granting and withdrawing equivalence, although that may be little consolation to the 5,500 UK-based firms that will be losing the more-valued passports. FisheriesLong grass rating: •••• If any issue is going to poison the future trade talks, it is the trade-off between access to British waters for European fishing fleets and the right of UK exporters to sell their products into the European market. The political declaration is carefully worded to avoid this issue exploding now. Access to waters is linked to “quota shares”. The political declaration also commits both sides to have a new fisheries agreement in place by 1 July 2020, six months before the end of the transition period. The more dynamite demands of the nine EU member states who have skin in this game are likely to be set out in a side-declaration by the 27 EU member states at the leaders’ summit on Sunday. The European commission has admitted that this is one of the issues still open for the leaders to nail down when they gather in Brussels. Punishment clause Long grass rating: •• If the Conservative party thought Brexit would bring an end to the debilitating debate about the UK’s relationship with the EU, the political declaration will disappoint. The document paints a picture of a deep relationship in the form of an association agreement, with a host of joint ministerial and parliamentary forums. There will be a main joint committee responsible for managing the future trade and security relationship. Where there are disputes, it will go to an independent arbitration panel which will refer any question to the European court of justice if an interpretation of EU law is required. And if the UK should fail to comply with the arbitration panel, the EU “would be entitled to request financial compensation or take proportionate and temporary measures, including the suspension of its obligations within the scope of the future relationship”. The EU and UK will also hold biannual summits. British prime ministers will be trotting over to Brussels for decades to come. MigrationLong grass rating: ••• The EU’s member states have privately voiced their concerns about Theresa May’s inflammatory rhetoric about stopping their citizens “jumping the queue” to live and work in the UK after Brexit. The best Michel Barnier, the EU’s chief negotiator, has been able to do is to include a commitment in the political declaration that the UK will not be able to treat Romanians differently to the French, for example. Migration policies will also be reciprocal between the UK and the EU but Brussels is waiting on Downing Street to spell out what they will be. Both sides are also going to consider “conditions for entry and stay for purposes such as research, study, training and youth exchanges”. The paragraph suggests European citizens could in fact jump the queue over non-EU citizens in some circumstances. AviationLong grass rating: •••• The UK and EU have agreed to negotiate a “comprehensive air transport agreement” covering safety, security, air-traffic control, consumer protection, as well as market rules for aviation companies. But the short aspirational text leaves majority British-controlled airlines in the dark about how Brexit will affect their business, especially valuable transatlantic routes. At the moment, EU aviation agreements, such as the transatlantic Open Skies deal, are only open to European airlines where 51% of shareholders are in the EU. The EU has snubbed the British government’s request to join the European Aviation Safety Agency, merely noting that the two sides will “explore the possibility of cooperation”. Foreign and security policyLong grass rating: ••• The two sides have pledged to create a security partnership to tackle international crime, terrorism, cyber-attacks and “the erosion of the rules-based international order”. But in a blow to the UK, the EU is only offering co-operation, rather than membership, of the EU police agency Europol and the judicial cooperation agency Eurojust. “Close and lasting” cooperation is also foreseen for foreign policy, including co-ordination on international sanctions, but the UK would no longer be a member of the EU foreign ministers’ council. The UK has also pledged to worth work with the EU to combat illegal migration and toughen up controls on the EU’s external frontier. GibraltarLong grass rating: ••••• The Spanish government has said it will not support the Brexit deal unless it is clear that Gibraltar will not covered by a future trade deal without Madrid’s consent. The Spanish prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has even suggested that such consent would depend on discussions over the sovereignty of the Rock, a disputed territory. The political declaration as it stands does not offer Madrid any such assurance and a European commission spokesman has said work is continuing to resolve the issue. The British prime minister spoke to Sánchez on Wednesday night and appeared to suggest in a statement on Thursday that a way forward had been found. There may be an annexe added to refer to the need for future UK-Spain talks.