Oddly for a multimillion-selling blockbuster video game, in Red Dead Redemption 2 you spend many, many hours staring at a horse’s ass. Of the 70-ish hours I’ve spent with the game so far, I reckon 35 have been in a saddle, either exploring the wilderness or haring it from A to B on the way between story chapters. Horses are omnipresent, hitched to wagons, trotting under everyone from lawmen and farmers, running wild in the fields. They aren’t just a means of conveyance – they’re the soul of the game, beautiful and blameless, metaphors for the natural freedom that the game’s humans keep screwing up. If I ever accidentally shoot one in a fight, I feel appalled at myself. If the horses didn’t look and sound so lifelike, rearing and whinnying in the presence of wolves and grunting with exertion as you push them into a gallop, players wouldn’t feel such a connection to them. One of the first things I marvelled at in Red Dead was the way my steed’s muscles were moving under its flanks as it pushed through the deep snow. At Rockstar’s Edinburgh studio the week before Red Dead Redemption 2’s release, no matter whom I talked to, I ended up in a 20-minute conversation about horses. Phil Hooker, Rockstar North’s technical director, knew he’d have a keen critic of the game’s horses at home: his wife is an equestrian, and they have several. “It’s a collaboration between code and animation, and that code is involved and creative,” he says. “One problem we had with the horse as we went through development was that it was feeling quite stiff, and we wanted it to feel like a living thing … The animators came up with the idea of continuous movement, so no matter what you do with the horse, even if it’s coming to a stop, you can change the response in a second. And because we had that range of movement, we could make it so that the horse might decide to turn or walk slightly differently each time – you might see a step sideways, more lateral movement. You’re not entirely in control of exactly what it’s doing, which I hope makes it feel like a real animal, rather than something you drive.” In-game, when you bond strongly with a horse, there’s a button you can press to make it perform dressage – specifically piaffe, trotting on the spot. This, it turns out, is not just a mad act of Rockstar vanity, but the foundation that the horse’s animation and movement systems are built on. “When I talked to people about horses in real life, they start with dressage as the fundamental way of schooling a horse to be obedient and respond to fine control, so we approached the [virtual] horse with the same mindset: if we can make it nimble and flexible enough to do dressage, that would allow us to create something that would do whatever we needed it to do,” Phil explains. Technical audio director Alastair MacGregor also has a keen equestrian in his life: his sister would send him videos of her horse riding uphill, so he could listen to it. “We’re really trying to represent the effort that the horse is making with its breathing: is it tired? Is it injured? We have hundreds of different vocalisations to cover the mood of the horse in different situations,” he says. There’s even a library of different sounds for the swish of its tail. “The rhythm of the hooves is also crucial to it feeling good when you’re riding around, so we start with recordings of hoofbeats on different surfaces, then we look at how the horse shifts weight in its gait, which steps are heavier than the others, and that creates the rhythm, and that changes depending on the slope or whether you’re turning … it’s incredible the range of motion that the horse has now. You also traverse through different foliage types: we’ve recorded a huge range of different types of bush and tree, and depending on how the horse passes through them you’ll hear different cracks and tales and rustles. Then we look at what gear is on the horse: if there’s a bridle, reins, a saddle, saddle-bags with things in them, all these different components are modelled on the audio side. If you are carrying weapons they will rattle as the horse is moving.” The effort that went into the creation of these steeds has been rewarded by the amount of attention players are paying to them. My own Red Dead horse is a dalmation-speckled American Standardbred called Xandir. On social media I’ve seen grey dappled Shire horses with braided tails, shiny white Arabians with fancy saddles, and a beautiful black Mustang proudly shared by their riders. It says a lot about this game, or perhaps the mythic relationship between humans and horses, that what players are remembering and talking about is not the bloody shootouts or crazed bank robberies, it’s the animal they rode away on.