For Daria Martin, making art is a dream come true – literally. Her films involve restaging the dreams, nightmares or altered states of consciousness of friends and relatives. For one forthcoming project, Tonight the World, she’s recreated several of her grandmother’s nocturnal visions. She fled the Nazis in 1938 and spent the rest of her life dreaming about the family home she was forced to abandon. Even when Martin is not turning dreams into real life, her films have a dreamlike quality: crudely made robots dance away next to naked people; retro-futurist figures in white leotards strike poses among transparent plastic shapes. These investigations into the unconscious can be mesmerising – and no doubt cast a spell over the judges of the Film London Jarman awards, who crowned her the winner of this year’s £10,000 prize for art using moving images. One of the works that toured the country as part of the Jarman awards is A Hunger Artist, her theatrical adaptation of the Franz Kafka story of the same name. Shot in HD, the film invites us into the cage of a suffering artist whose work – starving himself in public – has begun to fall out of favour with audiences. Martin says she was drawn to the story not just for as a cautionary artistic tale but because she had undertaken volunteer work at a clinic for people with eating disorders. “I was struck by the parallels between the women I was seeing in this clinic, and this artist who also refuses food and makes it into a feat of endurance in a similar way,” she says. “Both can be seen as extreme manifestations of this broader tendency of withdrawing from real human contact and in its place producing this image of success or oneself as heroic.” Martin’s A Hunger Artist allows plenty of room for interpretation, which is partly why she blurred genders when it came to casting. A woman plays the starving male artist, for instance, which allows the audience to interpret the character in different ways. It was also, Martin admits, partly for practical reasons: “It’s difficult to find a male actor who could pass as emaciated, because they need to be pretty robust as a rule.” With her long, blond hair and California accent, Martin can appear as dreamlike as her work. But her films are no airy, cosmic fantasies. Rather, they explore serious themes rooted in the everyday: empathy, unease, withdrawal. A case in point would be the trilogy of films Martin made on the phenomenon of mirror-touch synaesthesia – a condition in which people experience touch and pain simply by viewing it happening to other people and objects. Sometimes this can be subtle – seeing someone’s arm stroked and feeling the sensation yourself – and at other times it can be extreme: one woman who witnessed a fight was left unconscious simply from the act of viewing it. Mirror touch was only formally identified by neuroscientists in 2005 and Martin interviewed more than a dozen people who experienced it to make her three films: Sensorium Tests, At the Threshold and Theatre of the Tender. At the Threshold takes the form of a 50s domestic drama that tells the story of a mother and son who experience mirror touch. A cake-making scene sees them playing with various objects intently: eggs, spoons and jars all jingle with intensity as they’re passed around the table, until an outsider is forced to throw down a bowl on an eggshell in order to gain their attention. Martin says she was drawn to mirror touch because it “asks questions about our own thresholds of empathy”. Is it something you can have too much of? Conversely, is it something the world is sorely lacking at the moment? “You could certainly say that our political problems are caused by a lack of empathy on both sides, or that empathy could be the bridge between this splitting that has occurred,” she says. “But empathy means so many things … it can also mean a kind of emotional contagion, and a way in which people catch each other’s anxiety in their echo chambers, so that’s a kind of empathy that’s not helping the situation.” We meet a few days ahead of the Jarman awards ceremony, at Martin’s home in London, before she knows she has won and can only ponder on how it would feel. “I know the proper answer is that it’s an honour,” she says, choosing her words carefully, “and of course I’d be happy. But awards are odd in that they really expose the structures of the art world, that we’re all competing against each other for limited resources when we’d prefer to imagine a camaraderie between us.” Martin says that the award’s existence – and increasing importance – is “evidence of the way moving image has become a more vital part of the art world”. This year’s Turner prize nominees list contains no painting or sculpture, and is instead dominated by film and digital art. Martin teaches, and says that video art – once a rather lonely furrow to plough – is now the medium a lot of her students are choosing to work in: “It’s become really apparent this last five years: whether it’s gaming or sampling from videos downloaded from YouTube, they’re using that digital realm as their material base.” Martin is not averse to digital but her own work is largely analogue. She grew up near San Francisco, and learned to paint as a child, mirroring her grandmother – a painter whose 60s oil paintings hang in Martin’s lounge today – as she worked in her studio. Martin herself entered art school as a painter, before moving to shooting film on 16mm, a medium that felt “fleshy and sculptural”, and allowed her to explore multiple narratives in a way that painting did not. In a neat example of things coming full circle, the grandmother who taught Martin to paint is now the subject of her latest work. Tonight the World, which will show at the Barbican in London from January, began when she received her grandmother’s dream journal – a 20,000 page document stretching across half her lifetime that contained around 40,000 dreams: “Quite an obsessive endeavour,” she notes. Martin became enthralled with the journal as a piece of art in its own right, jam-packed with narratives and unexpected twists and turns. Her grandmother never got to return to her home in Brno, now part of the Czech Republic, so Martin went in her place, with a crew and cast of actors, in order to restage five of her dreams on film. “It was a way of exploring this troubling family history that was not much talked about,” she says. Martin’s refugee grandmother never discussed the effect that leaving Brno had on her, nor the trauma of losing her own grandmother and family friends to the Holocaust. Yet Martin is interested in how the effects of this uprooting may have been passed down to her regardless. In another nod to the field of science that seems to underpin much of her work, she’s been reading about an area called transgenerational trauma: “One of my grandmother’s tendencies was to withdraw and that has its own effect.” Martin is aware that dreams can be offputting as a topic – fascinating for the dreamer, but usually less so for the person hearing the story. But her work is compelling because it mines these dream states for things that resonate in the real world. Dreams, she points out, can have a multitude of meanings – each one with the potential to affect an individual in its own unique way. “And hopefully,” she says, “artworks can do that, too.” • Tonight the World will be at the Curve, Barbican, London, from 31 January to 7 April.