If a defender attempted a tackle in the area, aimed to take the ball but missed and wiped out a striker, few would argue against a penalty being awarded. That happened twice at the Emirates on Saturday, but rather than an outfield player felling a forward, it was a goalkeeper. In the space of a few minutes both Alisson and Bernd Leno sprinted from their lines and attempted to punch clear a cross, but failed and took out Henrikh Mkhitaryan and Virgil van Dijk respectively. Different rules apply to goalkeepers, awarded fouls when given the slightest touch and forgiven when they commit pseudo-assault. Both incidents were more serious and dangerous than a standard foul from an outfielder: two well-built, 6ft 3in-plus athletes charging at an opponent at speed, and in Leno’s case smashing Van Dijk in the face with a forearm. It is a serious flaw in the rules that neither were penalised. Nick Miller • Match report: Arsenal 1-1 Liverpool Callum Wilson’s only previous appearance in an England shirt came in 2014 when he came off the bench to replace Harry Kane in an under-21 friendly against France but after adding to his impressive start to the season with another goal against Manchester United the former Coventry striker deserves another chance to impress Gareth Southgate up close. The 26-year-old was selected by the England manager for that match four years ago when he was still in charge of the youth side so Wilson is clearly on his radar and would certainly offer a different option in attack for the Nations League tie with Croatia next week. The international retirement of Jamie Vardy has created a vacancy in the squad for a striker with genuine pace and Bournemouth’s leading man has shown over the past three seasons that he has the tools required to make an impact at a higher level if he is given the opportunity. Ed Aarons • Match report: Bournemouth 1-2 Manchester United Manchester United’s first-half performance took standards to the lowest point of the season. Their excellent second-half revival to seize a deserved three points showed a way forward, with the pace and directness of goalscorers Anthony Martial and Marcus Rashford to the fore. Control of midfield was gained once Rashford and Ander Herrera arrived in the 56th minute in place of Juan Mata and Fred. The latter was United’s key signing of the summer but threatens to go the way of Henrikh Mkhitaryan, Alexis Sánchez, Eric Bailly, Victor Lindelöf and Paul Pogba: expensive signings distrusted by José Mourinho. Herrera added bite and haste where previously a trio of Pogba, Fred and Nemanja Matic, costing a combined £187.8m and all bought under Mourinho’s watch, had been hopeless. John Brewin • First half was a disaster, says Mourinho The outcry about Lee Probert’s decision to book Demarai Gray, who had removed his shirt to reveal another garment paying tribute to Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha after scoring Leicester’s winner, seemed a bit much given that there were far more important things going on. Yes, the law might be ill-conceived and yes, it was unfortunate given the emotion of the occasion, but Probert was doing his job and his body language upon seeing Gray’s actions – visibly wincing and then making as low-key a show of the yellow card as possible – should be enough to assure anyone that he was acting against his own instincts. Claude Puel and his players agreed afterwards that, much like them, Probert needed to remain professional and that is where it should end. It is not worth the fuss and it is certainly not worth opening Probert up to unnecessary fury in an age where too many idiots have licence to pour invective and sometimes worse. It is far more appropriate to take strength from an ultimately uplifting afternoon than abase oneself over an inconsequential refereeing call. Nick Ames • Match report: Cardiff 0-1 Leicester There is an inevitability about how the focus is drawn towards Eden Hazard’s brilliance at Chelsea. Or, when a striker who once appeared broken scores a brace, the praise is duly dished out for Álvaro Morata. Yet it was the energy in the hosts’ ranks which saw them eventually overwhelm Crystal Palace, and the likes of Willian and Pedro who personify that dynamism. The Brazilian has now started 11 games in succession, a sequence that surely has to be curtailed for a breather in Belarus this week, and is a player relishing life after Antonio Conte. He would make way for Hazard, but few players have unsettled Aaron Wan-Bissaka as obviously in recent times. Pedro, industrious as much in defence as in attack, is a truly unsung hero, a player whose tireless running eventually grinds opponents down. His finish for the third was emphatic, and reward for an afternoon of endeavour which sums up this side’s approach. Dominic Fifield • Match report: Chelsea 3-1 Crystal Palace Goodison Park was purring after the best Everton display under Marco Silva so far and three quality goals brought an emphatic end to Brighton’s winning run. The only reservation was criticism of Séamus Coleman’s recent form and the angry response it prompted from the Republic of Ireland captain following his important goal against Chris Hughton’s team. By his own admission Coleman has not hit his usual high level in recent weeks, which is hardly surprising given he was unable to train for over a month due to a stress fracture in his foot. That injury against Wales, coming after last year’s double leg fracture against the same opposition, clearly affected the defender’s fitness but the 30 year old impressed even without his goal on Saturday. Coleman is gradually rediscovering the rhythm that is crucial to his game. If any player deserves a show of that rare commodity in football – patience – it is the team captain who embodies commitment to the Everton cause. Andy Hunter • Match report: Everton 3-1 Brighton There is no disgrace in losing at Manchester City but there must be serious alarm in Southampton’s failure to win a Premier League game since 1 September. Despite suffering a 6-1 trouncing at the hands of Pep Guardiola’s men there is hope in the way Saints managed to go at the champions for periods. As Mark Hughes said afterwards: “We have come up against City, we have created a number of chances again. Our shots on target are right up there in comparison to how clinical Manchester City were today. That has been our story this season. We pick the wrong option or don’t finish the chances we create. We need to improve that and at the back end we need to improve.” Next up are Watford and then a trip to fellow strugglers Fulham. If Saints fail to win either of those then Hughes can expect scrutiny. Jamie Jackson • Match report: Manchester City 6-1 Southampton What are the lessons from Newcastle’s first win of the season? That luck is a hugely underestimated factor in football and post-game analysis is often harshly binary with winning coaches tactical geniuses and losers dunces when, in reality, things could easily have gone either way. If fortune frowned on Watford, Newcastle enjoyed the breaks which have latterly deserted them. “If you win everyone says ‘that’s the way’ but, if you do well and lose they say ‘OK, you’re doing this wrong’,” said a relieved Rafael Benítez. “We knew we needed to win today and if we keep on winning, this will maybe be one of my biggest results [of his career].” Significantly, Benítez can seem sceptical about sports psychology but Newcastle’s manager revealed he has recently been reading up on a subject he studied at university as well as consulting the detailed case notes he compiled at previous clubs. Louise Taylor • Match report: Newcastle 1-0 Watford West Ham’s record signing, Felipe Anderson, delivered a top-class performance in the 4-2 win over Burnley but he was not the only one to do so. Marko Arnautovic thrilled with his power, imagination and skill, while the most exciting display of all came from a 20-year-old graduate of West Ham’s academy, Grady Diangana. The winger, making only his second Premier League start, showed not just trickery and speed but also the wit to thrive on the same wavelength as Arnautovic and Anderson. “He has great ability,” said West Ham midfielder Robert Snodgrass, who also played well. “What I say to these young lads is: ‘All you’ve got now is a chance – the same as youngsters coming through other academies – whether you grab that chance with both hands is up to you. Don’t let it pass you by.’ That’s what Declan [Rice] has done and now Diangana has been given his chance.” So far he has certainly taken it. Paul Doyle • Match report: West Ham 4-2 Burnley “It’s common sense, no?” Mauricio Pochettino said, pointing out that when you play on Monday, Wednesday and Saturday it is prudent to rest players such as Dele Alli, Christian Eriksen, Son Heung-min and Davinson Sánchez before PSV Eindhoven in the Champions League adds a fourth game in nine days. Less easy to explain is why Spurs needed to send on three of these players – Alli was not on the bench – to see out a game they were winning 3-0 after an hour. It would be a mistake to imagine it was simply the naive defending of the debutant Juan Foyth that led to the two Wolves penalties. Kieran Trippier was at fault too and the whole Spurs backline was at full stretch to resist a pummelling in the closing minutes. Wolves were unlucky, particularly with a wrongly disallowed goal in the first half. Which has to mean Spurs were lucky. They played well but they must still feel they got out of jail. Paul Wilson • Match report: Wolves 2-3 Tottenham