My experience of judging prizes is that the panel’s decision is rarely unanimous, whatever smooth things people like to tell the world later. But after the judges of this year’s Observer/Cape graphic short story prize had read carefully through the entries, we were all agreed that one had stood out right from the very start: An Artistic Odyssey by Edith Pritchett. Not only did it look great, it also had a beginning, a middle and an end – a harder trick to pull off than you may think over the course of only four pages. Best of all, it was funny. Posy Simmonds thought it was really funny, and she’s one of the most wickedly hilarious people it’s possible to imagine, in person as on the page. (The other judges were, as ever, Dan Franklin, publisher of Jonathan Cape’s graphic novel list, Suzanne Dean, creative director of Vintage Books, Paul Gravett, who runs the Comica festival, and yours truly; joining Simmonds as our other special guest was Michel Faber, whose novels include The Crimson Petal and the White and Under the Skin.) But perhaps this shouldn’t have been surprising. As it turns out, the very first graphic novel that Pritchett, a 24-year-old illustrator, ever read was Simmonds’s Gemma Bovery, and it remains a firm favourite (she also loves the New Yorker cartoonists Roz Chast and Edward Steed); no wonder her story comes with a certain Posy-ish waspishness in the matter of modern mores. Inspired by her time at Edinburgh College of Art when she, like most art students, leaned towards the edgy and fantasised about Tracey Emin-style global fame and wealth (her degree show featured a doll she had stitched of herself in the nude), Pritchett’s comic is all bathos. Our heroine dreams, for instance, not of owning some flashy penthouse flat in Manhattan, but of a deckchair for her iPhone. Nor can she bear to take down the poster of Harry Styles from the wall of her studio – not even after she has decided, following a conversion to militant feminism, to devote the space only to heroines such as Frida Kahlo and Gwen John. “I think the cycles she goes through were true of myself and a lot of my peers,” Pritchett says. “A combination of intellectual inferiority and a very keen desire to be important and do something impressive. But I wanted also to try to be honest about my love for pop culture and internet quizzes, as well as my endless yearning for material goods. Perhaps it’s really a confessional piece.” She is “ecstatic” to have won, hoping the prize might help her achieve her long-term dream of making cartoons her living in the future (she’d love to write a weekly strip). In the meantime, she intends to spend (some of) her winnings on “fancy peanut butter”. This year’s runner-up is Jac Clinch, 26, who works as a director and 2D animator at Blinkink animation studios in London. Clinch is recognised for his (also very funny) story Customer Complaint 40569, in which the mixed load setting on a new washing machine causes a tear in the fabric of time and space; as a result its owner, Elaine Thrupp, finds herself in the prehistoric savannah approximately 40,000 years ago. Clinch describes it, brilliantly, as a palaeolithic Eat, Pray, Love journey written in the form of a customer complaint letter. “Modern life can leave some of our primal needs unfulfilled,” he says. “But we can’t go back. Thrupp discovers her primal self, but she still can’t let go of that refund she’s owed.” Clinch, whose graduation film from the National Film and Television School, The Alan Dimension, was nominated for a Bafta last year, has been eyeing the Observer/Cape prize for a long time (our prize is now 11 years old). “I’ve followed the competition ever since I was a teenager drawing comics in my bedroom,” he says. “I’ve been so inspired by previous winners – and now, as an adult drawing comics in my bedroom, I’m unbelievably chuffed to be runner-up.” His story, which comes with a fantastic punchline, can be read here.