Theresa May’s hard-won deal is done at last; yet its undoing is all but taken for granted. Even as EU leaders gathered in Brussels to approve the draft withdrawal treaty and political agreement today, its myriad domestic foes were plotting their course past it. No one believes that the prime minister can pilot it successfully through parliament next month. The numbers look worse by the day, knighthoods notwithstanding. So the signing of the deal looks strangely beside the point after all the months of battle. But this is an important moment, sobering to all bar Brexit ideologues and those whose personal ambition precludes all thought of the country’s interests. As Mrs May observed, a new chapter in our national lives is beginning. The precise content of the coming pages is necessarily vague. We know only that they are bringing Britain closer to the unhappy and unnecessary ending of a 45-year story. The sorrow expressed at the Brussels summit was evinced entirely by the EU27 – it was a “sad day”; “not a day to celebrate”; even “tragic”, in Angela Merkel’s words. Politics obliged the prime minister to sound upbeat. Mrs May insisted, implausibly, that she was full of optimism about the future of the country. But the past weeks have underscored that the loss is Britain’s. Any Brexit deal is a bad deal for the country. The foreign secretary’s reassurance that Britain has been in far more challenging situations avoided mentioning that we brought this one upon ourselves, and must face up to this act of self-harm if we wish to emerge without more damage. Confronted with reality, the reaction of the Brexiters has been instead to double down on the post-imperial delusions and lies that got us here. They accuse Mrs May of selling out the nation, as if one country could simply stare down a bloc of 27. Britain is already damaged and diminished, weakened in its dealings with the other EU members – as the last minute tussle over Gibraltar showed – and with the world outside. The EU is with Spain, said the president of the European commission, Jean-Claude Juncker. It was with it for the simple reason that Spain is with the EU. Imagine now how the UK will fare when it goes solo in negotiations with the US, China and others. Good luck with those trade deals. Mrs May pandered to the Brexiters in the vain hope of assuaging them, triggering article 50 prematurely and laying down reckless red lines. Her letter to the public looks desperate in two ways: first, as a tactic, reflecting the increasing hostility to the deal among both Tory and Labour MPs; and second, in its content. She suggested the deal would clear the political space to address the burning injustices she has often pledged to resolve. If she was ever serious about tackling these – and her record to date shows little sign of it, the last budget perhaps least of all – it is clear Brexit cannot solve the problems that contributed to the vote for it; it will exacerbate them. Shamefully, her letter not only echoed but amplified the bus-side lie about Brexit boosting funding for the health service; the government would be able to spend British taxpayers’ money on the UK’s own priorities, “like the extra £394m per week” it was investing in the NHS. It is true that the British people mostly don’t want to spend any more time arguing about Brexit. But when leavers and remainers are united only in disliking Mrs May’s solution, that offers no way forward. Mr Juncker insisted that this is the only deal possible, though others were more cautious; tweaks are possible, but not the wholesale overhaul Brexiters demand. The alternative they posit, of a “managed no deal”, just means strapping on seat belts as you head for the cliff edge. Meanwhile, remain ministers have reportedly formed a new “gang of five”, hoping to steer Mrs May towards a softer Brexit after defeat in the Commons vote. On Sunday, Arlene Foster said the DUP could back a Norway-style deal, an option attracting increasing sympathy. The campaign for a second referendum is gaining momentum among both the public and politicians. Brexit is an economic and political disaster, fuelling, not healing, divisions. The extent of the folly has grown clearer with each turn of the page. But the ending is not yet written.