‘I like evil people,” says Steven Berkoff. “I’m like a surgeon who is happiest when working with a very diseased body.” The actor and playwright, now 81, is explaining why he wants to take the title role in Harvey, his latest one-act play, about a real-life alleged sexual predator called Harvey Weinstein. He’s long been renowned for playing screen villains, from Bond baddie General Orlov in Octopussy to Rambo nemesis Lieutenant Colonel Podovsky. But playing the disgraced movie mogul? That’s something different. “This is a creature,” he says, “who offers freedom, offers to change your life, because once you hear that magic word ‘Action!’ – wow, you’ll be changed from this small, simpering B-movie actress. Suddenly on the screen, you’re touching magic, you become immortal. He’s offering that for just a few minutes in the shower.” Berkoff slips into character, putting on a creepy American accent. “Just let me watch you in the shower, baby. Don’t lift your eyes, honey.” (In the real world, things were the other way round: Weinstein was taped asking a model to watch him shower.) On the table in front of us, as we talk in Berkoff’s London office with a stupendous view of the Thames, is the third draft of Harvey. “It’s a one-man show, about 15 pages of dense text. I’ve been trying to learn this over the past six months. It’s something I could do. I could play him.” It will be intriguing to see if any theatre will be prepared to stage Harvey. Following the ousting last year of leading British theatre director Max Stafford-Clark from the Out of Joint company over accusations of inappropriate behaviour, and the fall of one-time Old Vic artistic director Kevin Spacey, maybe relationships are changing in the rehearsal room between directors, actors and playwrights. When I suggest this to Berkoff, he’s not so sure: “#MeToo is just a reaction and, as with all reactions, it tips over. It comes from a very good source, but it attracts the elements who have, you know, minor disgruntlements and minor little feelings that they’ve been disrespected. It tilts too heavily that way. But it will tip back.” I have had dealings with nearly every one of those people accused of sexual misconduct, and they have always been indifferent, arrogant, disinterested and sometimes downright rude But #MeToo has, says Berkoff intriguingly, destroyed some of his enemies. “What’s interesting is that I have had dealings with nearly every one of those people accused, and they have always been indifferent, arrogant, disinterested, pompous and sometimes downright rude. I found it really bizarre. I’d love to tell you who these bastards are.” Well, you could try. “I really couldn’t. “You mentioned Max Stafford-Clark,” he adds. “When he was director of the Royal Court, for years I tried to get my plays put on there. He always replied, ‘No, we don’t have any room.’ Nothing, nothing, nothing.” Berkoff has long supposed himself – and been regarded as – a theatre establishment outsider. He’s a maverick trained in Parisian physical theatre at the École Internationale de Théâtre de Jacques Lecoq and steeped in the foul-mouthed vernacular of his native east London. He’s committed to anti-naturalistic plays deploying poetry, mime and dance, rather than the prevailing theatre, which today is obsessed with “domestic, petty and bourgeois problems”. I wonder if Berkoff would portray Weinstein sympathetically, not least because he agrees with my suggestion that there may be an element of antisemitism in some of the coverage of the movie mogul’s downfall. “No question,” he replies. “It’s locked in the brains. We’re brainwashed with so much information that Jews are often demonised. Antisemitism is massively on the rise everywhere, even in places you wouldn’t expect it – like the Labour party. It’s awful.” In the past, Berkoff has argued that British Jews face an inbuilt national dislike. “Overt antisemitism goes against the British sense of fair play,” he once told the Jewish Chronicle. “It has to be covert and civilised. So certain playwrights and actors on the left-wing make themselves out to be stricken with conscience. They say, ‘We hate Israel, we hate Zionism, we don’t hate Jews.’ But Zionism is the act of seeking sanctuary after years and years of unspeakable outrages against Jews.” We’re meeting because Berkoff has just finished recording narration for a film adaptation of Goethe’s Faust by  Philipp Humm, the Belgian-German former CEO of Vodafone Europe. Humm has shifted the action to present-day Silicon Valley, giving us an AI guru Faust who yearns to emulate God by creating life (and wears Steve Jobs’ uniform of black turtleneck with blue jeans). His devil, meanwhile, is a suited hedge-fund trader and his Gretchen a 16-year-old intern for a startup called Winestone Inc. It’s Faust for the era of Facebook, #MeToo and AI. The experience of reading Goethe in preparation has been a revelation for Berkoff. “The first time, quite frankly, it didn’t make an awful lot of sense to me. On reading it the second time, I’m amazed by the passion and the lyricism of the translation.” This was by Walter Kaufmann. “It’s magnificent theatre. It’s astonishing.” He thinks it is relevant to today, too. “Technology is the devil, and the more technology you have, the higher the price you pay.” He’s talking in part about the compulsive nature of social media and binge watch TV: “We’re becoming dead souls sitting on sofas.” But he also means the slaughter of animals for sport, in particular the Scottish goat slain recently by an American hunter and Cecil the Zimbabwean lion. “It’s a Mephistophelian pact: you’re given a gun and godlike power. Animals become your playthings. You shoot them just to show you’re clever, that you’ve got good eyesight. But something dies in you. Your empathy and sensitivity are being shrivelled. We’re becoming people who have everything and feel nothing.” He sees Goethe’s play as a marvellous antidote to British theatre, which he thinks is in a death spiral. “Theatre starts with the epic and then shrinks to the historic – kings and queens etc – and then to the domestic. Gradually, it erodes until it becomes obsessed with writers discussing their problems. That came out in the kitchen-sink dramas – and theatre has shrunk further since.” Where do your plays stand in this potted history? “I go into a much more epic description of the situation.” He cites his 43-year-old play East, about a working-class family living on a council estate and set firmly in the London where he was raised. The Stepney-born playwright described it as an “elegy for the East End and its energetic waste”. He says: “When I wrote East, I wanted a completely earthy, very sexy, very violent play, so I wrote in verse. I found it not only satisfying but releasing. It gave me an opportunity to play with language. We never played the characters like the yobs that they are, but rather in a slightly heightened way.” In this sense, he regards Goethe as a theatrical soulmate. “When I write about working-class people, I do so in ways that reveal them at their absolute magnificent worst. Maybe my work has a connection with Bruegel’s paintings, with people dancing in the village with their loathsome greed and fat pompous faces.” Even though Berkoff is now in his ninth decade, he’s still writing a lot. His self-published 2015 novel, Sod the Bitches, was a kind of Philip Roth-like romp through the sex life of a libidinous actor, while his memoir, Bad Guy! Journal of a Hollywood Turkey, described working on a dismal-sounding blockbuster. He may not be getting his new plays staged, but his other writings are being published, if mostly as free-to-download editions. Berkoff, clad in black, is still recognisable as the baddie of umpteen blockbusters, including Beverly Hills Cop, but gone is the aura of menace. The guy whom the Independent branded the bovver boy bard no longer looks too bovvered. We sip mineral water and then he opens his copy of Faust and recites Mephistopheles speech about the human desire to become godlike: “A supernatural delight!” he begins. “To lie on mountains in the dew and night.” My God, I think, when he’s done, what a majestic devil he would have made. “What Mephistopheles is saying,” he explains, “is that when you absorb and identify with life and nature, you have this almost godlike feeling. It happens in art, too.” In theatre? “It happened when I saw Olivier play Othello. He had such sublime energy and inspiration and perception. I remember feeling heaven was opening.” Has he ever achieved anything like that? “To tell you the truth, I’m not that talented or creative. I’m just a jobbing actor.” Oh come on. “Not really, no,” he says with a sly grin. “At times you’re on the stage or off stage directing and something happens, and you know that you’re getting a beam, almost like a laser beam from another place. And something in you just stops. You are surfing on this wave and it’s fantastic. That has happened a few times, not a lot.” If some brave theatre decides to stage Harvey, does he think he could reach those blissful heights again? “Hopefully,” he says, showing me out.