The controversy over Sam Burgess’s selection in England’s World Cup squad is still raging three years on. The former Bath player, who returned to rugby league a few weeks after the host country were knocked out of the tournament at the group stage, sparked a Twitter tirade when he claimed “egos and selfish” teammates caused the failure rather than his presence. Burgess, who now plays for South Sydney Rabbitohs, became involved when someone posted in response to a message that England would rue missing out on Andy Farrell, who will take over as Ireland’s head coach at the end of next year. Farrell was a member of England’s 2015 management team who were subsequently sacked. The user said England would be better off without him as he had been involved in Burgess’s selection. “I seem to be getting a few tweets regarding the Rugby WC in 2015 … still,” responded Burgess. “If people actually re-watched the games I participated in, you will see I added to the team. What cost us an early exit was individual egos and selfish players not following our leader, which essentially cost the coach [Stuart Lancaster] and other great men their jobs. “Tournaments are not won by the coaching staff or one player. It takes a commitment from the full group. I guarantee you this: I was committed but others had their own agendas. I have fond memories of my time in rugby union and some great friends. One day I will tell my side of the story but, for now, I love watching England and cannot wait to see them as they prepare for the 2019 World Cup in Japan.” Exeter’s Jack Nowell has been ruled out of action for nine weeks after suffering a hamstring injury training with England last week. He is scheduled to return just before the start of the Six Nations. It is the third time Nowell has been injured in an England training session. He suffered a torn thigh muscle during the 2016 camp at Brighton and was out for two months, and he suffered ankle damage during last year’s Six Nations that took a month to clear up.