Among the lard biscuits, superbly bouncy disco-light jellies and oddly set almond milk cubes of the final yum cha trolley of the day, these “daan tarts” have always been far and away the best pick. And, like they say, you’ll always remember your first. Mine was at Hong Kong’s original Tai Cheong Bakery, way before it was a chain. I tasked resident cake whisperer Kate with recreating these platonic archetypes from my memory. She insisted that to be true (and as light as the originals) they should be made with two different pastries. You could, I suppose, speed up the process dramatically by just using store-bought frozen sweet shortcrust pastry, but then that would be the sort of labour-saving shortcut a chain might be tempted to do. So don’t. makes 12 80ml boiling water 80g caster sugar 125ml milk 2 eggs1 egg yolk1⁄2 tsp vanilla extract 1⁄2 tsp white vinegar Water dough 150g plain flour, plus extra for dusting1 tbsp caster sugar 2 egg yolks1 tsp lemon juice Butter dough150g plain flour, sifted 180g chilled butter, chopped To make the water dough, blitz the flour and sugar in a food processor until combined. Add the egg yolks, lemon juice and 2 1⁄2 tablespoons water and blitz until the dough just comes together. Turn out onto a lightly floured surface and knead into a smooth ball. Wrap in plastic wrap and place in the fridge to rest for about 30 minutes. Now make your butter dough. Blitz the flour and butter in your food processor until a smooth ball forms. Wrap in plastic wrap and rest in the fridge for about 20 minutes. While your doughs are resting, place the boiling water and sugar in a bowl and stir until the sugar has dissolved. Set aside to cool. On a well-floured surface, roll out the water dough to a 30cm × 20cm rectangle. Quickly roll out the butter dough to roughly the same size. Place the butter dough on top of the water dough then, with a short side nearest to you, fold the dough into thirds, like a letter. Remember them? Give the dough a quarter turn clockwise and roll out gently to roughly the same size as the original rectangle. Repeat the folding and rolling two more times, flouring the work surface as you go. If the dough feels too soft at any stage, wrap it up and return to the fridge for 20 minutes. When you have finished rolling and folding, wrap the dough in plastic wrap and rest in the fridge. When the sugar and water mixture has cooled, add the remaining ingredients, whisk until well combined, then strain twice through a fine sieve. Preheat the oven to 190C/170C fan-forced. Lightly grease and flour 12 holes of a 45ml capacity (mini) tart tin. Roll out the pastry on a floured surface until about 3mm thick. Using a 9cm round cutter, cut out 12 rounds – they should be about 1cm larger than the holes in the tin. Gently press the rounds into each hole, then pour over the custard until the pastry shells are almost full. Bake for 35 minutes (for a smoother finish, leave the oven door slightly ajar for the last 10 minutes of cooking). Give the tin a little jiggle to test that the custard is set before you remove the tarts from the oven. Serve warm. This is an edited extract from Yummy, Easy, Quick: Around the World by Matt Preston (Plum, $39.99)