The scientist and television presenter Alice Roberts is to be the next president of Humanists UK, championing campaigns against state funding of faith schools and in favour of removing bishops from the House of Lords and the legalisation of assisted dying. Roberts, the author of nine popular science books and the host of TV programmes such as The Incredible Human Journey and Digging for Britain, will take on the figurehead role on 1 January 2019. From September next year, she will also be the president of the British Science Association. She said she was honoured to be at the helm of “a community of like-minded, thoughtful and compassionate people”, and described humanism as “the most rational and positive philosophy for life”. Roberts added: “As an anthropologist, I believe strongly in our common humanity. We can rise above the tribal divisions that have caused so much anguish and real damage in the past. “The real hallmarks of humanity are: curiosity and an amazing ability to cooperate. If we can use science widely and work together, I believe we can overcome the huge challenges facing us this century.” Humanists UK has more than 70,000 members and supporters. As well as running campaigns, its celebrants conduct non-religious weddings, funerals and baby-naming ceremonies, and the organisation trains humanist chaplains for hospitals, prisons and the armed forces. Roberts, who has been a patron of Humanists UK for seven years, helped lead a successful campaign for evolution to be taught in all state schools. She has expressed concern that some schools still teach creationism alongside evolution as an “alternative” worldview. Andrew Copson, Humanists UK’s chief executive, said: “Alice’s field of study is the long story of humanity itself, and her commitment to communicating the facts about that story in her broadcasting and writing has ignited the curiosity of people of all ages and from all backgrounds. “At a time when our work in bringing non-religious people together is more important than ever, we are delighted to welcome such a clear communicator with such insight and depth.” Roberts will serve a three-year term, taking over from Shappi Khorsandi. She is the fifth female president of the organisation.