Nicolas Roeg, who has died aged 90, could, during the 1970s, lay claim to be Britain’s leading director. His output was variable but, taken overall, constituted a forceful, provocative and original body of work. From his early years as a clapper boy, Roeg had progressed to world-class cinematographer before, by the late 60s, he was ready to direct, although it is unlikely that even the most prescient observer would have anticipated the dazzling quintet of movies that followed. The first, Performance, on which Roeg was cameraman and co-director with the painter Donald Cammell, and which starred James Fox and Mick Jagger, so shocked its backers, Warner Bros, that they held it up for two years, re-edited it then half-heartedly released it in 1970 to inevitably mixed reviews. Its vivid depiction of gangsters, the London drug scene and sexual ambivalence was heady for the period; and it went from failure to cult classic without ever enjoying success. Roeg also photographed his haunting solo directorial debut, Walkabout (1971), an altogether more accessible work with a fine screenplay by Edward Bond. It tells of a young girl (Jenny Agutter) marooned with her brother (played by the director’s son Luc) in the Australian outback after their father attempts to kill them and then shoots himself. They encounter a handsome Indigenous Australian boy and the movie becomes a journey of spiritual and sexual awakening. Concerns with loss, fear and problems of communication were found in his third, most admired, film, Don’t Look Now (1973). Adapted by Allan Scott, a regular Roeg collaborator, from a Daphne du Maurier story, and starring Donald Sutherland and Julie Christie, it blended a horror story with a compelling portrait of a couple’s trauma following the accidental drowning of their daughter. Its success allowed Roeg to move on to the ambitious The Man Who Fell to Earth (1976). Starring David Bowie as an alien with phenomenal powers who arrives on earth, this attracted a divided response. Considerably greater vitriol still was thrown at Roeg’s dark and disturbing follow-up, Bad Timing (1980). This starred Theresa Russell and the singer Art Garfunkel as two Americans in an obsessive relationship. The woman’s lingering suicide attempt, watched by the psychoanalyst lover, proved a step too far for many viewers. Roeg was born in London. His father, Jack, came from an aristocratic Dutch background; he had been severely injured during the first world war and worked very little as a result. His mother, Gertrude (nee Silk), took a job in bookshop to help financially. After prep school in Brighton, Nicolas went to the Mercers’ school in the City of London before undertaking national service. His older sister, Nicolette, had already become an actor when he joined the industry in a documentary unit and began an apprenticeship. There were no film schools at that time. In the 50s he moved to MGM’s base at Elstree studios, Hertfordshire, for two years and worked as a camera operator and eventually assistant to leading cameramen such as Jack Hildyard and Ted Moore. He worked on numerous films, from The Trials of Oscar Wilde (1960) to Jazz Boat (1960) and on Tarzan’s Greatest Adventure (1959), with a young Sean Connery. A major breakthrough came with responsibility for second unit camera under Freddie Young, filming David Lean’s Lawrence of Arabia (1962). Roeg’s work on this led to important credits including Clive Donner’s claustrophobic black and white version of The Caretaker (1963), followed in garish contrast by Roger Corman’s The Masque of the Red Death (1964) and Donner’s acerbic comedy of manners, Nothing But the Best (1964). There were duds along the way, including a Michael Winner movie and a silly musical, until he was offered Lean’s Doctor Zhivago (1965), but the director soon realised that Roeg found his laborious working methods intolerable and Young took over – winning an Oscar for his pains. Roeg fared better on Francois Truffaut’s Fahrenheit 451 (1966) and on John Schlesinger’s Far From the Madding Crowd (1967), which showed that he could work well in the classical style with a less authoritarian director. He rounded off this period of his career with two films for the freewheeling Richard Lester, notably Petulia (1968). After his run of brilliant films in the 70s, the British antipathy to experimentation, and films lacking conventional narrative-based realism, resulted in the comparative neglect of Roeg. He had no liking for self-publicity, which resulted in some projects falling to other directors. As he remarked, he “refused to join the club”. Eureka (1983) languished before going to television without a wide release. Gene Hackman starred as a millionaire who becomes the victim of powerful business and is murdered. The decidedly more amusing Insignificance (1985), from Terry Johnson’s play, depicts a slice of Americana via the convergence of several iconic figures in an anonymous hotel. Russell (by now Roeg’s second wife) starred as Marilyn Monroe, who encounters Albert Einstein and engagingly explains the theory of relativity to the great man, with a forlorn Joe DiMaggio and a noxious Joe McCarthy hovering in the background. In Castaway (1986), a slob – Oliver Reed – advertises for a companion – Amanda Donohoe – and spends a year on a desert island with her in an uneasy version of a conventional relationship. Marriage was treated even less kindly in Track 29 (1988), which Roeg directed from a Dennis Potter screenplay. The first of his American television movies was Tennessee Williams’s Sweet Bird of Youth (1989), starring Elizabeth Taylor. The BBC was behind his last commercially successful venture, The Witches (1990), a fantasy adapted by Scott from Roald Dahl’s novel. Many subsequent films had minimal release or went straight to video. These included Cold Heaven (1991) and the TV movie of Heart of Darkness (1993), an intelligent attempt at Joseph Conrad’s novel. The subsequent Two Deaths (1995) surfaced only on late night TV. His last feature, Puffball (2007), dealt with aspects of the supernatural. The restoration of Performance, re-releases of Don’t Look Now and The Man Who Fell to Earth, and David Thompson’s 2015 documentary about the director, It’s About Time, for the BBC’s Arena series – in which he seemed happier reading poetry than discussing his work – reminded admirers of a distinguished career. Roeg is survived by his third wife, the actor Harriet Harper, whom he married in 2005; by the four sons, Luc, Waldo, Sholto and Nico, of his first marriage, to the actor Susan Stephen, which ended in divorce; and by the two sons, Max and Statten, of his second marriage, to Russell, which ended in divorce. • Nicolas Jack Roeg, director and cinematographer, born 15 August 1928; died 23 November 2018