I shy away from writing about game, because I am conscious that not everyone has access to it, but I am a huge fan. The animals have had happy, antibiotic-free lives, the flavours are rich and deep, and the meat is lean and healthy. Enter Farmison, a brilliant, keenly priced online butcher and winner of Observer Food Monthly’s best retailer award. Here I have used Farmison’s venison mince to make a delectable, quick Thai stir-fry. If we all eat less meat, but of higher quality, we can make the world a better place. Spicy, savoury and with deep, meaty flavours, this is an insanely good midweek supper dish. Adjust the spice levels if feeding children. Mine love this one. Prep 15 minCook 15 minServes 4 3-4 bird’s eye chillies, or to taste4 garlic clovesA big splash of dark soy sauce (optional)2 tbsp light soy sauce1 tbsp fish sauce2 tsp oyster sauce2 tsp white sugar 300ml rapeseed oil, plus 4 tbsp for stir- frying4 shallots or 1 small onion, finely sliced350g venison mince 160g green beans, topped and chopped into bite-size pieces2 large handfuls of Thai holy basil or regular basil leaves4 eggsSteamed jasmine rice, to serve Put the chilli and garlic in a mortar and pound with the pestle to a rough paste. Combine all the sauces and sugar in a small bowl. Heat four tablespoons of oil in a wok over a medium heat and, once hot, fry the paste and shallots for a few minutes, until golden. Add the venison, followed by the sauces. Stir-fry for a few minutes, until the meat is cooked. Add the beans, cook for another two minutes, then fold in the basil and immediately take off the heat. Transfer the mince to a warm bowl. For the eggs, wipe the wok with a damp, clean dishcloth and warm the 300ml oil in it over a high heat until shimmering hot. Crack the egg into the middle and cook for one to two minutes, until the edges crisp up, then start spooning the hot oil over the yolk until it is cooked to your liking. Take out of the wok with a spatula, drain on kitchen paper, then repeat with the other eggs. Cool the oil for re-use. Serve the mince at once on top of bowls of steamed rice, topped with an egg, with any hot sauces and soy sauce you might like on the table. This Thai-spiced mince is so delicious that I sometimes make a big batch, minus the beans, and freeze it in small bags for easy fast dinners. Try also making burgers or lasagne with the venison mince – it is so nutritious, we should all cook with it more.