Alex Rodriguez is famous. Very famous. You’d probably know that Alex Rodriguez is famous without knowing who he is. He’s one of those people who, in that abstract way, just looks famous. He is probably still one of the most famous sportsmen in America, and certainly one of – if not the most – famous baseball players. Which is a problem considering he retired in 2016. Rodriguez was – still is – a cross-cultural celebrity in a way that most of the current crop of Major League Baseball players are not. Being one of the best players the game has ever seen helped, as did a history with performance-enhancing drugs, a very public private life and a feisty on-field persona. But if you asked an average American who did not regularly follow the sport to name a baseball player, there is a good chance they would say Rodriguez, rather than anyone still playing. It is not a particular surprise then, that “A-Rod” is the man MLB chose to publicise next summer’s games in the UK, when the New York Yankees (his old team) and their great rivals, and current World Series holders, the Boston Red Sox face each other twice in London. But how difficult is it to sell a new sport to a country with little cultural history with it, without many “stars” to help? “We have to lead with our best players and start telling stories,” says Rodriguez, sitting in a room overlooking the London Stadium, which will host the two games. “Aaron Judge is the one who jumps out of the screen because he’s like a Game of Thrones character. “This guy is 280 pounds, he’s 6ft 7, he’s under 10% body fat and he has an over 30-inch vertical jump. He will make baseballs look like golf balls. He’s this beautiful man, who’s big and strong and smart. If you can’t sell him, you can’t sell anyone.” Judge, the Yankees outfielder who was MLB’s rookie of the year in 2017, is perhaps the best candidate to be the next “face of baseball”, but there are not many others. Mike Trout, the LA Angels outfielder, regarded by some as not just the best current player but among the greatest of all time, could probably walk down Broadway and not turn many heads. Likewise Bryce Harper, who this winter could sign a contract worth $400m with whoever has that sort of cash lying around, and Mookie Betts, the Red Sox’s leader and reigning American League MVP. It could be they just do not want to be famous. Perhaps it is detrimental to their game. Rodriguez pauses for a moment when asked if it would have benefited his game had he been less famous. “I wish a lot of things were different that would have made me a better player,” he says, carefully. “If I was advising a young Aaron Judge or a young Alex Rodriguez, I would certainly say that less is more. It would have probably made me better and also my team better as well.” But maybe individuals are not needed for baseball to take hold in the UK – maybe the spectacle itself is enough, starting with the fiercest and longest-running rivalry in the sport. “These are two titans,” says Rodriguez. “It’s goliath versus goliath. Any time the Red Sox win – and they’ve won a lot of late – it makes it even more interesting. The Yankees want to be the biggest and the baddest. They have been for over a century, with 27 championships, so they’re really inspired and motivated to take the throne back. “When you think about history in sports in America, part of that is Yankees v Red Sox. It’s been almost 120 years of a rivalry. My first game ever at was as an 18-year-old at Fenway Park, and I’ve been going back for over 25 years – I’ve never been to a game that hasn’t been sold out. It’s hard to describe the electricity. We’re leading with our best, and we’re coming here with the best America has to offer.” What then for baseball in the UK? The Red Sox and the Yankees is easy enough to sell, but they cannot come back every year. Cleveland against Kansas City might tax the marketing department a little more. Still, Rodriguez seems pretty confident that Britain doesn’t need celebrity like his to sell the game. “Baseball is made for Brits. You guys love history. I think you guys are going to fall in love with it.” The Boston Red Sox will play the New York Yankees at the London Stadium on 29-30 June. Register for tickets at mlb.com/londonseries