Five people have died after three shootings across America on Monday night. A gunman killed three people at Mercy hospital in Chicago; one person died and four were injured at a shooting near Coors Field in Colorado; and a woman was shot dead at a religious supply store near St Louis. “You can’t go to the hospital, you can’t go to school, you can’t go to church, you can’t go to the grocery store,” one woman caught up in the Mercy hospital shooting told CBS News. “You can’t go anywhere … You never know when you walk into a place if you’re going to come out alive.” She’s right. Monday’s violence means that 316 people have now died in mass shootings in America this year, according to data from the Gun Violence Archive. That’s almost one mass shooting a day. There are no safe spaces in America when it comes to gun violence; the NRA is turning the entire country into a no-go zone. That’s not hyperbole – here’s a list of just some of the places in the country where major shooting incidents have taken place in recent years. A 28-year-old former marine killed 12 people at a bar in Thousand Oaks, California, earlier this month. A gunman went on a 10-minute shooting rampage as Republican politicians were at baseball practice in a Virginia park last year. Nobody died, but Steve Scalise, House majority whip, was injured. He later said that getting shot made his gun rights support “as ardent as ever”. Twenty-five people, as well as an unborn baby, were killed at a shooting at Baptist church in Sutherland Springs, Texas, last November. The shooter was a 26-year-old white man with a history of domestic violence. Twelve people were killed and more than 50 injured at a Colorado movie theater in 2012. The 24-year-old gunman fired into the crowd at a midnight screening of a Batman movie. Fifty-eight people were killed and more than 800 injured when a 64-year-old man went on a shooting spree in Las Vegas in January. The shooter fired more than 1,100 bullets from the window of his hotel into a crowd of more than 22,000 people attending a country music festival. Three people died in a shooting at a video gamers’ tournament in Florida in August. The 24-year-old white male shooter, who killed himself, was reportedly angry he had lost in an earlier round of the tournament. A white man shot dead two black customers at a Kentucky Kroger supermarket in October, in what appeared to be a racially motivated attack. A shootout also took place at a Trader Joe’s in Los Angeles this July. One person was killed by an officer’s bullet. One person died and two were injured after a teenage boy open fire at a football game at a high school in Jacksonville, Florida, in August. Three people were shot at a hospital in Chicago on Monday night. The attacker first targeted an emergency room doctor he had been having a relationship with and then continued to shoot people. Two people were killed and four were wounded after a shooting at a library in Clovis, New Mexico, last August. The shooter was reported to be a white teenage boy. Five people died after a targeted attack at the Capital Gazette in Annapolis, Maryland, in June. Forty-nine people were killed and 53 people were injured at Pulse, a gay nightclub in Orlando, in 2016. At least 47 people have been killed and 88 injured in shootings in school property in 2018 alone. Seventeen people died at the Parkland, Florida, shooting in February. Eleven people were killed and six wounded at the Tree of Life synagogue in Pittsburgh in October. The gunman, a 46-year-old white man, had a long history of posting antisemitic comments on social media. In November a 40-year-old white man who appeared to have a history of racism and misogyny shot and killed two women at a yoga studio in Florida.