The 17-year-old Formula 3 driver Sophia Floersch was lucky to survive her dramatic high speed crash at the Macau Grand Prix according to the owner of her racing team. Floersch fractured her spine after losing control of her car at an estimated 170mph, hitting the back of another car and launching into a photographers’ pit at the side of the track. Frits van Amersfoort, the owner of her team – Van Amersfoort Racing – said she must have had an “angel on her shoulder”. “It was nearly a rocket. Surviving was incredible,” Van Amersfoort told BBC Radio 5 Live. “We reckon she was travelling at 276km/h [171.6mph] at the time.” The Japanese driver Sho Tsuboi, who Floersch crashed into, was taken to hospital with back pain. Photographer Minami Hiroyuki was also admitted with concussion while a marshal, Chan Cha In, had a fractured facial bone and lacerations. Another photographer, Chan Weng Wang, had a liver laceration. “I don’t think I’ve ever seen anything like this. I haven’t seen all accidents in motorsport but this was surely one of the worst I’ve ever seen,” said Van Amersfoort. “We were lucky that she was flying because she went over a barrier. If she had hit the barrier it would have gone a lot worse.” Floersch is still in hospital and said the surgical procedures had progressed without complications. “Current interim information: The medical team is deliberately working slowly to avoid risks,” she tweeted. “The previous surgical course is good and without complications. The surgery that began this morning continues.” The president of the FIA, Jean Todt, said the crash will be investigated. The British motorcyclist Daniel Hegarty died at the circuit a year ago and was the eighth rider to lose his life on the Macau track since 1973. “The FIA is mobilised to help those involved and analyse what happened,” Todt posted on Twitter. “We will monitor the situation and make the necessary conclusions.” The race in China was immediately red-flagged before restarting an hour later and was won for the second year running by Red Bull Junior driver Dan Ticktum.