This isn’t why I did it, honest, but an unexpected benefit of this column becoming more sustainable through wearing and talking about the clothes we already have, as well as pieces you can buy, is that I get to make out like I was on to all the new “lewks” before anyone else was. For example: the boat neck. You probably think it was Meghan Markle’s Givenchy wedding dress with its wide-slashed, high-rise neckline that rebooted this style, don’t you? Well, sorry, Meg, but I bought this navy velvet top two years ago, from Finery. (It was £45. Finery is such a bargain.) True, I may not have worn it in front of a television audience of 18 million but I did wear it to see Rogue One: A Star Wars Story at the Vue at the Angel Islington, and to Byron afterwards. (Hey, it was 2016.) OK, maybe this isn’t about me. But the point is, it’s a classic. Audrey Hepburn wore a white lace belted Givenchy boat-neck dress to the 1954 Oscars, where she won best actress for Roman Holiday; she wore a black version – also Givenchy, that one with the chic little bow at each shoulder – in Sabrina. Brigitte Bardot and Pablo Picasso both nailed lounging around the south of France looking mesmerisingly sultry and Gallic in the classic Breton variant, which has a similar wide-cut neck. In fact, what is surprising about this neckline is that it isn’t a go-to more often. It is easy to wear because it exposes enough skin to lend a little human warmth to your outfit but in a more straightforward, less loaded manner than a deep v-neck. It can look chic and gamine in a beatnik kind of way with slim, cropped trousers or jeans; this season, it’s also a useful pairing with high-waisted trousers. I find high-waisted trousers a lot more difficult to wear in practice than you think they will be. I love the idea of wearing them with a crisp mannish shirt, but the reality is trickier. In my head I am Katharine Hepburn in The Philadelphia Story. Then I look in the mirror, and I’m one fake moustache shy of Dandy Dan in Bugsy Malone. With a clean, no-fuss neckline, elegance in a high-waisted, wide-legged trouser is more achievable. What’s more, a boat neck is the perfect foil for a huge pair of earrings. This alone is more than reason enough to endear the look to me. But should you need further persuasion, then surely a royal warrant seals the deal. • Jess wears top, Jess’ own. Trousers, £200, by Weekend Max Mara, from matchesfashion.com. Heels, £250, lkbennett.com. Earrings, £10, warehouse.co.uk. Styling: Melanie Wilkinson. Hair and makeup: Samantha Cooper at Carol Hayes Management