Horror is having a moment. Films such as Suspiria, Halloween, A Quiet Place and Hereditary are no longer being dragged out and dusted off at Halloween before being kicked back into the basement for another year. Now, they generate high-profile coverage all year round, often reiterating some version of the idea that they shouldn’t be called horror at all, but should be fenced off in a subgenre dubbed “elevated horror”, “smart horror” or “post-horror”. I don’t like horror, the reasoning goes, but I liked these horror movies … so now I have to call them something else. This is nothing new. The history of horror films is one long tug of war between the classy, critically lauded top of the market, where the monsters are suggested rather than hidden, and the schlockier depths, where the monsters are not only revealed but run up and down the aisles screaming and waving blood-stained axes. While it is always splendid when horror is taken more seriously, it is a shame that less prestigious examples are still routinely dumped on by critics and pickier fans, although this doesn’t appear to have affected the huge profit ratios of this year’s critical punchbags, which include Insidious: The Last Key (“tiresome”), The First Purge (“cheap-looking and spineless”), Truth or Dare (“an execrable mess”), The Nun (“boring, uneventful, downright ludicrous”) and Overlord (“a futile exercise in turd-polishing”). But I got a kick out of these films as much as, if not more so than elevated fare such as Hereditary or A Quiet Place. For a start, each of these non-elevated examples has a healthy awareness of its B-movie status, socks over its high concept, and – best of all – doesn’t waffle on for a bloated 152 minutes, unlike Luca Guadagnino’s Suspiria, which is nearly an hour longer than Dario Argento’s original. Also, I’ll admit it, I found The Nun quite creepy in places. Of course, as a horror director, it gives you an advantage if, like Guadagnino, you are an Oscar nominee and arthouse darling and everyone wants to hear your thoughts on remaking a classic. Or if, like David Gordon Green, you once won best director at the Berlin film festival, so everyone is curious about your take on that other horror classic (the new Halloween), and never mind if neither film cuts the mustard on the scary front. The media also find it helpful when a director lays out his stall in advance, letting critics know his film is a reflection of the socio-political schisms in postwar Germany, and stylistically influenced by the work of Rainer Werner Fassbinder (Suspiria), or is exploring the toxic legacy of mental illness (Hereditary), or is confirming that having her friends massacred by a killer in a William Shatner mask will leave a woman struggling with post-traumatic stress disorder for the rest of her life (Halloween). The critics grasp these aperçus and regurgitate them, not bothering to explore other avenues. Meanwhile, non-elevated horror films that get released without this sort of media brouhaha are wrongly assumed, by default, to be lacking in these things. It is like the early 1990s all over again, when the success of The Silence of the Lambs led to a slew of big studio shockers, and there was a conscious effort on the part of their A-list directors to be “elevated”. Columbia Pictures pumped up the romantic angle of Bram Stoker’s Dracula, directed by Francis Coppola, giving it the tagline: “Love never dies.” Mike Nichols decided he was “transcending the horror genre” when he directed Wolf. Robert De Niro agreed to play the monster in Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein, directed by Kenneth Branagh, “because I knew that Ken was going to make more than just another horror film, that he was going to give it a deeper meaning”. Branagh himself observed of the story that it was “full of psychological insights about family”. And, of course, none of their films was remotely scary. A lot of “elevated horror” is too busy being elevated to bother with the generic nuts and bolts that are second nature to horror specialists such as Wes Craven or, more recently, James Wan (The Conjuring, Insidious) or Mike Flanagan (TV’s The Haunting of Hill House), although I admit that Hereditary did have its freaky moments before it lost the plot and turned into a different, less interesting movie, and A Quiet Place was nicely crafted, although I did wonder why the family didn’t just go and live by the waterfall. But even critically derided horror movies such as The Nun or Overlord tap as much into the subconscious as the intellect. The genre’s appeal to the gut can’t always be spelled out by its creators, who are usually channelling something they themselves don’t fully understand. Like fairy stories or folk tales, the genre draws on a well of primal fears and desires, with the same themes recurring so often in different guises they are often dismissed as cliche, but it is how they are reinterpreted that keeps them fresh. Horror is a broad church, with room for both the subtlest, most cerebral chills and splattery gore-fests full of cliche and “jump scares” – now designated shorthand for everything snobs despise about the genre. But it is the tension between these two extremes of nice and nasty that keeps the genre alive and kicking. Both ends feed the middle, and to paraphrase a meme, if you don’t love me at my jump-scariest, you don’t deserve me at my most metaphysical.