That the Nations League carries greater significance than the friendly matches it replaced hardly requires debate. The sense that this event became wholly relevant for the future and reputation of Alex McLeish was also plain to see. The same arguably applies to his paymasters at the Scottish FA. McLeish can enjoy a last laugh over his many detractors. Scotland’s progression from the group stage at the expense of Albania and Israel may not look momentous, but in context it is wholly important to the manager. The governing body has also been afforded a valuable cash boost courtesy of his men winning group C. This victory over Israel was ultimately merited, if belatedly panic-ridden. In an era where Scotland and international success have become such strangers, that is worthy of celebration. So, too, was James Forrest’s superb hat-trick. “I’m so proud of the guys, we answered a lot of questions,” McLeish said. “Criticism is fine because it makes you want to do better. The goal was to win, we did that. The lads played to a very high level.” Scotland’s canter in Albania on Saturdaynight had offered impetus to a regime which had been thoroughly unconvincing until that point. That 4-0 success clearly was not sufficient to reinvigorate the Scotland support, however. Tens of thousands of empty seats were once again a dismal feature at Hampden. Perhaps the national mood will change now. Scotland’s lame start was oh so curious. In a match where only victory was an acceptable outcome and the starting XI was the same as three days earlier, they opened up as if sleepwalking. The vim and vigour so evident at the weekend – albeit against a dreadful side – had vanished. And Israel capitalised on the tepid approach to claim an early advantage. League A, Group 2: Belgium 2-0 IcelandA4: Croatia 3-2 SpainB3: Austria 0-0 Bosnia-HerzegovinaC2: Hungary 2-0 Estonia, Greece 1-0 FinlandD1: Kazakhstan 1-1 Latvia, Andorra 1-1 GeorgiaD2: Luxembourg 0-2 Belarus, San Marino 0-1 Moldova League A, Group 1: Netherlands 2-0 FranceB1: Slovakia 4-1 UkraineB4: Wales 1-2 DenmarkC3: Cyprus 1-1 Bulgaria, Slovenia 1-1 NorwayD4: Gibraltar 2-6 Armenia, Liechtenstein 0-2 FYR Macedonia League A, Group 3: Italy 0-0 PortugalB2: Turkey 0-1 SwedenC1: Albania 0-4 ScotlandC4: Serbia 2-1 Montenegro, Romania 3-0 LithuaniaD3: Azerbaijan 2-0 Faroe Islands, Malta 0-5 Kosovo League A, Group 2: Switzerland 5-2 BelgiumA4: England 2-1 Croatia B3: Northern Ireland 1-2 Austria C2: Hungary 2-0 Finland, Greece 0-1 EstoniaD2: San Marino 0-2 Belarus, Moldova 1-1 Luxembourg League A, Group 1: Germany 2-2 NetherlandsB1: Czech Republic 1-0 SlovakiaB4: Denmark 0-0 Republic of IrelandC3: Cyprus 0-2 Norway, Bulgaria 1-1 SloveniaD1: Georgia 2-1 Kazakhstan, Andorra 0-0 LatviaD4: FYR Macedonia 4-0 Gibraltar, Liechtenstein 2-2 Armenia League A, Group 3: Portugal 1-1 PolandB2: Sweden 2-0 RussiaC1: Scotland 3-2 IsraelC4: Serbia 4-1 Lithuania, Montenegro 0-1 RomaniaD3: Malta 1-1 Faroe Islands, Kosovo 4-0 Azerbaijan League AFinals: Netherlands, Switzerland, Portugal, EnglandRelegated: Germany, Iceland, Poland, Croatia League BPromoted: Ukraine, Sweden, Bosnia-Herzegovina, DenmarkRelegated: Slovakia, Turkey, N Ireland, Rep of Ireland League CPromoted: Scotland, Finland, Norway, SerbiaRelegated: Estonia, Slovenia, Lithuania, Cyprus League DPromoted: Georgia, Belarus, Kosovo, Macedonia It was bad enough for McLeish that Beram Kayal was given one opportunity to shoot from 25 yards, such was the lack of pressure on the ball from Scotland’s defence or midfield. That the former Celtic midfielder took a touch before curling the ball beyond Allan McGregor was inexplicable from Scotland’s point of view. The finish itself was first class but Kayal was visibly caught between wild celebration and not believing the generosity of his opponents. If Scotland were to claw themselves back into the match – and it took them more than 20 minutes to fashion an opportunity – the identity of the likely protagonist was hardly a mystery. Forrest, fresh from two goals in Albania, seized upon the rebound from a Stuart Armstrong shot to slam the ball home. Better was to come for McLeish. A swift counterattack, in which Ryan Christie performed brilliantly, resulted in Forrest being played in 18 yards from goal. The Celtic winger again made no mistake, thereby completing a quick turnaround which had looked so improbable. The second half’s early minutes highlighted Scotland’s problem. Israel’s defence was considerably more ropy than robust, yet they carried a threat when breaking. Scotland’s challenge boiled down to chasing a third or believing a one-goal lead would suffice. Ryan Fraser was the architect of Scotland’s third goal with a jink into the area from the left flank. The Bournemouth player passed to the man of the moment, who finished low beyond Ariel Harush. It seemed vaguely unfair to Forrest that Robert Snodgrass had claimed a hat-trick for Scotland in Malta just two years ago. The prospect of a nerveless finish was shattered by Eran Zahavi and the Scots’ own incompetence. In a scene similar to Israel’s opener, when closing down looked an alien concept, they allowed Zahavi more time and space than was sensible, this time on the edge of the area, and he lashed a drive into the net, thereby affording Israel unlikely hope. One more chance duly arrived, McGregor saving expertly from Tomer Hemed. “We were written off and came through it,” McLeish added. It was an entirely fair point.