Hundreds of civil servants working in Whitehall have made complaints about suffering sexual harassment or bullying at the hands of colleagues – but only a fraction of staff have faced disciplinary action. A Guardian investigation using freedom of information laws reveals that government departments and other publicly funded bodies have received at least 551 complaints from staff who say they have been victims of sexual harassment or bullying over the past three years. That figure includes 95 staff who have complained about being sexually harassed. Yet in scores of cases staff have apparently not faced disciplinary investigations as a result of the complaints, with dozens more of those accused of misconduct escaping any kind of punishment. The true number of staff raising harassment and bullying grievances is likely to be even higher as only 21 government departments and taxpayer-funded bodies provided data, with many claiming they were unable to supply information. It is not clear exactly how many civil servants faced disciplinary investigations as a result of allegations, as in many cases departments have failed to say or specified only – citing the risk of identifying individuals – that “fewer than five” or “10 or fewer” did in any one year. However, in many examples there is evidence that the number of staff investigated over complaints is startlingly low. For example, from 2016-18 at HMRC, when there were 294 bullying complaints, 10 or fewer men and 10 or fewer women were subjected to disciplinary investigations in any one year. In 2016, when 13 male and less than 10 female CPS staff made bullying complaints, not a single member of staff faced a disciplinary investigation. There have been growing concerns over bullying and sexual harassment in the workplace since the #MeToo campaign. A damning independent report by Dame Laura Cox published last month laid bare a culture of bullying and harassment in the House of Commons, concluding there was a tradition of “deference and silence” that “actively sought to cover up abusive conduct”. Meanwhile, a civil service review into bullying, harassment and misconduct published in September called for action, citing a 2017 survey that highlighted that 11% of civil servants said they had experienced either bullying or harassment in the previous year. An investigation by the Guardian can reveal that: HMRC has received 362 complaints from staff who say they have been sexually harassed and bullied since 2016 – but only a fraction of staff faced disciplinary investigations as a result. At least 68 female staff made sexual harassment complaints and as many as 294 HMRC staff made complaints about being bullied by other employees. The Treasury received at least 21 complaints from staff who said they had been bullied in the last three years, yet just a small number of staff have been investigated formally. In 2017-18, 20 bullying complaints were received, yet not a single formal investigation was carried out. At least two sexual harassment allegations were made by employees, both of which were investigated. The Crown Prosecution Service has been hit with 48 complaints from staff who say they have been bullied but only a small number of disciplinary investigations of employees have been carried out. On Monday, a senior politician and civil service unions expressed concern over the figures and called for further action. The Conservative MP Maria Miller, who chairs thewomen and equalities select committee, told the Guardian: “It’s completely unacceptable that the civil service, which should be the gold standard in training and management, is yet to tackle this issue. It’s not a new issue, it’s something that’s been in the public eye in recent years and still not been adequately tackled and they need to get their act together.” Asked about the fact that so few staff have faced disciplinary action in response to the bullying and sexual harassment complaints, the MP said: “It says that the civil service uses cover-up as a way of managing this problem and that’s not acceptable. It’s appalling.” Mark Serwotka, the general secretary of the Public and Commercial Services Union, the country’s largest civil service trade union, said: ‘The amount of bullying and harassment complaints made by civil servants is staggering. It’s particularly concerning that only a small number have resulted in disciplinary action being taken. Amy Leversidge, the assistant general secretary of FDA, which represents senior civil servants, said bullying and harassment also affected her members. “I don’t think it’s as clear-cut as saying it’s always on hierarchical grounds that bullying happens,” she said. “It’s a very complex picture.” The Labour MP Stella Creasy added: “These figures raise many questions about how allegations of bullying and harassment are being handled by the civil service, and what the process for investigation of these complaints are – with staff across a range of sectors saying they don’t have confidence in internal disciplinary mechanisms to deal with the abuse of power involved in bullying and harassment allegations, the case is growing for all employees to have access to an independent process so that no one fears losing their job for speaking up.” The Foreign Office recorded at least eight complaints from staff who said they had suffered bullying by their colleagues. At least two of the department’s UK-based staff made complaints about being sexually harassed. The department refused to say exactly how many staff faced disciplinary investigations, but said it was “fewer than five” in any one year. Employees at the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government made at least seven complaints about being bullied by other members of staff. No information was provided about disciplinary action. The schools watchdog, Ofsted, has received 13 bullying complaints since 2015 with no disciplinary action taken against staff in any of the cases. It received one complaint by a female member of staff who said she was sexually harassed in 2018 and an investigation is ongoing. A government spokeswoman said: “Bullying and harassment has no place in any workplace, including the civil service. “The most recent survey of staff shows incidents of this nature remain rare, but all allegations are taken extremely seriously, investigated promptly where appropriate and always dealt with in the strictest confidence. “The government published a comprehensive review into tackling bullying and harassment in September and we have further strengthened the routes for staff to report bullying and harassment to ensure investigations are transparent and staff are fully supported. We are listening to staff and taking action.” A CPS spokesman said: “In some instances, allegations of bullying will be resolved informally through mediation, an apology or training without the need for a formal disciplinary process. This approach represents good employment practice and is overseen by highly trained mediators.” An Ofsted spokesperson said: “All complaints are recorded and formally investigated by an experienced and independent manager, supported by a HR professional. The decision to take disciplinary action will depend on the findings from our investigation of each individual case.”