For the first time since 2009, the Australian women’s cricket team’s cabinet is empty. No World Cup. No World T20 trophy. Just the recognition of being the top-ranked team in the world in both formats. But preparations leading up to the start of this week’s World T20 tournament have run smoothly and Matthew Mott’s side now feel they unfinished business to attend to in the Caribbean. 2009 was a horror year for the Southern Stars. As part of that team, I’m well placed to judge. We finished fourth at the World Cup – Australia’s worst ever performance – and to rub more salt into our wounds it was on home soil, in front of family and friends. And then, fewer than six months later, we lost to England in the semi-final of the inaugural World T20 after posting a competitive total of 163. Personally, it remains the one year of my entire cricket career I wish I could erase. Fast forward nine years and Australia find themselves in a similar position; they lost the last World T20 final – to the West Indies two years ago – and failed to make the final at last year’s World Cup in England, where they were beaten handsomely by one player, India’s Harmanpreet Kaur, who smashed an unbeaten 171 runs in the semi-final to send them packing. The encouraging news for the current crop of players, led by Meg Lanning, is that history may be repeating itself. After the nightmares of 2009, the same core group of players were able to turn it around less than a year later by heading to the sun and beaches of the Caribbean. There, they demonstrated the fight and hunger that has been synonymous with the side, who are the most successful women’s team in world cricket, having won three out of five WT20s and six out of 11 World Cups. The current squad will be hoping to emulate the team that made the same journey to other side of the world eight years ago. Four players understand what it takes – Alyssa Healy, Elyse Villani, Rachael Haynes and Ellyse Perry are survivors from that trip and have fond memories of the West Indies. Despite the lack of silverware, the Australians will still go into the tournament starting on 9 November as favourites. The official International Cricket Council rankings have them at No 1 on 280 points, three ahead of New Zealand and four points ahead of England. Australia dominated 2018, dropping just one T20 match out of 11. They are a balanced side and can call upon any bowling style to get the job done, while their top order batting is the most explosive of any of their rivals. Yet for all the contributions throughout such a talented XI, this team’s winning formula has been born out of the positioning of their two leaders in the batting order. Haynes, who captained the side during Lanning’s absence for last summer’s Women’s Ashes, demonstrated that she was a player for all three formats. By having their two leaders, the players with the coolest temperaments, in the middle order to finish or guide Australia to a competitive total, the top order – consisting of Australia’s hardest hitters – has been allowed to play to their own strengths – going hard. Since Lanning dropped down from opening the batting to four or five and Haynes was included in the T20 side, there has been more freedom at the top of the order. Healy’s form of late typifies that. No longer do the Australians rely on one or two players. Every member of the squad knows their role and have the freedom to execute what they have been selected for. And with the strength of their batting, we are now seeing the opposition play the team rather than the conditions. However this dynamic group of players will have to adapt to the conditions they will face in Guyana. The Caribbean pitches are not expected to produce a lot of bounce and they will turn for spinners. With New Zealand, India, Pakistan and Ireland in their pool – and with three out of those four teams used to such conditions – Australia might have to dig deep to swing things their way. Indeed, the team that fields out of their skins could well have the best chance of qualifying for the semi-finals. But everything is aligning nicely for the Australians, at the right time too. History is on their side, they are heading to a place where they have enjoyed success before and most importantly, they might have cracked the formula for World Cup success. The trophy cabinet may not stay empty for much longer.