Rat-a-tat-tat! There’s someone at your door … but not someone you’re expecting. Rather, it’s a young Italian man and he’s asking a rather bizarre question: would you like to swap doormats with him? What would you do next? Invite him in for a cup of tea to hear more about his proposal? Or shoo him away and alert Neighbourhood Watch that there’s a weirdo in the area? It’s something Alex Urso has been finding out as part of a month-long artist’s residency in London. Intrigued by the UK’s current political climate, he wanted to know just how open-hearted the capital was and came up with The Welcome Project. He would go door-knocking around the city, armed with fresh new doormats, to see if residents would be happy to exchange their mats as a token of friendship. If the encounter went well, he would leave with somebody’s old doormat, which he could use as material for an artwork. “The plan is to make a mosaic out of all the doormats, one that represents Londoner’s willingness to be open,” says Urso, when I join him for a chilly afternoon’s door-knocking around Hammersmith. I soon get an idea of how time-consuming the project must have been. Not every home has a doormat to swap, and even when they do, most raps on the door are left unanswered. We rouse the odd barking dog, but there’s rarely sign of a person. One elderly lady opens her door, but is hard of hearing and can’t understand what Urso is offering, so we leave apologetically. Another woman comes to the porch, but won’t open it, suspicious of what Urso wants. As he explains his artistic project to her through the glass panels, she tells him that she’s actually on a phone call and hasn’t got time for it today. Still, Urso has had worse encounters. In Islington, a man started yelling at him – “Politics is crap! Europe is crap! England is crap!” – until he beat a retreat. “I wanted to speak with him about these feelings, but there was no way to calm him down,” Urso explains. Finally, we knock on a door that opens. It has a zig-zagged doormat outside that has particularly taken Urso’s fancy and the woman is willing to listen to his story. After hearing him out she says she would be happy to swap mats, but needs to speak to her husband first, as it was a present from his mother. Unfortunately, he’s away, and once again Urso leaves empty-handed, more than a little dejected. I start to wonder if anyone in London will give us a doormat today. But several knocks later we strike gold. Caroline is from France and, despite retaining an air of bemusement, is more than happy to chat to us about what it means to be welcoming in modern Britain: “I feel that everyone in this street is pretty open,” she says. The only thing she can’t understand is why anyone would want to swap a fresh new doormat (classic brown with “Welcome” written in black) for her well-trodden one. “Most people are suspicious at first. They think you must be selling something,” Urso tells me over coffee and a croissant in a cafe after our adventure. “But they are normally willing to speak to me, to tell me their stories. There’s only a small minority of people who are closed.” Of course, he’s aware that being willing to swap doormats is no concrete gauge of a welcoming attitude. But he says he didn’t measure openness solely by the doormat exchange, but rather in terms of dialogue. Only if an encounter was deemed to be hostile would he go as far as including this in his mosaic, with an upturned doormat to represent unwelcomeness in ugly black rubber. Alongside the 35 mats Urso has collected when we meet, there are seven black spots – not a bad ratio. Urso talks about the positive stories he’s had during his travels – like John from Barnet who was so concerned about the cold weather that he sent him on his way with a bottle of whisky to keep him warm. While not exactly scientific, Urso has gone to great lengths to absorb each part of London. Armed with a gigantic map, various highlighter pens and a notebook to record each response, he’s been knocking on doors in every direction, from the centre all the way out to the suburbs in zone six. And while not wanting to saddle his project with politics, he made sure to visit London’s leave-voting areas such as Havering and Barking and Dagenham, to see if there was a difference in response there. He says, if anything, the leave voters were more welcoming. “There may have been more disagreement but they were more open to dialogue,” he says. “Whereas in remain areas people could be more suspicious, especially when you encroach on their private property, perhaps because they have more? It explains a lot about the political trends these days.” Urso’s work is often about building bridges: the 31-year-old currently lives in Warsaw, where he is also heavily involved in curatorial projects that connect Polish and Italian artists. But after several weeks of meeting strangers in London, what does he feel he’s learned about them? “That there’s a lot of confusion around the politics,” he says, “but also that nearly everybody wants to be open. They just need a chance.” Indeed, there’s something quite heartwarming about seeing Caroline’s initial scepticism dissolve into a warm chat about embracing strangers. If nothing else, Urso’s project should make us all reappraise how we feel next time we hear an unfamiliar knock on the door.