On Thursday, the V&A staged a “Quant revival” outside the museum to mark the launch of ticket sales for its upcoming retrospective of iconic fashion designer Mary Quant. Models and staff who worked with Quant during the height of her fame in the 60s and 70s, as well as contemporary models, turned out for the event – many wearing Quant originals. Among them was 60s fashion model, photographer and long-time Quant fan Jill Kennington, who chose to wear a striped, woollen Quant dress for the occasion. “It honestly could be today’s fashion,” she said. “I love Mary Quant and I always did. She opened the door to fashion for youth. There was nothing, really, before Mary. It’s great that she’s being honoured by the V&A because she deserves that.” The event also featured a replica version of Quant’s “beauty bus”. The open-topped Routemaster then travelled to the King’s Road, home of Quant’s first store, Bazaar. Go-go dance troupe the Meyer Dancers performed to songs of the 60s wearing black and white Quant-inspired outfits. The exhibition follows the museum’s callout to the public in June, in which the V&A sought to track down rare items of Quant clothing, receiving over 800 responses. The objects and stories since unearthed have informed the “exhibition narrative”, which will focus on the years between 1955 and 1975. Visitors to the exhibition will find more than 120 garments, as well as accessories, cosmetics, sketches and photographs belonging to Quant, most of which have never been displayed before. Quant is synonymous with some of the era-defining styles of the 60s – namely the miniskirt. Emerging alongside second-wave feminism, Quant revelled in rule-breaking fashion design and her higher-than-high hemlines are still very much associated with the sexual revolution and women’s liberation movement. “We really dissect the story of the miniskirt, how it evolved and who was responsible for it taking over fashion,” said co-curator Jenny Lister. “The exhibition also goes through to the 70s, when she diversified into other projects like cosmetics, tights, underwear and even raincoats.” Quant was also known for her colourful tights and tailored trousers, as well as for being someone who personified her distinctive brand. “We want to bring to life the stories of the people who wore the clothes,” says Lister. “It’s not just about fashion being exclusive and expensive, it’s much more achievable – which makes it quite different to fashion exhibitions that we’ve done before.” The exhibition Mary Quant runs from 6 April 2019 – 16 February 2020. Tickets are available from the V&A.