Papua New Guinea’s national parliament is in lockdown after a group of soldiers and police officers attacked the building, smashing vehicles and entryways on Tuesday afternoon. The officers are believed to have attacked the parliament in protest against unpaid allowances from the Apec conference over the weekend. Opposition parliamentarian Allan Bird told Guardian Australia he and other opposition MPs were in a locked conference room when they heard the group. “We heard them coming in, you could hear them smashing things – the glass entry ways, a few vehicles on the way in,” he said. “I understand some of the parliament security guards were assaulted, a few ministers may have also been assaulted. I think the [group] were mostly targeting ministers, but anyone who got in their way was roughed up.” A police spokesman told Guardian Australia he didn’t have any further information beyond some “disgruntled” police officers and soldiers had attacked the building. Bird said he didn’t feel in danger as the opposition were not the target of the “unhappy” soldiers and officers. PNG Armed Forces storm parliament over outstanding allowances @BryanKramerPNG @PM_GOV_PG @dfat @MFATgovtNZ @ForumSEC @IBIupdate @PacIsNewsAssn @StefArmbruster pic.twitter.com/WN81h7g1yO “I know we haven’t done anything wrong as an opposition … but I’d be scared if I was a member of government to be honest,” he said. “I think it’s a lot of long standing issues, but the trigger was the non payment of allowances from Apec. That was the spark that set them off.” Opposition MP Bryan Kramer said police were on site. “Members of the armed forces including CIS and police stormed parliament over grievances over their allowances,” he said on social media. Kramer said he and colleagues were told the police commissioner Gary Baki, the police minister and members of police had met this morning to discuss the allowances issue. After the meeting members of the police force travelled to parliament and stormed the building, he said. “Numerous staff of parliament were assaulted as part of this confrontation.” He said the group was waiting outside the parliament waiting to be addressed by government. Media were escorted into the building on Tuesday afternoon to wait for the prime minister, Peter O’Neill, commissioner Baki, and Apec minister Justin Tkatchenko, who were holding an emergency meeting. Apec wrapped up on the weekend without a joint communique from attending leaders – the first time in the conference’s history – and with extraordinary confrontations between Chinese and PNG officials. In the lead up, PNG nationals held two nationwide strikes in protest at the government’s spending on the conference, including exorbitant infrastructure projects, and the purchase of a fleet of Maseratis and several Bentleys. Tkatchenko claimed the luxury cars were to drive dignitaries around, and that all would be purchased by the “private sector” resulting in no cost to the government.