Boris Johnson called on Theresa May to “junk the backstop” in a barnstorming speech at the Democratic Unionist party conference. The former foreign secretary told the party’s conference in Belfast on Saturday that the backstop, a measure intended to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland, would cleave Northern Ireland from the United Kingdom. “If you read the withdrawal agreement you can see that we are witnessing the birth of a new country called UK(NI), or Ukni,” he said. “Ukni is no longer exclusively ruled by London or Stormont. Ukni is in large part to be ruled by Brussels.” Johnson sought to steel DUP resistance to the deal and to parry Downing Street’s attempt to woo the party’s 10 Westminster MPs, who could determine the fate of the deal in a vote next month. “We need to junk the backstop,” he said, in a speech which heaped praise on his hosts as guardians of British identity. The Brexiter’s visit to Belfast piled additional pressure on May. The prime minister travelled to Brussels for talks with the presidents of the European commission, Jean-Claude Juncker, and the European council, Donald Tusk, before a summit of EU leaders on Sunday. The speech, filled with eclectic references ranging from bendy buses, Star Wars, Van Morrison, Hugo Chavez and the Titanic, plus a repeated call to build a bridge between Scotland and Northern Ireland, earned a standing ovation from hundreds of DUP members. “He’s a very interesting man, though he talks very quickly,” said Sylvia Johnston, 82, a retired farmer. The Brexiter’s visit would stiffen DUP resolve, said Margaret Lang, 74. “The party is fighting hard. The deal is not right.” In the keynote address the DUP leader, Arlene Foster, said the prime minister was “genuine” in not wanting to harm the union but reiterated the DUP’s opposition to the deal. “We could not support proposals that would open the possibility of divergence in either customs or regulatory measures between Great Britain and Northern Ireland.” Her deputy, Nigel Dodds, struck a harder tone in calling the deal “pitiful and pathetic” and said it was not too late for May to stand up to what he termed Brussels bullying. “It is still not too late for the prime minister to change course,” said Dodds, who leads the DUP in Westminster. “It requires strong leadership to stand up to Brussels bullying.” The deal, which the House of Commons is due to vote on next month, would undermine Northern Ireland’s position in the United Kingdom by imposing a border down the Irish Sea and leaving Northern Ireland subject to EU laws, he said. The uncompromising language was a rebuke to the chancellor, Philip Hammond, who tried to sell the deal to DUP leaders in a gathering in Belfast on Friday night. Hammond argued that the backstop, an insurance policy, would not be used and that rejecting the deal would inflict severe economic pain and possibly lead to an election and a Labour government with Jeremy Corbyn as prime minister, according to one source who attended the gathering. Downing Street’s strategy, or hope, seem to rest on the possibility that Hammond’s arguments did make an impression, that maybe the DUP’s public fulminations concealed flexibility and that maybe, should May extract a sop from the EU, the party’s 10 MPs will abstain rather than vote against the deal, giving it a sliver of hope of passing. The DUP is under pressure on several fronts. Most Northern Ireland voters voted to remain in the EU. Farming and business groups back the deal and warn of calamity if there is no deal. The collapse of power-sharing in Stormont, now heading towards 700 days of paralysis, plus a so-called cash-for-ash scandal, have badly dented the DUP’s image and raised doubts about Foster’s future as leader. Foster apologised for the party’s role in the scandal. “As a party we are deeply, deeply sorry for the mistakes we made, and for the things we got wrong during that period.” 