A theatre director who has previously described himself as white was awarded a job designed to increase the representation of black and minority ethnic individuals in British theatre. Anthony Ekundayo Lennon was one of four people who won a paid, two-year, full-time residential traineeship funded with government assistance from Arts Council England. The programme is designed to help theatre practitioners of colour establish themselves in an industry that accepts it has failed to attract a diverse workforce and is dominated by white men. Lennon, an actor with more than 30 years’ experience, was awarded a position with the Talawa theatre company based at the Rich Mix arts centre in Shoreditch, east London. The position was advertised as “open to people of colour” and Lennon applied as a “mixed-heritage” individual, according to the Sunday Times. “This programme aims to increase the representation of theatre-makers of colour at the highest level of British theatre management, influencing whole organisations from the artists to administration, the productions and the audiences,” said a press release accompanying his appointment. “In the long term, more theatre leaders of colour will result in artistic programmes and audiences that better reflect the talent, innovation and diversity of Britain in the 21st century.” Lennon previously discussed his identity on an episode of the BBC series Everyman broadcast in the early 1990s. “Anthony Lennon was born in Kilburn, west London. His parents both come from Ireland and are both indisputably white,” read a synopsis for the show. “Anthony now earns his living as a black actor, because ever since he was a child he has looked black. When his friends, who are mostly black, find out about his background, fierce debates invariably follow; about whether Anthony really can call himself black, and about what black skin means to those who are born black.” The scripted programme featured actors discussing their real life experiences. The then 24-year-old Lennon discussed how his appearance caused him to suffer brutal racist abuse while growing up in 1980s London and he ultimately decided to adopt a new identity and middle name, despite the misgivings of his father. “When my hair was shorter it looked like a little afro and people just assumed you’re half-caste,” he said on the show. “When I was younger I would try to explain. After a while I just got sick of it, the explaining.” “When I’m alone in my bedroom looking in the mirror, thinking about the stuff I’ve written down, my past, relationship-wise, pictures on the wall … I think I’m a black man.” The organisation which distributed the funding told the Sunday Times that the job had been awarded in conjunction with the theatre company: “Talawa were satisfied Anthony was eligible for the opportunity as a result of a relationship with him over a number of years, in which he has identified as a mixed-heritage individual.” Arts Council England added: “Talawa raised their wish to support Anthony with us. In responding we took into account the law in relation to race and ethnicity. This is a very unusual case and we do not think it undermines the support we provide to black and minority ethnic people within the theatre sector.” Lennon could not immediately be contacted for comment.