The simmering confrontation between Moscow and Kiev has sparked a new global crisis after Russia fired on and seized three Ukrainian vessels and their crews in the Kerch strait separating Crimea from the Russian mainland, and the Ukrainian government voted to impose martial law. Six Ukrainians were reported injured, one of them critically, in the clash at the mouth of the Sea of Azov, where Russia has been building up its naval presence and seeking to restrict Ukrainian access since completing a bridge across the strait in May. The Ukrainian government released video footage of one of its ships being rammed by a Russian vessel. The incident sparked an emergency debate at the UN security council, where the Russian and Ukrainian ambassadors accused each other’s governments of seeking to trigger a conflict to deflect from their own domestic unpopularity. The Ukrainian ambassador to the UN, Volodymyr Yelchenko, said the Russian naval authorities had been notified that the three Ukrainian vessels – two cutters and a tugboat – wished to pass through the strait, and had been waiting to hear confirmation on Sunday morning when the vessels were attacked. “All hell broke loose,” Yelchenko said, adding that the Ukrainian tugboat was rammed by a Russian coastguard vessel and the two gunships were blocked from coming to its assistance. “All this time the Russian vessels were trying to provoke Ukrainian seamen to open fire.” He said the Ukrainian cutters were then buzzed by Russian attack helicopters flying at 50 metres and displaying their missiles. The cutters then turned around and headed back into the Black Sea, the ambassador said, and as they were steaming away they were pursued by Russian ships, which opened fire at 8.30pm. Russian special forces then seized the ships. The Russian ambassador, Dmitry Polyanskiy, claimed the Ukrainian ships had entered Russian territorial waters, and portrayed the incident as a long-planned provocation by the Ukrainian president, Petro Poroshenko, and his western backers to distract from Poroshenko’s unpopularity in the run-up to elections scheduled for next March. “[The declaration of martial law] is about cancelling the elections,” he said. Polyanskiy said the Ukrainian ships had “illegally crossed Russia’s border”, and the “responsibility lies with those who gave the illegal order” for the ships to cross the Kerch strait. Since the completion of the bridge over the Kerch strait, Moscow has demanded that Ukrainian ships not only give notice of their intention to transit the strait but request permission, a change that Kiev has rejected. According to western diplomats, the dispatch of the three ships was intended to assert freedom of navigation and also to reinforce a very small Ukrainian naval presence in the Sea of Azov. The US ambassador to the UN, Nikki Haley, said of Russia’s actions: “This is no way for a law-abiding, civilised nation to act. Impeding Ukraine’s lawful transit through the Kerch Strait is a violation under international law. It is an arrogant act that the international community must condemn and will never accept.” Donald Trump, when asked what he thought about the crisis, told reporters: “Not good. Not happy about it all.” He did not apportion blame – he has sought to avoid criticism of the Kremlin throughout his two years in office – but said the US had “let our position be known”. Poroshenko signed a bill to impose martial law for 60 days, allowing troops to be mobilised, air defences to be readied and anti-terrorism measures to be reinforced. Parliament voted late on Monday to approve the measure. The Ukrainian foreign minister, Pavlo Klimkin, said the captured sailors should be treated as prisoners of war. “These were planned acts of aggression,” he said. “We will demand [at the security council] the immediate release of our sailors and the liberation of our ships.” In a statement accusing Ukraine of deliberately provoking the incident to provide a pretext for further anti-Russian sanctions, the foreign ministry in Moscow said Russia would respond harshly to any attempts to undermine its sovereignty and security. “The Russian side acted strictly within both domestic and international law,” said the Kremlin spokesman, Dmitry Peskov, during a daily press briefing, adding that Moscow had opened a criminal case “in connection to the violation of Russia’s borders”. He gave no details on the fate of the Ukrainian sailors held by Moscow. Dozens of far-right activists protested against the Russian activity in front of Poroshenko’s office in Kiev and outside the Russian consulate in the western Ukrainian city of Lviv on Monday. Nato said its ambassadors and Ukraine’s envoy would hold emergency talks in Brussels on Monday at Poroshenko’s request after he had spoken to the Nato secretary general, Jens Stoltenberg. Stoltenberg had expressed Nato’s “full support for Ukraine’s territorial integrity and sovereignty, including its full navigational rights in its territorial waters under international law”, the military alliance said. It called for “restraint and de-escalation” and demanded Russia “ensure unhindered access to Ukrainian ports in the Sea of Azov in accordance with international law”. Russia-Ukraine relations have been severely strained since Russia’s 2014 annexation of the Crimean peninsula and its support for a pro-Moscow insurgency in eastern Ukraine. In May the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, opened the $3.69bn (£2.9bn) bridge over the Kerch strait linking the Russian mainland and the peninsula. In Berlin a spokesman for the German chancellor, Angela Merkel, urged both sides to open a dialogue quickly, saying the incident raised “serious questions, above all regarding the use of military force by Russian forces for which, on the basis of the facts known to us so far, no justification is apparent”. A spokesman for the British prime minister, Theresa May, said the UK condemned Russia’s “act of aggression”, while the foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, tweeted that the incident showed Russian “contempt for international norms and Ukrainian sovereignty”. The EU said it expected Russia to restore freedom of passage via the Kerch strait and urged both sides to “act with the utmost restraint to de-escalate the situation”, while the Danish foreign minister, Anders Samuelsen, said Copenhagen gave its full support to Ukraine. “The development is very disturbing and can escalate,” he said. Observers said the incident could lead to a fresh round of sanctions by the US and Europe against Moscow. “Western governments will side with Ukraine against Russia over the incident … making new sanctions against Russia likely,” the political risk consultancy Eurasia Group said.