Theresa May has attempted to sell her Brexit plan to MPs by reassuring rebel Conservatives over issues such as the Irish backstop, fishing and Gibraltar, but received a chilly reception from both Brexiters and remainers. Heralding the 26-page declaration on the UK’s post-Brexit relationship with the European Union, to be agreed by EU leaders at a summit on Sunday, May told the Commons that a deal was “now within our grasp” and would benefit both sides. However, after Jeremy Corbyn condemned the declaration as “26 pages of waffle”, Tory MPs from both sides of the Brexit divide urged the prime minister to think again. Many pro-Brexit Conservatives pointed to the lack of significant movement on the operation of the planned backstop insurance policy for the Irish border, something Boris Johnson said “makes a complete nonsense of Brexit”. Painting the agreement as a bespoke and carefully negotiated plan, May told MPs it disproved the idea that the only relationships on offer would be Norway or Canada. “The text we have now agreed would create a new free trade area with the EU, with no tariffs, fees, charges or quantitative restrictions. This will be the first such agreement from the EU with any advanced economy in the world – and will be good for jobs,” she said. “Crucially the text we have agreed has an explicit reference to the development of an independent trade policy by the UK beyond this partnership with the EU, so we would have the abilities to sign new trade deals and capitalise on new trade deals with the fastest-growing economies around the world. We will be able to get on with this negotiating deals during the transition period.” May said there was “an explicit commitment to consider facilitative arrangement and technologies to avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland”, and thanked Iain Duncan Smith and Owen Paterson for their input on that, which was jeered by some Tory MPs. Paterson and Duncan Smith saw the prime minister in Downing Street last week. Mindful of the hostile response of many Brexiter MPs on her benches to the plan, May sought to reassure them on a series of other sensitive issues, saying that on fishing there would be no trade-off between fishing rights and other areas. May also reiterated that she had held talks about Gibraltar with Spain, saying: “I was absolutely clear that Gibraltar’s British sovereignty will be protected.” She ended: “The British people want Brexit to be settled. They want a good deal that sets us on course for a brighter future. And they want us to come together as a country and to move on and focus on the big issues at home. The deal that will enable us to do this, is now within our grasp. In these crucial 72 hours, I will do everything in my power to deliver this to the British people.” Corbyn, speaking afterwards, said the declaration was “a testament to the failure of the Tories’ bungled negotiations”. The Labour leader said the plan breached both May’s red lines for the talks, and his party’s stated six tests. Corbyn added: “This half-baked deal is the product of two years of botched negotiations in which the prime minister’s red lines have been torn up, cabinet resignations have racked up, and Chequers has been chucked. “This is a vague menu of options. It is not a plan for the future and is not capable of bringing our country together.” Duncan Smith, a long-time proponent of Brexit, said he still had severe concerns about the backstop. He said: “I would hope that she would now consider that none of this is at all workable unless we get the withdrawal agreement amended and so that any arrangements we make strip out that backstop and leave us with that.” Johnson, the former foreign secretary, said May should “junk forthwith the backstop”. It was, he said, the “hard reality of the withdrawal agreement that gives the EU a continuing veto over the unilateral power of the entire Unite Kingdom to do free trade deals or to take back control of our laws”. There was also opposition from Dominic Raab, who resigned as Brexit secretary last week over May’s agreement. Raab said the backstop plan left the UK “with no voice and an EU veto over our exit”. People’s desire for the UK to regain control from the EU had led many to support Brexit, he said, adding: “Isn’t it it the regrettable but inescapable reality that this deal gives even more [control] away?” May also received opposition from remain-minded MPs on her benches. Justine Greening said: “I don’t believe this is a good deal for Britain, and I don’t think many young people in our country think this is a good deal for Britain at all.” The former education secretary said that if a parliament voted against both May’s plan and a no-deal departure, “then the only right option then is to go back to the people and allow them to have a final say”.