The Nations League groups came to a close this week and it was fantastic to see England continue where they left off against Spain. Now, with the finals taking place next summer shortly before the European Under-21 Championship, Gareth Southgate faces an interesting dilemma about how to use some of his emerging stars such as Jadon Sancho and Trent Alexander-Arnold. The tournaments are a week apart and although it may be possible to play in both, is that a healthy approach to a summer when the calendar is already so busy? Assuming it’s a case of picking the young players for one or the other, you have to look at the bigger picture. Is Sancho realistically going to start every game at the Nations League finals? Probably not. So it’s probably better for him to go and get that experience with the under-21s and be a key player, rather than sit on the bench and come on for 15 minutes at the end of a match for the senior side. I don’t think it is a case of players such as Sancho not being able to handle senior international football at next year’s finals – it’s more about game time and how much of an impact they can have for the respective teams. Aidy Boothroyd’s under-21s made it 22 games unbeaten this week – other than on penalties – after defeating Italy and Denmark and that is some achievement. They will discover who they face in the group stages on Friday and, if they were to win it next summer, that would really carry on the success of some of the young teams over the past few years. The under-17s and under-20s did so well to win their respective World Cups in 2017 and something has clicked in English football, because we are starting to compete at every level and age group across men’s, youth and women’s football. Now the expectation is for the under-21s to go to Italy and win it next summer, because success breeds expectation for more success. There has been a shift in mindset among all the England squads and the seniors will go to Portugal next summer knowing they have every chance of winning the Nations League. I was a little disappointed during the World Cup in Russia with what I felt was too much celebration of being on the weaker side of the draw from some of the press. They seemed to indirectly suggest England would not be able to beat the more established nations if it came to it. I’m not sure teams such as Belgium, Brazil and France cared too much about who they faced in the knockout stage because they have a mentality to beat any team. After the World Cup I hoped England would be a team who could go into tournaments thinking and believing they can beat anyone, primarily because they reached the semi-finals. After beating Spain and Croatia during the Nations League it is really pleasing to see a continuation from the World Cup and perhaps a mentality shift too in terms of going toe to toe with leading international teams rather than feeling inferior. You could see from the celebrations after the Croatia game how much it meant to the players to finish top of the group. Beating Croatia so soon after the defeat at the World Cup was an important step to continue the momentum they built up in the summer. Southgate should take a lot of credit because he has been very open in bringing in new faces, including Bournemouth’s Callum Wilson. Once upon a time, those kind of players at clubs such as Bournemouth just didn’t get picked for England because they weren’t big enough names or didn’t play for sexy enough clubs. Now every player can see it is possible to get into the England squad if they perform consistently. It must have been an absolute dream come true for Wilson to score on his debut. I’m sure all the Bournemouth fans were delighted to see him continue his club form in international football. A special mention to Jordan Nobbs after she ruptured the anterior cruciate ligament in her left knee. It was cruel to see her suffer this injury when she is playing so well for Arsenal. At the moment she is probably one of the best midfielders in Europe. Jordan has really stamped her mark on Arsenal this season and has been a key reason for their success, with some fantastic goals. I watched the game against Chelsea and she was the best player on the park, so it’s really sad to see she is going to be out for a long time, especially with the World Cup around the corner. I extend my best wishes to her – stay strong and focused. In this moment your mind is your biggest enemy but also your biggest strength. Injuries do happen but it’s been great to see the football community show their support. There has been lots of talk and criticism about the Professional Footballers’ Association and whether it is time for change. Often the reality of the work the PFA does can get lost in all the flak. From a personal perspective, as a member of the PFA I can only speak with the utmost gratitude and respect for the deputy chief executive, Nick Cusack, and the chief executive, Gordon Taylor, who made every resource available to help me during the most difficult period in my professional career. Nick was always on the end of the phone for more than a year, leading my case and guiding me through a very stormy period with sound advice and dedication. It is important for professional players to appreciate the level of help that is and can be available to them as PFA members.