For reasons unknown to me, Thai restaurants have long set up shop in some of my favourite pubs. As a result, and especially through my 20s and 30s, the Thai green curry has been with me through thick and thin – through birthdays and break-ups, it has helped to bolster proceedings and to soften blows. Its perfect balance of fresh green chilli heat and sweet, calm coconut has no other competitor for comfort, in my eyes. It’s about time, I suppose, that I got out of my comfort zone and made my own. I’ve used Indian finger chillies rather than Thai bird’s eye, to give this a green colour and vibrancy. The lime leaves (which I buy frozen from my local Chinese supermarket) add a gorgeous, lime-scented perfume, but if you can’t get hold of them, grate the zest of a lime into your curry instead. Prep 15 minCook 30 minServes 4 For the paste4 green finger chillies, roughly chopped 2 lemongrass stalks, tough outer leaves removed and discarded, the rest roughly chopped 3 fat garlic cloves (15g), peeled1 tbsp galangal paste, drained (I like Bart’s) 1.5cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and chopped 1¼ tsp salt ¼ tsp ground black pepper6 makrut lime leaves1 tsp cumin seeds ½ tsp ground turmeric 2 tbsp rapeseed oil For the curry2 medium aubergines (600g), cut into 2cm x 2cm cubes2 medium sweet potatoes (400g), cut into 2cm x 4cm chunks3 tbsp rapeseed oil1 x 400ml tin coconut milk, plus ⅓ of the empty tin’s worth of water1 ½ tsp sugar200g broccoli florets, cut into bite-sized piecesJasmine rice, to serve1 lime, cut into wedges, to serve Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6 and line a large baking tray with foil. Mix the aubergine and sweet potatoes with two tablespoons of oil, and place on the tray in a single layer (you may need to do this over two trays). Roast for 15 minutes, until the vegetables are golden, then transfer to a plate. Don’t worry if they’re not cooked all the way through, because they’ll get a chance to simmer in the curry later. To make the paste, put all the ingredients into a blender with two tablespoons of water, then blend as smoothly as possible. (Add a little extra water and oil if you need more help to blend.) Heat a tablespoon of oil in a large frying pan and, when hot, add the paste and stir-fry for four minutes. Slowly add the coconut milk and sugar, stirring them in to mix. When the milk starts to bubble, add the roast aubergine and sweet potato, and the broccoli (and any leaves), and simmer for six minutes, until all the vegetables are tender. Serve in bowls with freshly boiled or steamed jasmine rice and lime wedges alongside.