I was swiping through Tinder and found a second-rate pop star I fancy. Should I send them a message? Siân, 23, BanburyRita says: “Definitely go for it but be aware that they might be fake. Are there fake Rita Ora profiles online? Definitely! I see some things and I’m like, ‘That is totally not me.’ You just have to be open minded; you’re talking to someone you don’t know, so don’t have any expectations because you don’t really know who you’re speaking to. I wouldn’t recommend lying because if it follows through and you have a serious thing you’re gonna have to deal with it later. I have not done Tinder; I just think it might be a bit difficult for me. If I did, my biog would probably be: ‘If you like food as much as I do, let’s go out.’” I want to be teetotal but I fear my mates will think I’m boring. Should I care about what they think? Cheska, 18, Twickenham“Absolutely not! Be true to yourself always. I know it might sound a bit preachy, but it’s the truth. Good friends will support your decisions regardless. Plus, if you show them you can still have fun with them on a night out, they’ll get over it. I’ve done it and it’s worth it for that next day when you wake up with a clear mind and you don’t feel like you’re wasting the day. I’m not good at tackling hangovers, so that’s why I don’t mix work with pleasure.” My housemate urinates in the shower, so now I wear sliders when I use it. How do I tell him to stop doing it without making things awkward? CJ, 24, Kettering“First of all, how do you know that? How do you know they’re pissing? It’ll be awkward for a minute, but bring it up on a drunken night out: ‘Stop pissing in the shower!’ I haven’t had a housemate in a while. My housemate was my sister, so it wasn’t that bad; we were really open.” I am worried about the environment but I’m scared that if I go vegan I’ll not know what to cook. Any culinary tips? Pat, 17, Derby“It’s called Google. There is so much out there that’s available to you. There are chefs dedicated to vegan food, there are cookbooks, substitute restaurants and recipes. Being a vegan today, according to everyone I know who’s vegan, is much more understood.” I am addicted to my phone. I need dopamine. Is there something else I should replace it with? Denise, 39, Bracknell“Listen to music. Go to the gym. Music always gives me the best vibe. Time away from my phone is when I’m able to be the most creative and write more. With my new album, I really wasn’t on my phone that much. The process was so liberating and refreshing. It was almost like I was getting to know myself. You don’t know how much of an effect your phone has on you.” Is having a high ponytail as painful as Ariana Grande makes out? Viv, 19, Trim“She hasn’t talked about it to me personally, but it can be. My advice would be to try and give your hair as much of a break as you can. Look after it, try not to make it too tight, put some treatment in it. When I used to clip my hair back I’d put numbing spray on my scalp. When I was shooting The Voice I had four buns in a row and it was so painful. It was unbearable.” I really want to have a successful singing career. Should I do The X Factor or The Voice? Julian, 42, Coventry“Oh God! I’ve had the privilege of working on both. I love them equally. My heart would say The Voice but my head would say The X Factor. It’s important to remember that, although they’re great platforms, you don’t need to go on a show to become a pop star. You can graft and do it the old-school way. If you have a dream, then 100% go for it. You’re probably going to be hurt a lot of times, like I have been, like every pop star in the industry has been. You have to have very thick skin. Richard Branson said: ‘You can’t have a Plan B.’ If you’re gonna do something, you have to really commit.” Does having a food allergy in 2018 make one more interesting? Gail, 30, Wrexham“It’s a conversation-starter. A gluten allergy is really serious to be fair; it can be life threatening! Isn’t it, like, crazy?” My online persona is really outgoing but as a person I’m really shy. Will I get found out? Damien, 16, King’s Lynn“Oooh. Be comfortable and confident with who you are. If you are a shy person, embrace it. There is beauty in being who you truly are. Don’t try and be anyone else apart from yourself. I really try and be myself as much as possible.” I want to ghost someone. Any tips? Gabz, 25, Haywards Heath“Ha ha! I’ve been on both sides of the spectrum. It’s very difficult. I’ve never had it done really badly to me before, but you can imagine how awful it would feel. It’s just really heartless. If that’s what you have to do, then it was never meant to be, was it? Five years ago, it was just called ‘ignoring’. Honesty is the best policy.” I’m meeting my partner’s parents for the first time soon. They are pro-Brexit. Any thoughts on how to not get angry with them if it comes up? Ken, 29, Chagford“Oh gosh. Obviously everyone has a right to their opinion, especially when it comes to politics. The reason I signed an anti-Brexit open letter to Theresa May [focusing on the impact on the creative industry] was because it was about an industry that I work in. It was my duty to stick up for what we do as artists. Sir Bob Geldof asked me to be a part of it and I respect everyone else that was onboard.” Sainsbury’s are selling vibrators now. Do you think this is the end of uptight British society? Fiona, 66, Barrow-in-Furness“I don’t think I would say that Britain is uptight, but I do think it’s great that we have a choice. If you want that from Sainsbury’s, at least you now know you have the option! The last thing I picked up from Sainsbury’s was probably a quick lunch.” I still live with my parents. I say it’s because I’m saving to buy a house but I just spend, spend, spend! Any tips on saving money? Mischa, 32, Colchester“What are you spending money on?! What do you want more: the house, or whatever you’re buying? Stop shopping, vaping and drinking. I’m pretty responsible in that department, I’m not gonna lie. If there’s something that’s one in a million, that’s the kind of thing I’ll consider. I saw a beautiful Cy Twombly art piece that was the size of my hand and I was completely overwhelmed. Art is a new thing for me but I bought that. It was worth it.” I didn’t get Glastonbury tickets. What should I do instead, apart from cry loads? Baz, 31, Horsham“You can always wait until next year. Or watch it on TV. Glastonbury was one of the highlights of my life. Being on the Pyramid stage, I felt fearless and comfortable in my skin. It was such an achievement for me. I don’t think I can explain it with words. Is it better than Coachella? Because I’m a Brit, I’m gonna say yes.” My girlfriend wants us to experiment in the bedroom, but I’m allergic to PVC and have a low pain threshold. I don’t want to be a square, but how do I break it to her? Bex, 26, Hemel Hempstead“This is so funny. Not liking stuff doesn’t make you square. Who makes those rules up? If she’s the one, she’ll understand.” Our workplace Secret Santa has a £5 limit. What should I buy Dave from accounts Mischa, 47, Dewsbury“Hand sanitiser, so you can always stay safe. And ... what does everyone use? Lip balm! There we go. I love a product.” I used to love Kanye but now I can’t listen to his music due to his political beliefs. Can we ever separate the art from the artist? Rich, 42, Llandudno“Ooh, we’re talking about Kanye. Look: people are able to believe what they want to believe. What Kanye believes in is his choice. You can’t separate the two, but everyone is free to make their own choices and decisions in the world.” And finally Rita, the Guide would like to know what problem you might like some help with? “How do I sleep on the spot? Like, when you know you have two hours in the day to have a nap but your brain is going 100 miles an hour. How do you disconnect and have a nap? That’s what I want to know.” We don’t have the answer but thanks for being a wonderful agony aunt, Rita!“Ah, thank you so much! I’m here all week. Well I’m not, but I wish I was.” Rita Ora’s new album Phoenix is out now