When the then UN special rapporteur on violence against women, Rashida Manjoo, visited the UK in April 2014, she had strong words of condemnation for the country’s institutional misogyny and sexist popular culture. She projected what many were familiar and frustrated with: the old boys’ network, the pervasive sexualisation of women, the black hole of human rights that women in detention were thrown into. But nothing happened. Instead the headlines bastardised an observation she made on how overt the UK’s sexist culture was, into “UN special rapporteur says UK most sexist country in the world”. Media debates erected straw men, asking if the UK really was worse than Somalia or Saudi Arabia. Edwina Currie asked why Manjoo couldn’t “go to a country where women can’t drive cars, or have maternity leave? There are plenty of countries where women face serious problems.’’ One Daily Telegraph blogger argued that, not only is all well, the country is in fact, a “gynocracy” because we’ve had a queen since 1952. Politicians were glad of the misquoted soundbite, and the media was happy to go with it. What was completely missed was that, after a two-week investigation touring prisons and detention centres, and a 4,000-word report, Manjoo raised the alarm, pointing to the disproportionate impact of funding cuts on the provision of services to women and girls at risk of violence. She spelled it out: “Current reforms to the funding and benefits system continue to adversely impact women’s ability to address safety and other relevant issues.” That was more than four years ago. Manjoo’s warnings were drowned. We shot the messenger. This month, the UN special rapporteur on extreme poverty and human rights visited the country, and the results of previous missed opportunities were obvious to him. Philip Alston echoed Manjoo’s concerns, saying that if a “group of misogynists” had drawn up austerity legislation, the results wouldn’t have been too far off where we are today. His report pointed out: “Changes to taxes and benefits have taken the highest toll on those least able to bear it.” And it made clear that the costs of austerity had fallen disproportionately on already vulnerable groups – including women, poor people, ethnic minorities, children, single parents, asylum seekers and people with disabilities. Alston’s shameful findings back up those in a recent Equality and Human Rights Commission report, titled Is Britain Fairer? Take child poverty: the rate in the UK is 30% of children. But that number is 50% for black children and 60% for those of Pakistani and Bangladeshi origin. Ethnic minorities are more at risk of becoming homeless, with worse access to healthcare and higher rates of infant mortality. And yes, the EHRC report restates and adds to the UN’s 2014 findings: women are more likely to be in low-paid work, more likely to be child carers, more likely to be the child carer in a single-parent household, and thus more likely to be the child carer of a disabled child in a single-parent household. All this also puts them at higher risk of violence, with a more urgent need for legal aid that has been slashed, and a higher possibility of falling down the cracks of the immigration system. Austerity creates not just poverty, but also what the EHRC calls a “two-speed” society, one where certain groups are trapped, excluded from prosperity. The result is an acceleration of disadvantage. Nearly 400,000 more children and 300,000 more pensioners are living in poverty compared with five years ago. And the more excluded one becomes from society, the more likely one is to become isolated, which means fewer advocates and weaker connections to those in power, who include those who report the news and lobby the government. It is easier for the media and politicians to deny the pain of those who are already invisible. Nowhere is this more clearly shown than in the length of time it took to draw public attention at last to the Windrush scandal, a human rights miscarriage of life-and-death proportions. Predictably and punctually, the denials of Alston’s findings arrived. He was told by the UK government that the social support system was ticking along nicely, and that there was no extreme poverty in the UK because, among other cherry-picked statistics, household incomes were at a record high. This encapsulates the government’s broken logic – to which it holds doggedly despite all contrary evidence – that because some people are becoming better off, then all of us are. If anything, this excuse reifies allegations of a two-tier society, where one half is getting richer while the other is getting poorer, and high walls are erected against the desperate and eyes averted from their suffering. The UK is in a spiral where an irreversible, indisputable calamity has to happen – a Windrush or a Grenfell – before any tragically belated reforms are introduced. Shooting the UN messenger may afford this government temporary relief, but it comes at the expense of the country’s future. • Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnist