North-west India, the sixth century. Two men play a board game on an eight‑by-eight grid. The pieces are divided into four ranks, representing military divisions: five foot soldiers, three cavalry, one chariot, one elephant. At the end of the game, one man says: “That was great. We should play that again.” His opponent nods: “Yeah, it was fun.” Then his brow furrows: “But I don’t know, was it cool?” New Orleans, circa 1875. Paul Morphy, the dominant chess master of his era, a legend of the sport by the age of 21, walks up and down the long veranda of his home. Over and over, in French, he mutters: “He will plant the banner of Castile upon the walls of Madrid to the cry of the victorious city, and the little king will go away looking very sheepish.” Morphy is not yet 40 years old and hasn’t played competitively for a decade. It is assumed he has been driven to madness by the infinite possibilities of chess: that there are more possible moves in a game than atoms in the universe. But perhaps not; maybe he’s just ruminating: “Will this game I’ve played better than anyone in history ever be cool?” London, last Thursday. Magnus Carlsen, the precociously gifted, 27-year-old world champion from Norway, sits next to Fabiano Caruana, one year younger, Italian-American, sometimes (quite often actually) called the heir to Bobby Fischer. It is the official press conference before a much-anticipated, impossible‑to-call world championship that began on Friday and is scheduled for 12 head-to-head games over the following couple of weeks. Again the question on everyone’s lips: “Is chess about to become cool?” Carlsen, who has something of Matt Damon about him, or maybe Mark Wahlberg, tried and failed to act as if he had not been faced with this inquiry many thousands of times. This is a man who has modelled for G-Star Raw alongside the actors Gemma Arterton and Liv Tyler (who asked him for lessons). He warmed up for the Caruana match by playing Trent Alexander-Arnold; the Liverpool defender lasted an impressive 17 moves, eight more than Bill Gates did when he played Carlsen. “I’ve found chess the coolest thing in the world since I was eight years old,” replied Carlsen, laconically, at the press conference. “It’s always been that way.” Caruana, by his side, was wearing a grey T-shirt and bomber jacket made by Thom Browne, the American designer mainly responsible for the trend for ankle‑flashing trousers and too-tight jackets. He is nerdy, sure, but in the style of a Silicon Valley wonk who has just sold his unicorn company to Google. Caruana was then asked, seeing that he was playing “the Mozart of chess”, how would he describe himself? “Well, my musical tastes lie more outside classical music,” he replied, “so I’d probably pick someone in the hip-hop or rock genre.” Right now, Caruana is particularly keen on Kendrick Lamar and Killah Priest. So, we’ve got the “Mozart of chess” versus the “Killah Priest of chess”. What could be better – indeed cooler – than that? All the elements of great sport are present. Carlsen has experience, Caruana has form. Carlsen thrives on intuition, while Caruana is a brilliant all‑rounder, so precise and analytical that his opponent has compared him to a computer. It is also no secret that the pair don’t like each other much: this is thanks in part to Carlsen doing a showboating, finger-to-his‑lips shush gesture when he played Caruana in front of the American’s home crowd recently (embarrassingly, the Norwegian didn’t go on to win). And if you wanted a local angle: the showdown was taking place here in the UK, in London. Those of us old enough, though, might be getting some flashbacks. In London, 25 years ago, the British player Nigel Short challenged the then world champion, Garry Kasparov. The match was televised on not one but two terrestrial channels, half the available stations in 1993: Channel 4 had three transmissions each match day, the BBC had one. Short did his damnedest to drum up interest in the encounter. He compared his opponent to “an ape” – a comment on Kasparov’s body hair – and he posed for the Sun in black leather, whanging an electric guitar (as a teenager he had played in a band called Pelvic Thrust). Now, at last, chess was set to become cool: as big as tennis or golf, Short promised. It did not work out quite like that. Short was thumped by Kasparov, but that was not the main reason. Chess is not a sport of fireworks (it’s not a sport at all, according to the UK government, because it is not “athletic”). The novelist Julian Barnes, reporting on the match for the New Yorker, identified its televisual limitations. “Short thought,” he wrote about game nine. “And thought. Commercial break. And thought. And thought. Second commercial break. And thought. Finally, after using up 45 minutes of live television time, he castled. Tennis and golf? Forget it.” This is not a criticism of chess or even a criticism of watching live chess. Thinking is what it’s all about. Trying to predict what the world’s best players will do – and invariably getting it wrong – is why many millions will tune in (mostly online) to watch Caruana take on Carlsen. During their first game on Friday, there were moments of knuckle-gnawing tension as Caruana, playing with the white pieces, battled time pressures and a losing position. At one point, as Carlsen’s eyes bore into him, Caruana had three seconds left on his clock. Then, after four hours of concentration, Carlsen blundered and surrendered his winning position. The game finally ended in a draw. In game two on Saturday, Caruana fought back, making Carlsen “beg for a draw”, in his own words, and playing one move in particular that completely befuddled the Norwegian. Again, the feeling was that there is scarcely a cigarette paper between these two. Chess predates most sports, or pastimes, or whatever you want to call it. Who knows, it may well outlast them, too. This is precisely because it’s not a trend, it does not fall in and out of fashion. The 2018 Carlsen-Caruana saga should showcase the game at its very best; so if you still can’t get past the question of coolness, the loss is yours.