England’s Test cricketers are set to be made available for the knockout stage of the new 100-ball tournament, the playing conditions for which are due for sign-off by the England and Wales Cricket Board next week. It was thought leading players such as Joe Root and Ben Stokes would, at best, be free for only a couple of opening matches of the eight-team competition that begins in 2020, given it will clash with the summer’s home Test series. The ECB reportedly told the Professional Cricketers’ Association in May that Test players would be allocated to teams chiefly for marketing purposes and their on-field absence would not be a problem given the targeted audience “won’t necessarily know who Stokes and Root are anyway”. It is understood the ECB will now aim to ensure the biggest names are clear for the start and the climax of the five-week tournament – the latter being a play-off system, followed by a Grand Final – should their relevant team progress and wish to use them. A key staging post for The Hundred will come on 28 November when the ECB board sits down to ratify the format’s playing conditions. There are not expected to be any drastic changes to what was witnessed during the men’s and women’s trial games at the end of last season, when each innings compromised 10 blocks of 10 balls. Bowlers will send down either five or 10 balls of each block – and no more than 20 in total – with the powerplay likely to be set at the first 25 balls of each innings. An idea to have wides followed by a free-hit has been scrapped, while a decision remains over whether incoming batsmen must always face the next delivery, regardless of whether batsmen crossed for a high catch or the wicket fell off the final delivery of a 10-ball block. If the desired two and a half hour format appears close to completion then the composition of each team’s coaching staff continues to be the subject of much discussion. With the costs of The Hundred having ballooned from £13m to £40m, a number of the host venues are said to have suggested their county’s first XI staff simply transfer across. This is likely to rejected by the ECB and the PCA, because conflicts of interest could arise regarding player recruitment. The thinking is that each team will employ a “high-performance manager” to oversee the running of the men’s and women’s squads, as well as assemble coaching teams. Permanent coaches will be appointed, while assistants are likely to be seconded from the counties for short-term “guest” roles. There is a strong desire to ensure English coaches are at the front of the queue for the eight coach roles – well-paid positions, if the rumours of £80,000 for five weeks’ work are correct – and counties are expected to release staff who get the nod; it will not only be 96 players missing from the county 50-over tournament that runs concurrently. Another element that needs settling is when the first player draft takes place, with county directors of cricket (or their equivalents) pushing for it to be as early as possible to aid planning for 2020. October next year has been suggested, although the tournament’s marketing department ideally want it closer to the main event. Teams in the men’s competition are expected to have a £1m squad budget, with the women’s salary pot not yet decided. The ECB board meeting is also due to ratify the domestic structure from 2020 onwards, with Division One of the County Championship expanding to 10 teams. It was hoped the governing body and the PCA would also have agreed the County Partnership Agreement by this point – chiefly the distribution of funds from the £1.1bn broadcast deal and the salary cap – although this is likely to rumble on into 2019.