“Social media reminds me of fire,” Abra explains down the phone from LA, warm but purposeful, her sentences peppered with “likes” and “y’knows”. “It’s one of those inventions that changed the whole game. And it can keep you warm, but it can also burn you the fuck up – it can kill you.” The genre-smooshing singer, who has risen from blogger’s delight to the edges of the mainstream in recent years, claims she hasn’t used her phone for 48 hours prior to our interview. Between 2015 and 2016, the internet played a key role in the “reckless shit” (largely drug-related) that consumed those around her. Like every other millennial singer, she owes her career largely to YouTube and SoundCloud, but it’s also a world she’s sceptical about. This uneasy relationship has led in part to her making her acting debut in a new horror-comedy, Assassination Nation, about a US town sent into meltdown by a mass hacking. Acting might seem like something of a departure for the musician, whose real name is Gabrielle Mirville; age, at her behest, still unknown. Really, though, she has been doing it her whole life. Born in New York, she grew up in south London then relocated to Atlanta aged eight. It was tumultuous, which is where a second simile comes in. “I felt like the first half of my life was just a big hurricane ... I’m dropped down here, I’ll land here, I’ll pick this up, I’ll do this,” she says. “I had to unlearn a lot of things when I got to the US, especially with Georgia being a racially charged place. I remember a kid telling me black people don’t live in London, or in Europe. I had to get rid of my British accent, too.” As an insecure teen, Mirville devoured everything from Korn to Britney to gospel to dubstep (“Don’t judge me!”), then sang and produced her own approximations in her bedroom closet. It was, she says, the first thing that made her feel good about herself. There were also the guitar covers she uploaded to YouTube, from Gucci Mane to Radiohead. The Mirvilles – missionaries from Haiti and Guyana – weren’t initially thrilled by their daughter’s musical ambitions, but her determination swayed them. And, having caught the attention of rapper Father, she found her tribe in the form of the cult Atlanta collective Awful Records, whose members include tastemaker favourites Tommy Genesis and KeithCharles Spacebar. Once she had conquered her home town, Mirville made a name for herself more widely, signing with True Panther Sounds (King Krule, Girls) in 2016 and earning praise from Vogue and the New York Times. Although she terms her sound as “darkwave”, Mirville borrows and reworks from across the musical spectrum; Crybaby, from her 2016 EP Princess, is a gothic, 80s-influenced freestyle, while last year’s Bounty pairs mesmeric electro with the sensuality of R&B. She is not, however, just an R&B artist. “I think [that would be] a disservice,” she says, sounding stern. “For people trying to get into the music industry, if someone looks at them and says you [make] R&B because you’re a black girl or you’re soulful, you’re cutting off whole genres they might be able to kill.” As well as her music career (she tours with Scandi star Mø early next year, and features on the new Toro Y Moi record), Mirville can be seen in UK cinemas this week, starring alongside models Suki Waterhouse and Hari Nef in her first film. On paper, Assassination Nation sounds like a vanity vehicle for some young, beautiful people. However, it proves dark, wry and prescient: a slick, Heathers-like comment on the climate of misogyny in the US and beyond. As well as rallying against the ills of social media, there was another reason behind her decision to take the role of fanfic-loving Em. “When I watched Spice World and someone was like: ‘You have to be Scary Spice because you’re black’, or when there wasn’t even a black character in the film, that sucked. It felt important for me to be seen.” With film promo duties out of the way, Mirville is back to recording her debut album, working with Weeknd producer Doc McKinney, and listening to everything from Slipknot to Britney’s I’m a Slave 4 U. Nothing is set in stone, though, and she explains that the end product “could sound like Jolene by Dolly Parton … I just really wanna make a smash”. But, most importantly, like everything she does, it will be on her own terms. “I feel like, especially moving to LA, a lot of people wanna tell me what to do with myself,” she says. “It can feel like elementary school all over again. But now I’m an adult I’m like: ‘Nah, I’m not doing that.’ I did that for the first part of my life – now it’s my turn.” Assassination Nation is in UK cinemas now