Casey Stoney defended Manchester United’s berth as the only full-time team in the Women’s Championship after a comprehensive 4-1 win against their closest rivals, Tottenham. “To be honest I don’t feel bad. I think we should be playing teams more off the park,” said Stoney. “One of our mantras is we want to be relentless in what we do. I think it was a sensible decision to go the way we’ve gone because, let’s be honest we didn’t know what we were going to be able to recruit. We had three weeks to build a team and put a staff in place. “We’re a young team and we’re still growing. People criticise us but half our squad are WSL2 [forerunner to the Championship] players at least.” With their perfect start to the season, the visit of the north London side offered their biggest test. Yet from the whistle the gulf in class showed. Looking stronger, fitter and technically crisp, United brushed aside their challengers 4-1 and the effects of a full-time professional side against even the best part-time team were clear. A frustrated Spurs were broken 10 minutes in when Jessica Sigsworth dropped the ball at the feet of the 17-year-old Lauren James after mazy run to the edge of the area. James looked for the gap, turned her marker and powered a low shot to the left of Chloe Morgan. James soon returned the favour. Katie Zelem, instrumental in midfield, poked the ball wide to former Arsenal player and she raced to the byline swinging in a low cross for an easy Sigsworth tap-in. With Spurs chasing shadows in front of the vocal home support, they were unable to trouble England’s Siobhan Chamberlain. A hopeful run from Angela Addison ended with an exasperated cry as she was cut out by three United players with no one to pass to and nowhere to go, a summary of Spurs’ first half. Akin to playground bullies, United to continued muscle forward and when a Zelem free-kick found Sigsworth at the far post, she headed in the Reds’ third. Spurs can take pride in their defensive efforts in the second half but tired legs can only hold on so long and Charlie Devlin, on for James, let the ball run across her body before turning and shooting powerfully past Morgan for United’s fourth. A tentative foray into United’s final third late on gave the visitors a corner and Addison headed a consolation past Chamberlain – the first goal the hosts have conceded in the league – but it was not enough to stop United’s march. “We always knew it was going to be tough,” said the Tottenham manager, Karen Hills. Credit to the girls, I thought we were all outstanding today. We were a little disappointed to go in 3-0 down but in the second half we showed what character we’ve had over the past six or seven weeks.” On this performance, United will walk the league. The best the rest can hope for the second promotion spot. If this is the most competitive game of the season for United, then the decision to allow a professional side to play in the semi-professional Championship has left a stark difference in quality.