The tug-of-war between the White House and CNN over correspondent Jim Acosta’s press pass and fierce arguments over the US constitution and a free press are set to go on this week. CNN could be back in court as early as Monday over news that, despite having his White House press pass, in effect, restored by court’s restraining order last Friday the Trump administration has warned that his credentials are set to be suspended again when that 14-day order expires. CNN reported on Sunday night that the White House has sent a letter to Acosta informing him of that planned action. CNN argued in a statement provided to its own senior media correspondent, Brian Stelter, that the action would threaten “all journalists and news organizations”, about which Stelter tweeted early on Monday. “The White House is continuing to violate the First and 5th Amendments of the Constitution,” the statement declared. “These actions threaten all journalists and news organizations. Jim Acosta and CNN will continue to report the news about the White House and the President,” he wrote. Acosta had a stand-up argument with Donald Trump at a White House press conference last month after the president tried to shut down further questions from the correspondent and Acosta insisted on asking follow-ups. The confrontation resulted in a tugging match with a White House intern who tried to take the roving microphone from the journalist as he determinedly hung on to it – all captured on live television. The row escalated after the White House then suspended Acosta’s pass. The administration initially argued that Acosta had inappropriately made physical contact with the intern, and released a video clip of the confrontation, which turned out to have been speeded up. Now the White House says Acosta was not behaving appropriately generally and that it is within the White House’s discretion who gets a “hard pass” that allows them into the White House and grounds unescorted. “Lawyers were already expected to be back in court this week to discuss the timeline for further proceedings. Unless there’s some sort of resolution, CNN will be arguing for a preliminary injunction,” Stelter wrote late on Sunday, adding: “Expect to hear more about this on Monday.” The feud is just the latest episode of a difficult relationship between Trump and the media in which he oscillates between criticising and threatening the press and basking in its spotlight.