Donald Trump and several of his top aides were accused of violating the US constitution’s guarantee of freedom of the press in a district court in Washington DC on Wednesday, over his row with CNN’s Jim Acosta. In a case whose title sums up the hostile relations between the Trump administration and the media – Cable News Network, Inc V Donald J Trump – rival lawyers for CNN and the US government tussled over two hours of argument about the nature of political reporting and free speech. The hearing was held before Judge Timothy Kelly, a Trump appointee, who indicated he would give his ruling on Thursday at 3pm ET. At stake in the case was who gets to control media coverage of Trump’s presidency. Would it be the president, who government lawyers argued has wide powers of discretion over who he allows into the White House, or an untrammeled media as representatives of the people? The dramatic courtroom battle was prompted by the contentious decision of the White House last week to revoke media access to CNN’s chief White house correspondent, Jim Acosta, following a confrontation at a press conference between the reporter and Trump. In response, CNN is suing the president and members of his senior team, including the White House press secretary, Sarah Sanders, and head of communications, Bill Shine, in an attempt to get Acosta’s credentials immediately reinstated and to permanently protect journalists against such treatment in future. In the course of the hearing, government lawyers tried to minimize the significance of Trump’s attack on Acosta. James Burnham, a justice department attorney presenting the White House case, told the court: “As for CNN, I don’t think there’s any harm at all.” He said that Acosta had had his credentials removed not for reasons relating to his coverage or views, but because of his objectionable and disruptive behavior at the press conference. “Grandstanding is not a viewpoint,” Burnham said. Theodore Boutrous, addressing the court for CNN, said the revocation of the press pass was all about discrimination by the White House against the cable network’s and its reporter’s content. As for behavior, Trump was “the most aggressive, dare I say rude, person in the room,” Boutrous said. Acosta had his “hard pass”, which grants open access to White House grounds, suspended following a feisty press conference held the day after the midterm elections. In the course of a question-and-answer session with reporters, Acosta tried to ask Trump about his remark that a caravan of Central American asylum seekers was “invading” the US. Trump evaded the question, and instead called Acosta a “rude, terrible person”. Soon after the press conference, Acosta’s pass was suspended until further notice. The CNN journalist was also prevented from covering elements of Trump’s visit to Paris last weekend. Setting out its case in a filing to the court ahead of the hearing, CNN called the removal of the pass a form of “severe and unprecedented punishment”. The cable network said the move was the “culmination of years of hostility by President Trump against CNN and Acosta based on the contents of their reporting – an unabashed attempt to censor the press and exclude reporters from the White House who challenge and dispute the President’s point of view.” The news outlet cast its legal action in the broadest context of press freedom, arguing that Trump had violated the first amendment of the US constitution guaranteeing press freedom. CNN warned that “the revocation of Acosta’s credentials is only the beginning; as the President explained, there ‘could be others also’ who get their credentials revoked.” A few hours before Wednesday’s hearing, Trump further inflamed the row by telling the rightwing news site the Daily Caller that “guys like Acosta” were “bad for the country”. He said of Acosta, “he’s just an average guy who’s a grandstander”. As both sides of the legal dispute dig in for the fight, Trump finds himself opposed by a solid block of all of the main news outlets in the US, including his trusted friends. Fox News broke ranks with the president, putting out a statement in support of its cable news rival that said that White House press access should “never be weaponized”. “While we don’t condone the growing antagonistic tone by both the president and the press at recent media avails, we do support a free press, access and open exchanges for the American people,” the statement said. More than 15 news organisations backed CNN’s stance, either through public statements or court filings to the district court. The Wall Street Journal, another conservative outlet owned like Fox News by Rupert Murdoch that tends to be sympathetic to the Trump White House, also broke ranks by supporting CNN. The newspaper said that it found it “troubling” that Acosta’s access had been revoked. “The Journal remains committed to the exercise of free speech rights promised by the First Amendment and to reporters’ ability to question elected officials.” A joint statement from several major outlets including AP, Bloomberg, NBC, the New York Times and Washington Post, stated that it was “imperative that independent journalists have access to the President and his activities, and that journalists are not barred for arbitrary reasons”. Despite the universal disapproval lined up against him from leading media outlets of both left and right, the White House and Trump administration has refused to soften its hostile approach to CNN and to Acosta personally. The Department of Justice filed a 28-page memo with the DC court hours before Wednesday’s hearing in which it dispensed with decades of precedent and tradition by arguing that it was entirely up to the US president to decide which journalists could gain access to the White House. “The President and the White House possess … broad discretion to regulate access to the White House for journalists,” the memo said. “The broad discretion necessarily includes discretion over which journalists receive on-demand access to the White House grounds and special access during White House travel.” The White House justification for taking such a hard line against Acosta was notably different in Wednesday’s court filing than in previous public statements. In the immediate aftermath of the confrontation with Trump, Sanders had claimed falsely that Acosta was guilty of “placing his hands on a young woman just trying to do her job as a White House intern”. In fact, as video footage of the press conference proved, the White House staffer had tried to wrestle a microphone from Acosta’s hand and he had remained impassive. In the new court filing, the DoJ makes no mention of this false claim and instead argues that Acosta’s press access had been suspended because he had been disrespectful to his media colleagues by hogging question time. The memo quoted Sanders as saying: “This was not the first time this reporter has inappropriately refused to yield to other reporters. The White House cannot run an orderly and fair press conference when a reporter acts this way.”