Populism is a challenging thing to measure. Some researchers scrutinise speeches, manifestos and political messaging in search of populist rhetoric. Others survey politicians, or the public, to detect agreement with populist ideas and attitudes. Another technique involves analysing the electoral performance of political parties over time. It is frequently said that populism is on the rise on the continent. To interrogate that claim, the Guardian decided to facilitate research into European populism. The help of Matthijs Rooduijn, a political sociologist at the University of Amsterdam and a leading expert on populism, was elicited to categorise European political parties as populist or not. The Guardian also recruited 35 other leading scholars who agreed to assist with the research, mainly by peer-reviewing the process of deciding which parties could be defined as populist. There is no right or wrong when it comes to deciding whether a political party crosses the threshold into “populist”. However, it was felt that some of the existing research was out of date or otherwise problematic. We identified all parties that obtained at least 2% of the vote in at least one national election across 31 European countries – all EU member states plus Switzerland, Norway and Iceland– between 1998 and 2018, using public data from ParlGov. Using this dataset, and drawing on existing public research, Rooduijn produced a list of parties that could be categorised as either populist, far-right, far-left or Eurosceptic, using widely used academic definitions for those categorisations. Once the list was complete, it was shared for peer review through a specially constructed portal that allowed other academics to scrutinise Rooduijn’s classifications and provide detailed feedback, for example on why certain labels might be incorrect. For several countries where Rooduijn did not believe he was sufficiently familiar with the parties, such as Iceland and Latvia, he relied heavily upon consultation with local experts before classifying them. Academics assisting Rooduijn could also add parties they believed should be on the list. One particular challenge when measuring the performance of categories of parties over time is that they change as new leaders take command, ideological positions shift and parties adopt new strategies in response to political pressures. A number of parties in Europe that were once populist are arguably no longer so, while others more fully embraced the language of populism over the last decade as it paid off at the polls. Parties that endorse the set of ideas that society is ultimately separated into two homogeneous and antagonistic groups, “the pure people” versus “the corrupt elite”, and which argue that politics should be an expression of the volonté générale, or general will, of the people. (Mudde, 2004) Parties that are nativist, which is an ideology that holds that states should be inhabited exclusively by members of the native group and that non-native elements are fundamentally threatening to the homogenous nation state; and authoritarian, which is the belief in a strictly ordered society in which infringements of authority are to be punished severely. (Mudde, 2007) Parties that reject the underlying socio-economic structure of contemporary capitalism and advocate alternative economic and power structures. They see economic inequality as the basis of existing political and social arrangements and call for a major redistribution of resources from existing political elites. (March, 2012) Parties that express the idea of contingent or qualified opposition, as well as incorporating outright and unqualified opposition to the process of European integration. This includes both “hard Euroscepticism” – outright rejection of the entire project of European political and economic integration, and opposition to one’s country joining or remaining a member of the EU – and “soft Euroscepticism”, which is contingent or qualified opposition to European integration. (Taggart & Szczerbiak, 2004) For each party, a timetable was introduced allowing experts to pinpoint the period of time, based on a party’s stance in election years, in which they were populist. Some notable examples are Fidesz in Hungary, which was deemed to have become populist in 2010, and Poland’s Law and Justice party, which was judged to have embraced populism in 2005. Populist and other fringe parties tend to perform disproportionately well in European parliamentary elections, which typically have a low turnout. Therefore only national parliamentary elections were focused on, drawing on results listed by ParlGov. Because of the different electoral systems used across Europe, the vote share of populist parties was counted rather than seats held in order to chart the rise of populism. The Guardian’s data projects and visuals teams worked together to study the findings in partnership with Rooduijn. All of the academics listed below provided valuable peer review and guidance over the categorisations of political parties they were familiar with. However, Rooduijn and the Guardian took ultimate responsibility for determining the classifications for each of the 125 parties listed in the dataset. The full list of academics who peer-reviewed party classifications is listed below, but the Guardian would like to express particular thanks to Cas Mudde, a professor at the University of Georgia, Stijn van Kessel, a lecturer at Queen Mary University of London, Sarah Engler, from the University of Bern, Martin Eiermann, from the University of California, Berkeley, Kevin Deegan-Krause, an associate professor at Wayne State University, and Benjamin Moffitt, of the Australian Catholic University. The others who assisted with the peer review were: Paul Taggart, University of Sussex; Raul Gomez, University of Liverpool; Elisabeth Carter, Keele University; Andrea Pirro, Scuola Normale Superiore; Carlo Invernizzi-Accetti, City College of New York; Ben Stanley, SWPS University, Warsaw; Lorenzo Pregliasco, University of Bologna; Matteo Cavallaro, University of Paris 13; Luis Ramiro, University of Leicester; Reinhard Heinisch, University of Salzburg; Peter Spáč, Masaryk University; Ilze Balcere, University of Latvia; Ólafur Þórður Harðarson, University of Iceland; Paul Sum, University of North Dakota; Sergiu Gherghina, University of Glasgow; Hulda Þórisdóttir, University of Iceland; Allan Sikk, UCL; Algis Krupavičius, Vytautas Magnus University; Mindaugas Jurkynas, Vytautas Magnus University; Sarah de Lange, University of Amsterdam; Bram Spruyt, Vrije Universiteit Brussel; Elina Kestilä-Kekkonen, University of Tampere; Duncan McDonnell, Griffith University; Daniele Albertazzi, University of Birmingham; Paris Aslanidis, Yale University; Daphne Halikiopoulou, University of Reading; Matthew Goodwin, University of Kent; Anders Ravik Jupskås, University of Oslo; Marijana Grbeša, Zagreb University.