Times change, tastes shift, stuff that was once thought irredeemably naff is re-evaluated, but somehow Cliff Richard remains perennially unhip. Sixty years and 250m sales into his career, there’s been no Rick Rubin v Johnny Cash-style back-to-basics reinvention, no reappraisal in the heritage rock mags, no suggestion of a young artist claiming him an influence. He was one of a handful of British rock’n’rollers whose early releases were raw enough to bear comparison with the records coming out of the US, but his work is still seen as strictly the province of blue-rinsed Daily Express readers. Mid-70s soft rock gets belatedly welcomed into the canon, but no one mentions Richard’s 1976 album I’m Nearly Famous, home to the flatly brilliant Devil Woman and Miss You Nights, the latter pillow-soft and emotionally racked. The odd adventurous DJ might play something from an arcane corner of his catalogue (the revered DJ Harvey has been known to drop his 1980 hit Carrie), but Richard’s name as an artist remains beyond the pale. He hasn’t helped himself. He was a rock’n’roll star from an age when rock’n’roll was held to be a passing fad and you were advised to get into panto and cabaret sharpish if you still wanted a career when the novelty wore off. He sang as though he didn’t believe a word of it. (“They say it’s gonna die but please, let’s face it,” snapped his debut single, Move It. “They just don’t know what’s gonna replace it.”) His music quickly softened, and an overwhelming suggestion of the family entertainer has beset him ever since. Already pretty square by the time the 60s started swinging, he probably sealed his fate by joining Mary Whitehouse in the Nationwide Festival of Light, campaigning against “moral pollution” and the permissive society of the counterculture. Still, it seems a bit unfair: you’d struggle to describe the quality of his oeuvre as anything other than variable, but the best bits deserve better than their current reputation. So it would be lovely to report that his first album of new material in 14 years is built to win over the doubters and spark a reconsideration. Alas, it isn’t. There are certainly good things here, not least the title track, which obliquely references Richard’s travails with the South Yorkshire constabulary and the BBC. Tellingly, it’s the work of old hands Graham Lyle and Terry Britten – the latter the co-author of both Devil Woman and Carrie – rather than the Scandinavian writers-for-hire employed elsewhere on the album. But the highlights are marooned amid a bet-hedging hotch-potch of styles and ideas. There are a couple of songs in the vein of his 1982 “gospel in disguise” album Now You See Me, Now You Don’t. Reborn is pretty good, while Wide Deep and High is rather a ripe old cheese. There are runny MOR ballads, aimed directly at Richard’s core fanbase, and there are four old tracks reworked to hop on board the current vogue for whacking the Royal Philharmonic Orchestra over the top of vintage hits, whether it suits them or not. None of them are improved by the addition of sawing strings, although there’s something mind-boggling about the fact that The Minute You’re Gone reached No 1 in 1965. As if to demonstrate how far from pop’s frontline Richard had slipped by the mid-60s, it sounds as if it’s something from the pre-rock’n’roll era. And there is – adopt the brace position – yet another Christmas song, The Miracle of Love. The best thing you can say about it is that it’s more Mistletoe and Wine than Millennium Prayer. The rest chugs along pleasantly enough without ever threatening to set the world on fire. His voice sounds good – there are audible signs of ageing, but falsetto remains within reach. Arrangements tend towards post-Amy Winehouse retro-soul, heavy on the brass. Like the electronic effects on the vocals and the presence of writers used to working with Demi Lovato and Sam Smith, this is clearly intended as a bid for relevance, although if contemporaneity was what Richard was after, he could have sounded hipper still by examining his own back catalogue. Precisely the kind of taut, glossy, synth-y new wave pop sound that powered his superb run of singles in the late 70s and early 80s has become a modern musical touchstone; virtually no pop album is currently complete without a whiz-kid production team knocking together something that sounds almost exactly like his 1980 hit Dreamin’. Richard is clearly desperate for a hit, something he hasn’t had in a decade; there’s an air of by-any-means-necessary about the Christmas song and the orchestrated oldies. Perhaps if he were less concerned with proving wrong the radio stations who proclaimed him too old, he might make a more consistent album. As it is, Rise Up is not unlike Richard’s back catalogue in general: something to pick through rather than embrace unreservedly. Amor – Glimpses Across ThunderFrom the forthcoming album by the Glasgow disco-not-disco quartet behind last year’s superb single Paradise comes a yearning song over a deliciously understated, vaguely acid-ish groove.