Manchester City’s passage to the Carabao Cup quarter-finals via an easy win over Fulham left Pep Guardiola concerned regarding Kevin De Bruyne after the midfielder limped off with an injury to his left knee four minutes from time. De Bruyne was making only his second start after a three-month layoff because of ligament damage to his right knee. He was forced off after Fulham’s Timothy Fosu-Mensah fell on him. While Brahim Díaz’s first two goals for City secured a trip to Leicester or Southampton, Guardiola admitted his concern over De Bruyne. “Hopefully it’s not serious. He’s being checked. I don’t know right now,” said the manager, who added: “I think Kevin is back, no? It’s the Kevin we know. He made a huge effort against Shakhtar Donetsk. He played a few minutes in a difficult situation at Spurs [on Monday]. Today he was involved in the offensive and defensive side.” Guardiola retained only John Stones from the 1-0 win at Tottenham and professed himself pleased with City’s performance. “Everybody was good. Brahim made two goals; Aro Muric gave us good security; Phil Foden plays a good level every time. We made an excellent performance without the ball in terms of how aggressive we were. Fulham have the quality to play even though they are not in a good moment in terms of results. “We played like the game deserved. We made the space and created enough chances. I’m so satisfied.” Díaz could leave City next summer on a free transfer. “We want him but it doesn’t depend on us, it is the agent, him, family, they decide,” Guardiola said. “My opinion is not changed because of two goals. The opinion is so high. To compete with Leroy Sané, Raheem Sterling, Bernardo Silva, Sergio Agüero, Gabriel Jesus – it is not easy to find space in the team. He knew that in the beginning and we are delighted with him. He decides. It’s simple.” Slavisa Jokanovic made three changes – Tom Cairney, Luciano Vietto and André-Frank Zambo Anguissa came in – with the Fulham manager desperate for a win after losing the past four games. De Bruyne took only moments to show his class with a shot and followed that with a cross-shot Sergio Rico was grateful to gather. Fulham were wide open and sloppiness appeared to be City’s only enemy. It was too easy. Sané fed Foden and his fierce shot was beaten away and De Bruyne’s follow-up was deflected for a corner. City’s lead arrived when the ball broke following a corner. It bounced off Vincent Kompany’s left knee and Díaz’s hunger allowed him to beat Fosu-Mensah to the ball and hit home. Next, Danilo skated along the right and was allowed to career into a shooting position. Only Rico’s left post kept out the right-back’s blazing shot. City had Fulham were they love to have all opponents: pinned in and around the area facing constant waves of attack. At this juncture De Bruyne, Danilo, Díaz, and Fabian Delph were a blur of interchanging passing. When Foden laid off a simple ball to Sané rather than shoot it was a telling illustration of smart decision-making by the 18-year-old midfielder. City, though, did ease off. Passes went astray and the pace sagged. This had Guardiola hanging his head and, for all their dominance, City were only a goal up. They did, though, commence the second half with intent but Aleksandar Mitrovic gave City a scare when he breached the penalty box – a near collector’s item – before Foden broke down the left. After swapping passes with Oleksandr Zinchenko he put in Jesus but a player with only one goal in his past 11 appearances showed why, proving unable to at least pose Rico a question. The match was played at an under-capacity Etihad Stadium with a flat atmosphere. City had caught the mood and a passage of prolonged Fulham pressure showed they retained hope. Díaz still sparkled. One moment he was back helping to defend, the next performing a soft-shoe shuffle to create space for a shot. It was the Spaniard who doubled City’s lead. An injection of what had been missing – speed – from Sané led to Foden touching on to Jesus and, after his attempt came off Rico’s left post, Díaz smashed home. Sané was now back on song: driving at Fulham and causing them headaches. Foden produced a dinked pass that put in Sané and it began to feel a long way back for Fulham. With 13 minutes left Riyad Mahrez replaced Díaz. The forward received an ovation plus a hug from Guardiola, who brought on the 18-year-old French midfielder Claudio Gomes for his debut.