A bigger slump than the one that followed the financial crisis. A 25% fall in the value of the pound. An annual inflation rate of 6.6%. Official borrowing costs up to 5.5%. Our job, Mark Carney said, is not to hope for the best but to prepare for the worst. And the governor of the Bank of England certainly laid it on. Asked by MPs on the Treasury select committee to imagine what could happen to the economy in the worst possible scenario, Carney painted a bleak picture of goods not clearing customs, the EU refusing to accept UK products and financial markets in meltdown. The Bank is not actually saying that the economy is going to shrink by 8% in a single year. For that to occur, three conditions would need to be fulfilled: the UK would need to leave the EU without a deal next spring; that departure would come as a bolt from the blue; and it would prompt punitive action from Brussels. “It is what could happen,” Carney said, “not what’s most likely to happen.” The governor’s was not the only game in town. There had been another attempt at futurology earlier in the day when the Department for Exiting the EU published a paper outlining four possible Brexit scenarios: May’s now defunct frictionless trade Chequers model; a Norway-type arrangement where Britain is outside the customs union but part of the single market; a free-trade deal similar to that signed between the EU and Canada; and operating on World Trade Organization terms. It concluded the prime minister’s Chequers plan offered the least economically damaging form of Brexit. Predicting the future of the economy is next to impossible. Forecasters find it hard enough to gauge what will happen over the next three months, let alone the next 15 years. The Treasury and the Bank of England have got it wrong many times in the recent past – not least in their failure to spot the 2008 financial crisis coming – so any studies of the impact of Brexit have to come with a prominent health warning. And both did. The Whitehall-prepared paper was full of caveats, noting that the structure of the economy could change radically over the next 15 years. It takes no account, for example, of two factors that could have a much bigger longer-term impact than Brexit: the march of the robots and climate change. Government policy is also assumed to be unchanged, which of course is unrealistic. Even so, May will welcome the governor’s doomsday scenarios and the Whitehall version, however hedged around with qualifications. But we have been here before. In the weeks leading up to the EU referendum in June 2016, both the Bank and the Treasury issued warnings of the bad things that would happen in the event of a vote to leave, none of which came true. This time the constituency is much smaller: the 600-odd MPs who will vote on May’s EU agreement early next month. It looks like the last roll of the dice.