If victory in the 2016 Masters will always be the biggest of Danny Willett’s career, this triumph in Dubai on Sunday may yet rank as the most significant. Typically, success for Willett at the DP World Tour Championship did not arrive without an element of drama. Willett took to the 72nd hole holding a two-shot lead. His subsequent tee shot clung for dear life onto the edge of a water hazard; the man himself thought the ball was wet. It rather summed up Willett’s last 31 months that he was denied a nerveless walk towards the trophy. With wider context in mind, Willett was not likely to fret. His trials and tribulations since claiming the Green Jacket have been linked to a back injury as much as form. At one stage, the Yorkshireman slipped to 462nd in the world rankings. When he spoke of being in a “very dark place” there was no exaggeration. Willett wondered at times whether his career had longevity. Externally, there was sniping; Willett was harshly portrayed as a one-hit major wonder, a tone of analysis which wrongly ignored his progress before events at Augusta National. Willett even had to withstand the unwanted written musings of his brother as he prepared for a Ryder Cup debut. This response, after so much professional turmoil, was superb. “It’s been tough,” Willett conceded. “I’m just massively proud of myself and everyone that’s been around me. You never quite know when a win is around the corner and with all the things that have happened, I was never quite sure if it was going to happen again. “We’ve battled long and hard through this season to come out at the end, regardless of what happened today, a better person and a better athlete. It’s a special place. It’s been a hell of a lot of work and it’s just nice to be back.” An indication that this may be Willett’s day arrived early. Having started the fourth round in a share of the lead with Patrick Reed, Willett converted an eagle putt from 40ft at the 2nd. Reed was struggling; the reigning Masters champion played his front nine in two over par. Reed duly responded as one would expect, with four birdies in six inward half holes. The 17th at the Earth Course, as so often proves the case, was definitive. As Reed wastefully missed the green to the left, from whence he could only summon a bogey four, Willett produced a magnificent iron to within 5ft. Willett’s two afforded him breathing space, now by two over Matt Wallace, which even that wobbly last tee shot could not offset. Willett’s 18 under total secured a two-stroke win. Reed closed with a birdie to share second with Wallace, the Englishman who has enjoyed a superb European Tour season. Adrian Otaegui, Dean Burmester an Jon Rahm shared fourth at minus 14. On a day of multiple prizes, Francesco Molinari was unsurprisingly confirmed as the winner of the European Tour’s order of merit long before the tournament reached its conclusion. Tommy Fleetwood had to win the DP World Tour Championship to halt Molinari; the defending Race to Dubai champion closed with a 71 for a share of 26th. In an endearing sight, Molinari was among the first to congratulate an emotional Willett as he stepped from the final green. In concluding a year which saw him crowned Open champion before heroics in the Ryder Cup, Molinari was a perfectly fitting Race to Dubai winner. “It’s incredible,” said Molinari. “You know, now I’m going to have time to sit down and relax and really think back about the last few months. This morning on the 1st tee, the announcement is ‘The winner of the Open Championship, Race to Dubai leader,’ it doesn’t sound real. “It’s more than I ever dreamed of achieving. I’ve seen guys that I think are better players than me not winning majors and not winning order of merits. To achieve those things in one single season is just incredible. “You look at the players who have won the Race to Dubai and obviously it’s only really the top players that have done it. It means a lot because it’s a season a long race. In a week, you can beat anyone, really. You can have your perfect four days of golf and win a tournament, but to win something like this obviously shows how good the season has been. Ideally, it would have been nice to come here in better shape and close it out in better fashion, but I think both Tommy and I, we’re really exhausted after a very long season. I’m very proud.” He wasn’t the only one. Willett’s long-awaited celebrations marked a wholly appropriate conclusion to a memorable season.