India made their biggest call of the semi-final before a ball was even bowled: dropping veteran Mithali Raj. Criticised for her conservative approach to Twenty20 batting, it was a bold, brave decision that fitted with the new, exciting approach to the format which they have touted during this tournament. Unfortunately, when it came to semi-final crunch time, the reality did not quite match up to the rhetoric. In a collapse that was reminiscent of their poor showing in the 2017 World Cup final, India crumbled from 88-2 to 112 all out with three balls of their innings unused: of the key top four, only Smriti Mandhana could muster a strike rate above 100. England then eased their way to their first 20-over global final since 2014, winning by eight wickets with 17 balls remaining as both Amy Jones and Nat Sciver accumulated unbeaten half-centuries. “Everyone’s so happy,” player of the match Jones said after the match. “To finish it pretty convincingly – everyone is so, so pleased. I saw this tournament as a big opportunity for me with the gloves, and I’m glad that I could contribute with the bat too. I’m feeling very good right now.” England had initially experienced some nerves in their chase, both openers holing out in the powerplay to leave England 24-2. But Jones and Sciver’s 92-run partnership put them in firm control of the situation. This was keeper Jones’ coming-of-age moment: her 45-ball fifty was her first in T20 internationals, and it was she – fittingly – who stroked the winning runs through midwicket. Along the way she hit her first six in the format, as England showed the aggressive intent that India had so lacked. “We felt pretty confident,” Jones said. “The total wasn’t really high. I knew if we just batted through and had a good partnership we’d be in a good place. Nat [Sciver] was fantastic. She came in and straight away took the pressure off. She’s an attacking batter – I could easily take the singles and I knew that as long as we stayed in together we’d get the job done. “We kept reminding each other to take the easy options, take the runs they give us. So we were constantly talking about that, and just trying to stay relaxed.” After winning the toss India should have been in pole position, England’s Heather Knight admitting that she, too, would have preferred to have avoided chasing on a tricky slow pitch. But a painful innings from opener Taniya Bhatia immediately started the rot: 11 off 19 balls, batting in a style that was scarcely different from Mithali’s old approach. At the other end, Smriti Mandhana diced with death in the opening overs, with some uppish drives falling just clear of the infield. The diciest was a catch put down by a diving Sophie Ecclestone at cover when Smriti was on just 13. Ecclestone atoned for her mistake 18 balls later as she clung onto a caught-and-bowled chance off her own bowling, but in the meantime it had cost England 21 runs. Three overs later Knight removed Bhatia from contention, and the crowd awaited the Harmanpreet Kaur show. But there was an air of anti-climax, as the Indian captain struggled for several overs to get the ball off the square. She showed some semblance of her old self, taking on Kirstie Gordon with a huge six over long off, but could only muster up 16 off 20 balls, eventually top-edging Gordon to Sciver at cover in a slog-gone-wrong. By that time India were 94-5, with Jemimah Rodrigues – who shared a 36-run partnership with Harmanpreet – also back in the hutch thanks to a brilliant run out from Tammy Beaumont at backward point, one of three such dismissals across the India innings. From there it was easy pickings for Knight, who – having not bowled a single over in England’s previous two matches – finished with figures of 3-9, ripping through the late middle order. Should she bowl herself in the final against Australia, she will start on a hat-trick. “Our bowlers were fantastic today,” Jones said. “To restrict them to that total was brilliant. The spinners in particular – Kirstie Gordon has been fantastic throughout. They made it a lot easier for us.” On this evidence, the final is a mouth-watering prospect: Australia may be tournament favourites but the calm way in which Jones and Sciver approached the run chase puts England in firm contention. They will be looking to avenge their 2016 semi-final defeat to Australia when they take to the field on Saturday.