Two years ago, in the World Twenty20 semi-final in Delhi, England suffered a humiliation at the hands of Australia: a six-run loss, courtesy of a collapse that saw them lose seven wickets for 60 runs. In the interim they have changed their captain, blooded new players and won a World Cup. Even so there was a sense of deja vu today as they subsided from 30-1 to 105 all out, the equation this time nine wickets lost for 75 runs. Once again, it was the old enemy Australia who were their nemesis, storming to their fourth World T20 title by eight wickets. For Australia it was their young leg-spinner Georgia Wareham who unexpectedly stole the show in her first ever outing against England, finishing with 2-11, a catch and a direct hit run-out to her name. “It’s unreal - it hasn’t sunk in just yet,” Wareham said. “Getting the opportunity on the world stage has been enormous for me, and done lots for my cricket. It’s an amazing feeling.” Ashleigh Gardner (33*) and Meg Lanning (28*) then shared a 62-run partnership, Lanning stroking the winning single through the off-side after Gardner punished two huge sixes over Kirstie Gordon’s head to ensure the victory came in style, with 29 balls to spare. Wareham’s big contributions had come at opposite ends of the England innings. It was her run out of Amy Jones with a direct hit from midwicket that started the rot, the star of England’s semi-final short of her ground by 2 metres, leaving her side 30-2 at the end of the powerplay. Eight overs later Wareham demolished the defences of the late-middle order, seeing off Lauren Winfield and Sophia Dunkley with successive deliveries. The Winfield wicket required an astute DRS review, the original on-field decision overturned after the ball tracker showed it would be hitting middle stump. Though Knight safely played out Wareham’s hat-trick ball, the damage had already been done, the England captain’s sparky 25 unable to successfully prop up the middle order. Wareham finally had her number in the 18th over, snaffling a good catch at mid-off to give fellow spinner Gardner (3-22) her third wicket of the day. By that time it was clear that England had fallen a fair way short of a par total. On another day in another final 4,000 miles away, Anya Shrubsole had made sure an under-par total was enough: not this time. Player of the Tournament Alyssa Healy got Australia’s chase going early by punishing Shrubsole for three boundaries in her first over of the day: the bowler’s frustration was clear. Healy eventually added just 22 runs to her tournament tally, bowled by Sophie Ecclestone in the fifth over, and opening partner Beth Mooney also fell cheaply, caught behind when on 14. Even at 44-2, though, Australia seemed largely in control of the situation: Gardner and Lanning did the rest. Earlier, it had been Australia who blinked first, their fielding going awry in the opening overs as usually reliable players let boundaries through their legs and dropped crucial catches. England’s top scorer Danni Wyatt should have gone early, Rachael Haynes spilling a difficult chance at point in the second over of the day. Four balls later Healy herself made a rare error, putting down a flying high catch behind the stumps, giving Wyatt yet another life. It meant that Ellyse Perry had to wait a little longer for her 100th T20 wicket: when it finally came, it did so in trademark fashion, a yorker that trapped Nat Sciver LBW. Wyatt, though, ploughed on, finally coming to the party in this World Twenty20 after a run of low scores. She took 11 off Sophie Molineux’s first over, dancing down the track to send the ball back over the left-armer’s head and forcing an early bowling change from Lanning. Dropped on 11, 12 and 34, Australia took four attempts to get rid of her: she was eventually deceived 7 runs short of her half-century by a flighted delivery from Gardner, finally finding a safe pair of hands in Meg Lanning at cover. Had she batted out the innings England might have salvaged a decent total, but then Wyatt has always been a live by the sword, die by the sword kind of a player. Their under-par showing in the final completes what has been a difficult World Twenty20 with the bat for England, only Amy Jones finishing in the top ten tournament run-scorers. For Australia, meanwhile, the challenge was always to live up to pre-tournament expectations which put them as clear favourites: today’s clinical victory shows they have done just that.