Before Theresa May’s crunch Brexit cabinet meeting on Wednesday, a lobby hack asked the prime minister’s spokesman: does the cabinet have full confidence in the prime minister? Usually it’s the other way round – the prime minister is asked whether she has full confidence in an unruly or scatty minister. However, as May’s premiership enters its most difficult days yet, the power to grant or take away confidence lies firmly with her ministers and MPs. And it is becoming increasingly clear that, despite May’s cabinet having signed off her deal, confidence is fading fast. Dominic Raab’s resignation this morning as Brexit secretary is a near-fatal blow to May’s Brexit plan – and to her premiership. Prior to the meeting, No 10 aides privately conceded that, of all the ministers that could resign, it was Raab that they could not afford to lose. Raab helped May keep the show on the road in the aftermath of the Chequers backlash, in which the key Brexiteers David Davis and Boris Johnson quit. A pragmatic Brexiteer, Raab was a crucial hire for No 10, as the choice showed that May’s plan still had appeal to leave voters. Raab’s announcement that he cannot support the proposed deal in good faith means that it will now be even harder for Brexiteer MPs to be swung into voting May’s plan through parliament. The government’s Brexit position was opposed by 11 ministers at cabinet – with 18 supporting it. The lack of enthusiasm for the deal from Brexiteer ministers means few will be willing to get out there and sell it to the public. It’s not hard to see why they would be reluctant to wax lyrical about it on the Andrew Marr sofa. If agreed, the UK pays billions to the EU in a divorce bill – something Boris Johnson once suggested Brussels could “go whistle” over. Free trade deals look off the menu for the foreseeable as a result of a UK-wide customs union in the backstop agreement – which the UK could leave only if an independent arbitration panel consisting of five people agreed. As for taking back control, there is a continued role for the European court of justice, at least in the short to medium term. Yet May’s big problem relates not just to those around the decision-making table, but to the parliamentary party at large. As Raab’s resignation demonstrated, the anger in Eurosceptic circles cannot be underestimated, and a confidence vote could finally materialise within days. Up until now, the European Research Group of Brexiteer backbenchers had insisted the problem was with the policy not with the person promoting it. That has changed, and Jacob Rees-Mogg will not rule out submitting a letter of no confidence in the near future. “Theresa May is the problem,” complained a member of the group. Were the magic number of 48 to be reached, more than half of all Conservative MPs would need to say they no longer have confidence in the PM. That is not a given, but there is new thinking among Brexiteers that it could still be worth it, as the fact they could call the vote would be a display of strength. If they can show there are 48 Tory MPs who have no faith in May, it sends a message that there are 48 Tory MPs who will not vote for her deal. This would be uncomfortable for No 10 as it would reveal how the Conservative government is having to rely on Labour votes to get its plan through. Even now, the idea that this deal will pass seems pie in the sky – but the chief whip, Julian Smith, has said it is possible. To make it happen, the suspicion is that the government will need many Labour MPs to make up for losing the support of the DUP and swaths of angry Tories. “Increasingly, I can’t see how they would get it through without a significant number of Labour MPs getting behind it,” remarked one Tory MP. Already May’s allies are trying to buy her time by suggesting she doesn’t need to get her deal through on the first attempt – they argue that it could be voted on a second time once MPs saw the markets go and they came under pressure from businesses and constituents. This fear is what No 10 appears to be relying on to sell the deal to MPs. May will argue to colleagues that, if they don’t back her, they will be responsible for a chaotic no deal that will open the door to Jeremy Corbyn becoming prime minister. However, Tory MPs are tired of being lectured by No 10 and trust is at an all-time low. No deal may be something the government is not adequately prepared for, but that doesn’t mean MPs will be pushed into taking what they view as a very bad deal. It follows that May needs to quickly come up with a convincing argument for her deal if she is to get more MPs on side. One argument in its favour – made by the odd Tory MP – is that it actually represents a closely won referendum result quite well: a lot of leave voters wanted freedom of movement to end, and it will; one of the remain concerns about Brexit was what it would do to the economy – this arrangement keeps market access, even if it does mean losing influence as part of that. But as this morning’s events have shown, such arguments have been given little airing. Instead the narrative is one of Brexit betrayal. At this rate, May will be lucky to still be in place as prime minister when she wishes to put this deal to a vote next month. Confidence that she can do that – let alone pass it – is fading fast. •Katy Balls is the Spectator’s political correspondent