With less than a fortnight to go before the meaningful vote on Theresa May’s Brexit deal, more details are emerging about how the government will structure the vote – and their strategy. Government sources have confirmed they have dropped attempts, previously being spearheaded by the former Brexit secretary Dominic Raab, to make the motion impossible to amend. Instead, they will allow MPs to table a string of potential amendments – likely to come from across the political spectrum, from European Research Group hardliners to “people’s vote” enthusiasts. Labour is also considering tabling an amendment setting out its own, alternative Brexit policy, in the hope that it can thereby demonstrate significant parliamentary backing for it. Even May’s most loyal lieutenants know the odds against the deal passing are now all but insurmountable, with more than 90 of their own MPs pledged publicly to reject it. But they hope MPs’ minds will be more keenly focused on the decision at hand, if a series of amendments are voted on before the main motion, and have failed to command majority support. That would upturn the sequence of events in the minds of many at Westminster, who are busily game-planning for what comes after the meaningful vote is lost. MPs of all shades of opinion hope a majority will coalesce behind their preferred policy in the aftermath of the vote, at 7pm on 11 December; but many of these, all of which have their vehement champions in parliament, contradict each other. A Norway-style deal, which is being enthusiastically discussed both inside and outside the cabinet, would be rejected by the prime minister, who has repeatedly signalled that she believes “ending free movement once and for all” was one of the messages voters sent in the 2016 referendum. Labour’s frontbench would also be likely to reject such a deal: Jeremy Corbyn’s spokesman said on Wednesday: “We’ve said in relation to the Norway option that we just don’t think it works for Britain and we’ve said that all along.”