Michel Barnier has sought to sell the provisional Brexit deal by insisting the UK was now “taking back control” of its laws, in an echo of the Vote Leave campaign slogan, and calling for member states to recognise the progress made amid signs of fracture. With concerns high over the volatility in Westminster, and some worries being expressed within the EU about the advantages handed to the UK, the EU’s chief negotiator called for calm following a meeting with ministers for the 27 member states. Barnier said the EU ministers agreed that there were no more talks with the British to be had on the withdrawal agreement, despite the suggestion by some in the cabinet that the text should be reopened to find improvements. “We are in fact at the decisive moment in this process, no one should lose sight of the progress that has been achieved in Brussels and in London,” Barnier said. “Both the EU and the UK will have full control over their own legislation and rule-making. “This is essential on our side for the integrity of the single market. It is essential for the UK in terms of taking back control. Now more than ever we must all reman claim, and I will remain calm, and keep on our focus for the UK to leave the EU in an orderly fashion.” Brussels is preparing for a special Brexit summit next Sunday, where leaders will formally sign off on the withdrawal agreement and the accompanying political declaration on the future relationship, on which negotiations are continuing. The seven-page outline of the political declaration is expected to become a significantly longer document by the time it is published, which may be as early as Tuesday. Ministers for the 27 EU member states had spoken earlier of their concern about the threat in London to the Brexit deal as they made their final preparations to end “45 years of difficult marriage”. The deputy prime minister of Belgium, Didier Reynders, said of the withdrawal agreement, including the contentious solution to the Irish border issue, that it was “the best” way forward after two years of talks. “Here it will survive,” he said. “We are [hoping for] the same situation in London but here in Brussels it will survive.” “From the EU side Michel Barnier has organised a very good process with the 27 member states but also in the negotiations with London,” he added. “I’m sure that we are now at the end of the process so I’m hoping it will be possible also in London to go further.” Some member states are not happy that the UK has been given a customs union in the withdrawal agreement without strict enough conditions to ensure the European economy cannot be undercut. France is among those that also want a guarantee of a satisfactory agreement for European fishermen who work in British waters in the political declaration, having not achieved that goal in the withdrawal agreement. EU sources said that any attempt to open the withdrawal agreement at this stage would result in EU member states inputting their own further conditions. Nathalie Loiseau, the French EU affairs minister, said: “The 27 went at the end of their margins of manoeuvre. Now we are waiting for the British to greet this agreement as well for its value, that is, to move forward. “We do not want to reopen the agreement but we will be very vigilant about its implementation, to ensure that, for example if we were to use the backstop, everything that is fair competition is perfectly well taken into account. “Then we will be very attentive to the political declaration on the future relationship, again on the issues of fair competition, on the access of fishermen to British waters.” Loiseau said France was “flexible” on extending the 21-month transition period until the end of 2022, as suggested by Barnier at a meeting with ambassadors on Sunday. The transition period, which will be used to negotiate the future relationship, must be time limited with only one extension, she said, otherwise “there would not be enough predictability for all actors”. The Spanish foreign minister, Josep Borrell, said his government wanted it to be clearer that a future trade deal would only extend to Gibraltar should separate bilateral negotiations over tax affairs and the local airport be successful, an EU red-line agreed last year. “We want to make sure the interpretation of this text is clear and shows that what’s being negotiated between the EU and the UK does not apply to Gibraltar”, Borrell told reporters in Brussels on Monday. “The future negotiations over Gibraltar are separate,” he added. “Until that’s clear in the exit text and the political declaration over the future relationship, we won’t be able to agree to it.” Alan Duncan, a British foreign minister visiting Brussels, said his colleagues in parliament should be “realistic” when assessing the deal brokered with Brussels – and stop ordering the prime minister around. He said: “My message to parliamentary colleagues back in London is: back the prime minister 100%, be realistic that what we need here is a deal that can last for the future, and telling the prime minister what to do all the time is not going to make anything better, so back her 100% and what matters is what is discussed between the UK and the EU, not the voices that are telling the prime minister to do things back in the UK, so let’s be optimistic. “I have optimism, we have to be realistic in appreciating that everything is a bit of a compromise; there are no perfect outcomes in what is a very complex issue, but I hope in the years ahead we can make sure that the UK works very closely still with our friends in Europe but within a new structure and we’ve got to make sure those friendships are good for everybody and lead to continuing prosperity”, Duncan added. Gernot Blümel, the EU affairs minister for Austria, which holds the rolling presidency, said of the coming days: “A painful week in European politics is starting. We have the divorce papers on the table. Forty-five years of difficult marriage are coming to an end.”