Jürgen Klopp has claimed every club in Europe would covet Sadio Mané after the Senegal forward became the latest Liverpool player to commit his future to the club by signing a new long-term contract. Mané, who moved to Anfield from Southampton in 2016 for £34m, has been in negotiations with Liverpool over a new deal since the end of last season but has now agreed terms on what is understood to be a five-year deal lasting until 2023 worth around £150,000 a week. It is a justified reward for the 26-year-old, who has scored 40 goals from 89 appearances and was voted as the club’s player of the year in his debut season. “I am very happy, very happy to extend my time at Liverpool,” Mané told Liverpoolfc.com. “It is a great day for me and now I am looking forward to everything – to helping the team, to helping the club achieve our dreams and, especially, to win trophies. “I’ve always said, when I knew I had a chance to come here I didn’t have to think twice. The right club in the right moment and with the right coach as well. I came here and was very happy. For me, I have made the best decision in my career.” Mané has been a mainstay of Liverpool’s attack this season, scoring six goals in the Premier League as Klopp’s side attempt to sustain a title challenge to Manchester City. He joins Mohamed Salah and Roberto Firmino in signing new five-year contracts in the last 12 months. “This is a big boost for everyone and another demonstration of how the players we have at this club are committed, not just to our present but our future also,” said Klopp. “I can’t think of a single club anywhere in Europe that wouldn’t want a player like Sadio available to them, so the fact he wants to remain with us says something about where we are currently. “He is a such an important member of our team and squad. He radiates joy and I think this is reflected in his performances and impact on the pitch. The only criticism I could ever have of Sadio is that maybe at times he is the only one not to see just how good he is but as an attacking player he is the complete package. “He made a big impact when he first arrived, but if anything he’s got better and better each season. His trajectory has only been upwards in terms of his level and his contribution.”