Elliot Daly 6 The Springboks gave him an uncomfortable afternoon under the high ball but much improved display in defence and attack. Chris Ashton 7 Stunned New Zealand with a try in the first two minutes and was always a threat. Good defensive display on his comeback. Henry Slade 6 Had few chances to show his silky running skills. The centre pinned the All Blacks back with some smart tactical kicks under pressure. Ben Te’o 6 Made a number of telling incursions to get England over the gainline and very strong in defence when his side were denied possession. Jonny May 6 Remembered for his scintillating try in this fixture four years ago. No opportunities for a repeat but some good intelligent touches. Owen Farrell (co-capt) 6 No controversy about his tackles this week. Two of them, on Kieran Read and Damian McKenzie, could be felt in the stands. Ben Youngs 8 His wondrous pass for the first try set the tone for one of his best games for England. His tactical kicking and passing were excellent. Ben Moon 6 Picked ahead of his fellow Exeter Chief Alec Hepburn he was solid in the scrum against Owen Franks and made some important tackles. Dylan Hartley (co-capt) 6 Driven over for his third international try in the second quarter and strong display before Jamie George took over at the break. Kyle Sinckler 7 A real force in the loose where he made some decisive early carries and a number of thumping tackles. His best game for England. Maro Itoje 7 A tower of strength in the lineout and his line speed rocked the All Blacks in the first half. Gave nothing against the world’s best pack. George Kruis 6 The Saracens lock has been a very able replacement for injured Joe Launchbury this autumn. A very strong set-piece game. Brad Shields 6 The former Hurricanes captain was taken off after 27 minutes for a head injury assessment but returned to give a real muscular display. Sam Underhill 9 Chosen to make life difficult for Beauden Barrett. He unsettled New Zealand with his tackling before being denied chance to make history. Mark Wilson 7 He has had two terrific games to help England solve their No 8 crisis and did piles of unseen dirty work in filthy conditions. Replacements Jamie George (for Hartley ht) 6, Alec Hepburn (for Moon 57) 6, Harry Williams (for Sinckler 57) 6, Charlie Ewels (for Kruis 66) 6, Courtney Lawes (for Shields 64) 7, Danny Care (for Youngs 62) 7, George Ford (for Te’o 72) n/a, Jack Nowell (for Ashton 67) 6 Damian McKenzie 7 Tested under high balls in the freezing rain he showed off his dazzling footwork and scored a smart try that turned the game. Ben Smith 6 A lovely gliding run after half an hour and got stronger as the game wore on. He was always a threat to the English defence. Jack Goodhue 6 The young Crusaders centre made some muscular breaks and good offloads as New Zealand moved their gears after a terrible start. Sonny Bill Williams 5 The centre had a point to prove after his Lions experience last year but had an unhappy half an hour before being replaced by Ryan Crotty. Rieko Ioane 6 The Auckland try-machine had few chances to improve on his record which is better than any wing in the world. Beauden Barrett 8 The world’s best player set up McKenzie for his try and turned the game New Zealand’s way. Scored his first international drop-goal. Terrific. Aaron Smith 6 Smith may be the world’s best scrum-half but he was outshone by his opposite number. Improved after the break. Karl Tu’inukuafe 7 The 21st Auckland bouncer seized his opportunity in the absence of Joe Moody and played a big role in stabilising the world’s strongest scrum. Codie Taylor 7 The top hooker in the world this year and his duel for the No 2 shirt with Dane Cole will be interesting. Played big role in set-pieces. Owen Franks 6 A solid display against Ben Moon and made some telling breaks and tackles. Franks worked tirelessly in the first half. Sam Whitelock 7 His second-row partnership with Retallick is the best in the world and he made some big carries particularly late in the game. Brodie Retallick 8 Injured for much of the season the All Blacks enforcer fluffed at the kick-off but went on to help disrupt the English lineout. The best All Black forward. Liam Squire 5 The Highlanders back-rower worked hard and made a number of thumping tackles but not one of his most influential games. Ardie Savea 7 Sam Cane’s openside berth is in good hands. He was very strong at the breakdown but missed a try-scoring chance just after half-time. Kieran Read (captain) 7 The captain made a key decision just before the break when he spurned three points. Leadership dug All Blacks out of a deep, deep hole. Replacements Dane Coles (for Taylor 44) 6, Ofa Tu’ungafasi (for Tu’inukuuafe 55) 6, Nepo Laulata (for Franks 44) 6, Scott Barrett (for Squire 51) 6, Matt Todd (for Savea 67) 6, TJ Perenara (for A Smith, 62, 5) 5, Richie Mo’unga (for McKenzie 62) 6, Ryan Crotty (for Williams 30) 7