The Irish government has said it does not want to see any “hardening” of the border in the Irish Sea, ahead of a crunch cabinet meeting in Dublin on Brexit on Wednesday morning. The prime minister, Leo Varadkar, and his deputy, Simon Coveney, had a two-hour teleconference call with Ireland’s representative in Brussels last night following leaks that the deal had been agreed. However, there were indications that they had not yet seen the 500-page draft withdrawal agreement but were merely apprised of the detail. Varadkar has called his ministers to a specially convened cabinet meeting at 9.30 this morning with a possible statement later today. His party’s Brexit spokesman in the senate, Neale Richmond, said the priority was to ensure the backstop provision to guarantee the Irish border remains open “never comes into play”. Richmond told RTE’s Morning Ireland that there was no desire to humiliate the UK as the DUP’s Brexit spokesman, Sammy Wilson, has suggested following the Brexit leaks on Tuesday. “The priority will always be that in the future declaration framework that in the next transition period we can negotiate that deep and meaningful trade customs and regulatory arrangement between the EU and the UK as a whole, that will ensure not only is there no hard border on the island of Ireland but there is no hardening of the border down the Irish Sea, that’s something the government is keen to achieve and I think can achieve,” Richmond said. “There is no ambition to humiliate anyone. Whatever the deal will be it won’t be a good deal, because there simply is no such thing as a good deal.” Former Irish prime minister Bertie Ahern told RTE the Brexit agreement is a “good deal” for Ireland but a “hard sell” for Theresa May. But he said the UK-wide customs arrangement instead of a discrete backstop for the Irish border was a “victory” for her as it was a “big concession” from the EU. A nervousness has descended in Dublin over the cabinet meeting in Westminster with a virtual media blackout on the subject of Brexit on Wednesday morning. Ireland has said that Brexit is the most damaging event in its history with the lucrative £56.5bn (€65bn) a year trade with the UK at risk if there are barriers in the form of tariffs or border checks. Sources said the government wants to stay “below the radar” and see how Theresa May’s cabinet meeting plays out and whether she will survive without any resignations. It has been widely reported that there is just one “backstop” to ensure the Irish border remains open in the withdrawal agreement. A backstop is required to ensure there is no hard border in Ireland if a comprehensive free trade deal cannot be signed before the end of 2020. Theresa May has proposed to the EU that the whole of the UK would remain in the customs union after Brexit, but Brussels has said it needs more time to evaluate the proposal. As a result, the EU insists on having its own backstop - the backstop to the backstop - which would mean Northern Ireland would remain in the single market and customs union in the absence of a free trade deal, prompting fierce objections from Conservative hard Brexiters and the DUP, which props up her government. That prompted May to propose a country-wide alternative in which the whole of the UK would remain in parts of the customs union after Brexit. “The EU still requires a ‘backstop to the backstop’ – effectively an insurance policy for the insurance policy. And they want this to be the Northern Ireland-only solution that they had previously proposed,” May told MPs. Raising the stakes, the prime minister said the EU’s insistence amounted to a threat to the constitution of the UK: “We have been clear that we cannot agree to anything that threatens the integrity of our United Kingdom,” she added. The backstop, which is envisaged as an insurance policy in the event of no deal, however is deeply embedded with the terms of the transition period with a temporary UK-wide customs arrangement. There are expected to be specific provisions for Northern Ireland which involve closer regulatory alignment to the single market with a review mechanism. It is believed the first review date would be in July 2020. This would enable the two sides to agree one of three things. The first would be the implementation of a new regime un January 2021 at the end of the transition period. This would be predicated on a final deal on the future trade and security relationship being complete or near completion by then, which many think is highly unlikely. The second option would be to agree a short extension to the transition period to enable negotiations to continue. Theresa May has suggested an extension of just three months may be needed. The third option would be the backstop in the event of no deal and no extension in the transition period. This would mean the UK remaining in the customs union until further notice with deeper provisions for Northern Ireland in relation to single market regulations. Richmond repeatedly said it was important to project the discussion beyond the withdrawal agreement as the long-term “priority” for Ireland was a future relationship with the UK.