Robert Kubica will complete a remarkable and unlikely comeback to Formula One after Williams announced the Polish driver will race for them next year. It will be Kubica’s first competitive F1 drive for eight years since he suffered severe injuries and a partial amputation of an arm in a rallying accident. Rated as one of the best drivers of his generation until the accident, Kubica has been welcomed by his contemporaries across the paddock as they prepare for the season finale in Abu Dhabi this weekend. “Being back on the F1 grid next season will be one of the greatest achievements of my life,” he said. “I’m sure with hard work and commitment we will be able to help motivate the team to achieve good things together. Thank you again to everyone who has supported me and believed in me. I cannot wait to get back racing.” The 33-year-old showed an aptitude and love of racing from an early age. He began competitive karting in Poland when he was 10, going on to win six titles in three years. By 2006 he had been taken on by BMW Sauber as a reserve driver and replaced Jacques Villeneuve at the team in mid-season, becoming Poland’s first F1 driver. He went on to complete 76 grand prix starts, with 12 podium finishes and one victory at Canada in 2008. He joined Renault in 2010 but before the 2011 season began crashed during the Ronde di Andora rally, in northern Italy. The injuries he sustained were so severe they were expected to end Kubica’s career. As well as the partial amputation, he suffered compound fractures and a major loss of blood. He admits he now has to drive “70%” left-handed and his recovery and return are a huge achievement, acknowledged by fellow drivers. Lewis Hamilton said: “I raced him from karting days so I have known him for a long, long time. He was always one of the most talented drivers that I have had the pleasure of racing. It’s just great to see that he’s got the opportunity back. It’s exciting for the sport to see him back in action.” Williams have endured a terrible year and are bottom of the constructors’ championship but McLaren’s Fernando Alonso, who is driving in his last F1 race, still believed the Pole would be a valuable addition to the grid. He referred to him as “one of the greats”, adding: “It remains to be seen what will be the performance of the car, and his own performance because we only saw a couple of tests but if he is 100% he will be amazing to watch.” Kubica knows the real challenge lies ahead. “I would like to thank everyone who has helped me over these last few years,” he said. “It has been a long road to get to this point, but as that challenge now comes to an end with this announcement, a new challenge begins, working with Williams on track.” His comeback began by returning to rallying before taking part in GT racing. He then had a test in a 2012 Renault last year and went on to test the 2017 car for Renault and Williams and this season he has been latter’s reserve driver. With the full time seat he will join Britain’s George Russell who, with a 37-point lead, is poised to secure the GP2 title this weekend at Yas Marina. With Williams losing their Martini sponsorship at the end of this season, Kubica is also believed to be bringing backing from PKN Orlen, a Polish petrol retailer and oil refiner. He will also bring legions of Polish fans whose support has never wavered in the years he has been out of the sport, with Kubica banners a regular feature at many races since his accident.