Florida’s election torment is set to continue after officials ordered a hand recount of ballots in the knife-edge US Senate race between the Republican Rick Scott and the Democrat Bill Nelson. After a troubled machine recount finished on Thursday, Scott had a lead of 12,603 votes, or 0.15 percentage points – within the threshold of 0.25 points that by state law triggers a manual recount. But the eagerly watched race for governor appeared to be over, with the Republican Ron DeSantis virtually assured of victory over Democrat Andrew Gillum, according to unofficial results posted on the Florida secretary of state’s website. Gillum, bidding to become the state’s first African American governor, did not have enough votes to force a manual recount. Scott, currently the state’s governor, tweeted: “With the statewide machine recount finished, our margin of victory has increased by nearly 1000 votes. @SenBillNelson, it’s time to admit this race is over.” But there was no sign of Nelson throwing in the towel. His lead campaign lawyer, Marc Elias, announced a lawsuit against Palm Beach county, which failed to meet the recount deadline due to malfunctioning equipment. “We have sued Palm Beach County and the Florida Sec of State to require a hand count of all ballots in the county due to systematic machine failure during the machine recount,” he tweeted. Elias also noted that Hillsborough and Broward counties were reporting incomplete results. “We are monitoring the situation but we will take steps to ensure that every lawful vote is counted.” Around eight million people voted in Florida’s midterm elections. Initial counts before the recount showed Scott with a narrow lead over incumbent senator Nelson. In beleaguered Broward county, the recounts ended on Thursday with minutes to spare before the 3pm deadline. Brenda Snipes, the county’s widely criticised elections supervisor, told reporters: “We are excited to be at this point.” But she admitted that the total included 23 invalid provisional ballots that were mistakenly mixed in with valid ones and were now impossible to separate. In a mark of the level of chaos prevailing in Florida for the past eight days, she acknowledged that, if the 23 votes proved decisive in any of the races, “that will be a proper election contest issue”, but she felt it would be unfair to disenfranchise the 182 who did vote. However, the batch of 205 will remain “segregated” from the rest of the election in case of challenges. Broward county is a Democratic stronghold. In the Senate, Scott polled 210,513 votes there, while Nelson gained 469,949 votes. In the first count, the figures were Scott 211,119, Nelson 471,334. For the governorship, DeSantis received 221,252 votes, while Gillum noted 480,304. In the first count, the figures were DeSantis 221,873, Gillum 481,677. On Thursday, the US district judge Mark Walker cleared the way to include ballots from as many as 5,000 people across the state who submitted ballots by mail that were rejected by election officials. Amid tension and confusion, counties have until Sunday to inspect the ballots that did not record a vote when put through the machines. Those ballots are re-examined to see whether the voter skipped the race or marked the ballot in a way that the machines cannot read but can be deciphered. The election will be certified on Tuesday, a full week after the election. The drawn-out recounts have revived uncomfortable memories of the disputed 2000 presidential election between George W Bush and Al Gore, which ended only after the US supreme court stopped the counting and in effect put Bush in the White House.