This is a special place for a Test match. Two sides of Galle’s cricket ground are flanked by the ocean and a third is overlooked by the magnificent old Dutch fort where the pauper and the miser can share an excellent view of the cricket. On Saturday the skeletons of the awnings to be fixed over the stands were being erected to prevent English spectators from being frazzled or drenched come Tuesday for the first Test against Sri Lanka – hopefully the former is the greater peril but there are no guarantees at this time of the year. There was also some activity out in the middle. The square is a luscious green and a few days ago there were photographs of the Test pitch, which was the same colour. Now the much-discussed strip of turf that constitutes the playing surface is easily distinguishable. Grass is still visible but is no longer emerald green. The ground staff were scrubbing the turf with brushes in anticipation of another trim. The likelihood is that the pitch will be browner by Tuesday and that it will soon be receptive to a spinning cricket ball. Given the recent weather – there have been more showers in Galle as well as a mighty thunderstorm on Friday night in Colombo – there will, no doubt, be some moisture there. But do not expect either captain to invite the opposition to bat on Tuesday morning. It will be a surprise to everyone if the ball does not start turning early in the game, including Rangana Herath, the deceptively cuddly left-arm spinner and an inspiration to so many club cricketers around the world given his physique, age and speed around the ground, who, in his final Test, is eager to add to his haul of 430 Test wickets, 99 of which have been taken at Galle. The 40-year-old could not resist the prospect of one more outing here and at least one more wicket at his most beloved venue. England will be acutely aware that they are in foreign territory. Just two of their number have ever played a Test match in Sri Lanka – Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad – and here it is not certain that the latter will make the final XI, in which case this would be the first time Broad has been dropped from the Test team since 2012. There is no doubt, however, that Anderson will play. Off the field, at least, he has become a bit of an amiable philosopher, happy to pass on the wisdom he has acquired over the years. “I’ve enjoyed my experiences here before [though he often disguised this quite well]. It has not always been a good one for the team but it’s a great place to play‚” he says. “It is a huge challenge for seam bowlers but when you have a good day out here you get more satisfaction than bowling on a green seamer in England in April. When you’re dripping with sweat, covered in mud, you know you’ve had a hard day. I think you get more of that. You’ve put in the hard yards for the team.” Our philosopher is not afraid to state the bleeding obvious occasionally. The winning formula? “We’ve got to get big runs. And then 20 wickets. It’s not rocket science.” He is also realistic: “The wickets we have played on last week have been really flat, a little different to what we are likely to get in the Test matches. The spinners are going to play a huge part.” How many of their spinners will England play? Anderson could not tell us that in part because none of the England camp had seen the pitch at close quarters. If Trevor Bayliss and Paul Farbrace, who know conditions here so well, spy something similar to what greeted the South Africans last July then expect England to play all three of their spinners. Such a selection would leave Anderson’s old partner, Broad, vulnerable. “I honestly don’t know if he will play. At this stage I’d say it’s impossible to pick that starting XI‚” he said. If Broad is omitted then there can be no disguising the fact that he will be dropped on a horses-for-courses basis rather than rested. Anderson acknowledges the logic that neither he nor Broad have played since September so they can hardly be rested in the first week of November. “There was a question asked if I was keen to tour this winter and I said yes and that was pretty much the end of it‚” he explained. “The amount of cricket I play at the moment is manageable, and Stuart would say the same for himself. We don’t play any white-ball cricket so there’s no reason why we cannot be fit for all Test cricket. That’s how we look at it. There are plenty of gaps for us to rest and recuperate.” Broad, despite the hostile conditions, remains commendably eager to play. It will be a tricky call for the hierarchy as will sorting out England’s best batting lineup. Here the focus is on Joe Denly. It seems that the management have been keen to have him in their Test team especially since Jonny Bairstow became unlikely to be available for selection. Yet Denly’s performances so far, ,albeit in matches that were little more than middle practice, have been unconvincing. There are no like-for-like alternatives in the frame, so curiously Denly’s woes enhance the chances of Ben Foakes or Chris Woakes making the final XI. But as Anderson sagely points out, nobody really knows at the moment – and that may well include the England management.