Gianni Infantino played a central role in negotiations that led to a settlement when Manchester City and Paris Saint-Germain were accused of breaking Uefa’s financial fair play (FFP) rules, documents released by the German magazine Der Spiegel claim. In an email Der Spiegel said was written by Infantino to City’s chairman, Khaldoon al-Mubarak, Infantino allegedly describes drafting a possible settlement, saying: “You will see that I’ve sometimes chosen a wording which ‘looks’ more ‘strong,’” before signing off with the message “Let’s be positive!” Infantino was then Uefa’s general secretary – and is now the president of Fifa. Infantino, as the general secretary of Uefa, was within his rights to contact Mubarak over the negotiations. The documents –​ part of the latest release of “Football Leaks” documents – ​also purportedly show City officials prepared to pursue a long-term campaign of aggressive legal action against Uefa if they did not get their way. With the ruling family of Abu Dhabi holding a controlling stake in City and PSG effectively owned by the Qatari state, both clubs had struck sponsorship deals with businesses and organisations related to their parent countries. Investigations conducted by a marketing group, Octagon, on behalf of Uefa had found the deals to be grossly overvalued, to the tune of nearly €400m. According to a report conducted into City’s accounts by PricewaterhouseCoopers, as much as 84% of City’s “other commercial income” was derived from Abu Dhabi. Under Uefa’s FFP rules, which were then new to the sport, sponsorship deals of the kind struck by City and PSG had been outlawed. The maximum sanction for such behaviour could be a suspension from European competition. But, according to the leaked documents, after secret meetings involving both Infantino and then-president of Uefa, Michel Platini, the man who had introduced FFP, those charges were never heard by Uefa’s Club Financial Control Body (CFCB). City and PSG ultimately agreed settlements with Uefa of €20m each, roughly a 10th of the sums from which they had benefitted on the way to building championship-winning teams. According to the documents neither party had been willing to contemplate appearing in front of CFCB. PSG admitted to no wrongdoing. Manchester City told Reuters, which had early sight of the Football Leaks documents: “We will not be providing any comment on out of context materials purported to have been hacked or stolen from City Football Group and Manchester City personnel and associated people. The attempt to damage the Club’s reputation is organised and clear.” PSG said its compliance with the financial fair play rules had been “exemplary.” Uefa has been approached for comment. In response to the Football Leaks claims, Fifa said it had “received a very large number of questions from a group of media on a wide range of topics relating to Fifa” in October. In a statement released on Friday night, Fifa added: “It seems obvious from the ‘reporting’ carried out in some media outlets that there is only one particular aim: an attempt to undermine the new leadership of Fifa and, in particular, the president, Gianni Infantino, and the secretary general, Fatma Samoura. “For the avoidance of doubt, it also deserves to be pointed out that NONE of the ‘reports’ contains anything which would even remotely amount to a violation of any law, statute or regulation. This is, beyond question, an immeasurable improvement on the past and something which Fifa is fully committed to going forward. We will not be distracted from our work as Fifa is unarguably in a far better position than it was two years ago. We welcome any constructive debate. And we will continue to move forward, stronger and more committed than ever.”