An outright success. That’s the overarching feeling of everyone who was fortunate to be part of the ICC Women’s World Twenty20 2018. The first standalone World T20 for women, with every match broadcast for the first time, meant no double headers with the men, no sharing of media outlets and playing during the prime time slots to maximise viewership and attendance at the grounds. Close to 60,000 people made their way to the small grounds in Guyana, St Lucia and Antigua over the 12-day carnival in the West Indies. The locals provided colour, music and the party vibe that is synonymous with Caribbean cricket, making it a joy to be part of. For Australia, it couldn’t have gone any better. Without a world trophy in their cabinet heading into the tournament, they showed why they were the clear favourites. They were sleek, professionally run and played an attractive brand of cricket. The only slip up came in their final group match against India, which followed similar trends to the horrors of defeats to the West Indies in 2016 and India in last year’s World Cup. However, after the game, the group were still in good spirits and I felt it gave them the jolt required by any team with aspirations of winning a T20 tournament. The determination was evident on the faces of every player and member of the coaching staff. Australian cricket has been through a difficult period and there was a sense that, as a group, they were trying to rectify the wrongs of missing out in the last two international events, but also an intent to give Australian fans something to smile about. And you couldn’t help but smile at the way Alyssa Healy went about her batting; she was named player of the tournament as the leading run scorer with 245. Yet while Healy dominated the top order, the team was never reliant on her runs, and valuable contributions came throughout the order. The Australian bowling attack was the most diverse seen in a long time and all the players chipped in, though the experienced spearheads of Ellyse Perry and Megan Schutt were noticeable. But the most gratifying aspect of the bowling group was that the three spinners – Ashleigh Gardner, Georgia Wareham and Sophie Molineux, all playing their first ICC event – held their nerve at crucial moments. The captain of the side, Meg Lanning, made light of the “Seriously Sally” nickname given to her by her teammates and could not hide her jubilation when she and Gardner scampered through to ensure victory over England, the old enemy, in the final. Jumping into the air, removing her helmet, Lanning ran towards Gardner and launched herself onto her. Then there was an embrace with the rest of the team that had invaded the pitch. Based on Lanning’s reaction, you might think this was her first victory in a world tournament. In fact, she has three titles now: one 50-over World Cup and two World T20s, one of those as captain. Asked in the post-final press conference if this was her most satisfying victory, she smiled. “It is definitely the most satisfying win I’ve been involved in, especially after the last couple of years,” she said. “The last couple of World Cup exits for us hurt our team a lot.” The taste of victory is even sweeter after bitter defeats. As a former player, the most pleasing aspect of this tournament was to see the belief these players had, not only in their skill and role within the the side but more importantly in each other. They were a happy bunch and it showed on the field. Australian fans won’t need to wait too long to congratulate the team, as the Women’s Big Bash League kicks off this weekend. It will feature the returning World T20 heroines but also an array of the best female cricketers in the world, allowing the fans a chance to see them live and join in the continual rise of the women’s game. The trophy cabinet is empty no more, and there appear to be more spoils to come.