Democrats in the House of Representatives have vowed to investigate Donald Trump’s removal of the attorney general, Jeff Sessions. A day after the midterm elections, Sessions was fired and replaced with Trump loyalist Matthew Whitaker. The move handed Democrats, who had just taken control of the House of Representatives, their first opportunity to go after Trump with investigations. “The firing of Jeff Sessions will be investigated and people will be held accountable,” said congressman Jerrold Nadler, the likely incoming chair of the House judiciary committee. “This must begin immediately, and if not, then a Democratic Congress will make this a priority in January.” At issue is the fate of special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 election and possible collusion with the Trump campaign. Sessions had recused himself from that inquiry, infuriating Trump. Democrats and Republicans alike warned Mueller must be allowed to continue his work under the new attorney general. “The firing of Jeff Sessions fits a clear pattern of interference from Donald Trump in the work of the Department of Justice and the ongoing criminal investigation being conducted by Robert Mueller,” Nadler said. “There is no mistaking what this means, and what is at stake: this is a constitutionally perilous moment for our country and for the president. Donald Trump may think he has the power to hire and fire whomever he pleases, but he cannot take such action if it is determined that it is for the purposes of subverting the rule of law and obstructing justice. If he abuses his office in such a fashion, then there will be consequences.” He and other Democrats said Whitaker – who has publicly criticised the Mueller investigation – should step aside and let the deputy attorney general, Rod Rosenstein, continue to oversee it. “We are immediately issuing multiple letters to key officials demanding that they preserve all relevant documents related to this action to make sure that the investigation and any evidence remains safe from improper interference or destruction,” Nadler said. Two such letters, sent to Whitaker and House judiciary committee chairman Bob Goodlatte, were released on Thursday. The Democratic members warn that the Mueller investigation is now “at grave risk”. Their letter to Whitaker asks him to confirm which justice department official has responsibility to oversee the investigation; argues that Rosenstein should continue in that role; contends that it would be “wholly inappropriate” for Whitaker himself to assume that position, based on his past criticisms the investigation; and recommends that the department more fully protect Mueller. It concludes: “President Trump’s actions risk plunging the country into peril, akin to ‘a slow-motion Saturday Night Massacre’” – a reference to former president Richard Nixon’s 1973 move against the Watergate special prosecutor that triggered resignations before the prosecutor’s eventual dismissal. Congressman Elijah Cummings, set to take over the House committee on oversight and government reform, has also pledged an investigation into the firing. “Congress must now investigate the real reason for this termination, confirm that Matthew Whitaker is recused from all aspects of the special counsel’s probe, and ensure that the Department of Justice safeguards the integrity of the Mueller investigation,” he said. The Senate minority leader, Chuck Schumer, who learned of Sessions’s dismissal while he was holding a press conference in Washington, warned of a “constitutional crisis” if the Mueller investigation is terminated. “I find the timing very suspect,” Schumer told reporters. “Protecting Mueller and his investigation is paramount. It would create a constitutional crisis if this were a prelude to ending or greatly limiting the Mueller investigation, and I hope President Trump and those he listens to will refrain from that.” Schumer later tweeted a call for Whitaker to recuse himself from supervising the special counsel’s investigation. On Thursday Whitaker joined Trump in ceremony at the supreme court for the ceremonial swearing-in of new justice Brett Kavanaugh, confirmed last month amid allegations he sexually assaulted a woman decades ago. Kavanaugh has denied it.