One of the most careworn observations of the golden age of TV was that it marked the point where TV became novelistic. After years and years of sitcom-style episodic resets – where Jessica Fletcher never once questioned why such an unthinkable number of people were murdered around her – shows such as The Wire, The Sopranos and Breaking Bad took great delight in telling a single detail-heavy story very slowly. But that was then. Now there’s a case for arguing that television has abandoned the novel to become a short story collection. This week it was announced that Amazon is making a half-hour series based on the New York Times column Modern Love, complete with an enormous cast including Anne Hathaway, Tina Fey, John Slattery, Dev Patel, Catherine Keener, Andy García and Andrew Scott. The catch? It’s an anthology series. Every episode will be self-contained – with different writers, directors and actors – linked only by a nebulous theme. It isn’t alone. News came last week that The Ink Factory is planning to revive Roald Dahl’s Tales of the Unexpected; then there’s Jordan Peele’s Twilight Zone reboot, currently in production. Add this to the existing glut of anthology series – Black Mirror, Easy, The Romanoffs, Electric Dreams – and it seems like this might be the way that TV is heading. This sort of show makes perfect sense for 2018. One of the biggest criticisms of the Peak TV era is the phenomenon of Netflix Bloat. We’ve all constantly got so much good television to watch that we’ve become much less tolerant when serialised programmes take their foot off the gas; when Daredevil or House of Cards inevitably start to meander halfway through a series, it makes us feel like our time is being wasted. But with an anthology series, you can just dip in and out. Want to see the Tina Fey episode of Modern Love but none of the others? Great. Want to just watch the Marc Maron episodes of Easy? Done. It requires much less dedication. Jay Duplass, whose own Room 104 was an anthology, called the format “the Tinder of television”, and he’s dead right. Nevertheless, I have my reservations. By their very nature, anthologies are notoriously patchy affairs. Every episode requires a brand new idea, and good ideas are hard to come by. Even Black Mirror – the show credited with reviving the anthology format – suffers from this. Every series of Black Mirror has rocketed between amazing highs and terrible, terrible lows. For every San Junipero there’s been a Playtest. For every USS Callister there’s been a Black Museum. Luckily for Black Mirror, the good episodes are so good that nobody dwells on the duffers, but that isn’t always the case. Channel 4’s Phillip K Dick anthology Electric Dreams is a perfect example. The first episode was dismal. So was the second. The third one might have been incredible – it was a brand new story after all – but everyone with any sense had already checked out by then. The same thing, to some extent, goes for The Romanoffs. It’s already quite a thing to commit to a feature-length episode of anything, but it’s even harder when you don’t know if you are going to get a fun little morality tale or a turgid, meandering story about middle-class idiots doing basically nothing. The worst examples can also feel tossed off. With Mad Men, Matthew Weiner was forced to commit – to a story, to a set of characters, to a place in time – and by the end you sensed that he had mined everything he could from it. But with The Romanoffs, he gets to skip around unbound by those concerns, which means that several episodes end up feeling deeply unexplored. Joe Swanberg’s Easy also suffers from this. The good episodes are great, but there are more bad episodes, and they all feel like first-draft sketches than proper episodes. At their worst, these shows make you long for something meaty and longform. Perhaps the answer to this is more anthologies. Perhaps if we’re spoiled for choice with individual stories, makers will be forced to up their game and deliver more consistent work. Maybe Modern Love will be the start of this, kicking off the golden age of anthologies. And if that happens, someone should really make an anthology series based on the Guardian’s Blind Date articles. And if that happens, I want an executive producer credit, minimum.