Much like the reanimated corpses at their center, zombie films refuse to die. With this week’s US release of Anna and the Apocalypse – a Christmas-themed zombie musical – coming out only a few weeks after Overlord – a second world war action-horror hybrid – it’s clear that film-makers are still finding new ways to fashion stories around the walking dead. Even before George A Romero’s groundbreaking Night of the Living Dead, the modern zombie mythos was proving itself extremely malleable, and film-makers have continually found creative, surprising and often ridiculous new ways to fit these creatures into stories across a variety of genres. Here’s an overview of some of the more memorable examples of genre-bending zombie mashups. If the audience reactions from last year’s festival circuit are any indication, Anna and the Apocalypse is likely to become the most popular zombie musical yet made. It won’t, however, be the first. That honor belongs to 2006’s Z: A Zombie Musical, a campy, ultra-low-budget romp in the Rocky Horror tradition. Anna won’t even be the first zombie musical released this year, as Disney’s Zombies, a kid-friendly musical tween comedy that aired on the company’s eponymous network, holds that distinction. Slim pickings to be sure, but if we expand our scope outside the realm of features, we can count one of the greatest music videos of all time, Michael Jackson’s Thriller. Directed by John Landis (who’d already given us one of cinema’s more memorable zombies), its most famous moment features the King of Pop leading a crew of the shuffling undead in an instantly iconic dance number. Anna may not be the first film of its kind, but it is one of the only films of its kind. The same cannot be said of Overlord. There are numerous second world war-set zombie films, most of them Z-grade offerings like the Outpost series, Horrors of War, War of the Dead, and Zombie Massacre 2: Reich of the Dead. (Better known – at least to horror fans – is the 2009 Norwegian film Dead Snow, and its sequel, Dead Snow 2: Red vs. Dead, both of which, although set in the present day, feature Nazi zombies.) It’s easy to figure out the impetus behind this tired trope: the myths surrounding Nazi wartime medical experiments and their ties to the occult make them tailor-made for zombies, even if no reanimated corpse can compare to the real-life horrors of that era. It speaks to their adaptability that of the 10 highest-grossing zombie films of all time, only two of them – Pet Semetary and Zack Snyder’s Dawn of the Dead remake – can be considered traditional horror movies. Of the remaining eight, three are glossy action-horror hybrids (World War Z, Resident Evil: Afterlife, Resident Evil: Apocalypse), two are animated kids’ films (ParaNorman, Hotel Transylvania), two are action-comedies with young adult romances at their center (Zombieland, Warm Bodies), and one is a darkly comic fantasy (Death Becomes Her). It’s interesting that, despite their popularity, the Resident Evil films (six in total, with a reboot in the works) comprise the only A-list zombie franchise, although forthcoming sequels to Zombieland and World War Z (with David Fincher, of all people, attached to direct) may soon change that. Zombies and comedy go hand-in-hand. This has been the case since at least Dawn of the Dead, which drew an unmistakably satirical connection between its hordes of brainless zombies and the real-world hordes of brainless American shoppers. As the genre exploded in the following decades, so too did its comic possibilities, with directors like Sam Raimi (Evil Dead 2, Army of Darkness), Peter Jackson (Braindead, AKA Dead Alive), Stuart Gordon (Re-Animator), Frank Henenlotter (Frankenhooker), and James Gunn (Slither) mining the zombies for all their gory slapstick potential. Taking this same approach but infusing his story and characters with greater emotional depth, Edgar Wright had his breakout hit with Shaun of the Dead, creating in the process one of the most influential zombie films of any kind. That influence can be seen across the majority of comedic zombie movies since, especially in the similarly themed slacker-v-zombie films John Dies at the End and Juan of the Dead. Zombidies are not limited to blood-soaked sight gags; they run the gamut, from meathead buddy cop films (Dead Heat), to pet adventure spoofs (Fido), teen sex romps (Scouts Guide to the Zombie Apocalypse), political satires (Uncle Sam), and especially romcoms (My Boyfriend’s Back, Burying the Ex, Life After Beth, and the aforementioned Warm Bodies). The easy substituting of sexual desire for murderous urges makes the connection between sex and zombies an obvious one. This terrain is explored in greater depth in less easily definable films like Shivers, Cemetery Man and It Follows. Of the various genre mashups, none is more inherently ridiculous than the historical action/romance/horror/comedy-of-manners flop Pride and Prejudice and Zombies, the Jane Austen “parody” adapted from Seth Grahame-Smith’s 2009 novel. While the novel experienced a certain flash-in-the-pan success – which inspired a number of lazy knockoffs and “thematic sequels” (such as Sense and Sensibility and Sea Monsters) – the film version was utterly ignored by the time it came to screens seven years later. Despite that film’s example, it is possible to refashion a literary classic by infusing it with zombie shenanigans, as proven by 1943’s hauntingly beautiful I Walked with a Zombie, which takes another 19th-century romantic novel – Charlotte Brontë’s Jane Eyre – and transplants its story to the voodoo-haunted Caribbean. Given nothing more than the eye-rolling title by his bosses and told to turn it into a feature, the legendary RKO producer Val Lewton came up with the ingenious idea to adapt Brontë’s gothic romance, dialing up the gothic to truly frightening levels, without sacrificing any of the romance. Granted, the reanimated corpses in I Walked with a Zombie are of the Haitian folklore variety (very different from the Romero-esque breed that make up the overwhelming majority of modern zombie fare), but it remains proof positive that any zombie movie has the potential to become a masterpiece, no matter how ridiculous its premise. Despite a few highly acclaimed examples from the last few years – most notably the viscerally overwhelming Train to Busan and thought-provoking The Girl with All the Gifts – the oversaturation of zombies throughout pop culture has caused their popularity to wane. But that doesn’t mean that they’re going to stop, not so long as innovative film-makers find new ways to subvert audience and genre expectations. The next couple of years’ crop should prove especially interesting: along with Fincher’s World War Z sequel, we’ll also be getting a zombie comedy from arthouse favorite Jim Jarmusch, starring Bill Murray, Tilda Swinton, Adam Driver and Steve Buscemi. We may soon need add a new category to the list: Auteurist Zombie Cinema.