Playwright Laura Wade, 41, grew up in Sheffield, had her first play produced at and is best known for her 2010 drama Posh, about a Bullingdon-esque university society of future politicians, subsequently filmed as The Riot Club. Her adaptation of Jane Austen’s unfinished novel, The Watsons, has just opened at Chichester, and the National Theatre/Theatr Clwyd production of her 2018 play Home, I’m Darling transfers to the West End in January. Wade lives in north London with the actor and director Samuel West and their two daughters, aged four and one. What is the plot of Jane Austen’s unfinished novel, The Watsons?A 19-year-old woman called – hilariously – Emma Watson has grown up with a rich aunt but is suddenly disinherited. She and her sisters have to find husbands as their father doesn’t have enough money to support them. Austen only wrote about 17,000 words of it, basically the setup, before abandoning it in the middle of her writing life. What was the appeal of adapting it?I have always loved Jane Austen, and there was the chance to do something truly theatrical with this. It’s not a straight attempt to finish the book: it goes somewhere stranger than that, and examines what happens to a group of characters when the author abandons them, filtering a classic work through a 21st-century lens. Your partner Sam West directed it…It’s the first time we’ve worked together in this dynamic, so there was trepidation about whether we could separate work and home – what if it all got a bit tense? But actually it’s been great. He was a very good dramaturgical eye when I was working on the draft of the script. And he has a very fine sensibility, which makes him really good for this kind of period work. Sam’s parents are Timothy West and Prunella Scales – does that make you part of a “theatrical dynasty”?They call it a family business. Where did the idea of Home, I’m Darling – about a modern couple choosing to live the lifestyle and revert to the typical gender roles of the 1950s – come from?Tribes have always been interesting to me, and the vintage tribe – people who feel they are born in a time they don’t belong in – seemed like a really good canvas to talk about lots of issues around marriage and domesticity. Did having your own children while writing it influence the plot or the message?During the six years we were developing the show, Tamara [Harvey, the director], Katherine [Parkinson, who plays the lead role] and I had two children each, but we never ended up giving the couple in the play children because it felt like a purer decision for them to live the 50s if they didn’t have them. The idea of being a stay-at-home mum seemed more socially acceptable than a woman leaving her job to be a housewife and look after her husband. Has having children changed your writing?We have two girls, and we think a lot about how we raise them as girls, what role models are available to them, what stories, and where they can see themselves in art. With that increased awareness it feels important to create work that isn’t exploitative, that tells positive stories, and to write about things that matter. Is the continued popularity of Posh a blessing or a burden?It doesn’t at all feel like a burden. I am hugely proud of it. Did you get an echo of its characters’ cocksure swagger when David Cameron suggested he might return to politics?[Pause] That was surprising to me in light of Brexit. Let’s leave it at that. Posh’s characters seemed loathsome at the time, but now seem almost quaint compared with those who have taken over politics, don’t they?I find it difficult to think of without despairing, and it’s doubly hard for a writer as it’s all changing so fast. Trying to write something about the state of the world that will still be relevant in 18 months is difficult. But I think theatre has something important to offer in terms of community in these dark times. Something that gets people to use their imagination and their empathy is a really useful thing. But you are not just writing for theatre these days…I’m working on a film about a society woman who lost her children in a divorce battle and campaigned to have the legal status of wives changed, and a TV series set in the Regency period – about the same time Jane Austen was writing. The next thing I write is definitely going to be set now… • The Watsons is at Chichester Festival theatre until 1 Dec. Home, I’m Darling plays at the Duke of York’s, London, from 26 Jan-13 April, then tours to the Theatre Royal Bath and the Lowry, Salford