Tottenham Hotspur closed the gap between themselves and the Premier League summit to two points thanks to Juan Foyth’s headed goal. In a performance typical of Spurs’s season so far, Mauricio Pochettino’s side grafted away against opposition set up to stop them playing and eventually found enough to win. Foyth was a fitting matchwinner. The young Argentinian only made his league debut last week and gave away two penalties against Wolves. This week he dealt with Palace’s limited attacking threat and was on hand to poach a goal from six yards halfway through the second half. It would be difficult to overstate just how much rain was tipping down from the sky as the sides emerged for this match. Kayla the eagle pretty much summed it up for everyone. Returning to mascot duties after a period of illness, she sat perched on a crossbar looking miserable, every one of her feathers sodden. Palace came into this match looking similarly bedraggled. For the second time this season, Wilfried Zaha was a late withdrawal having been unable to recover from a hamstring injury sustained against Chelsea last weekend. The statistic that Palace lose without him in the side is well-worn, but it remained true coming in to this fixture – the streak had reached 11 matches. Even with Zaha Palace had failed to win in the league since the middle of September when they beat Huddersfield 1-0 away. They had lost four of the six matches that followed since, scoring four times and conceding 10. On the other hand, while the last three matches may only have earned them a point they had put in some obdurate performances, and a late comeback to claim a draw against Arsenal. It was this determination that characterised Roy Hodgson’s side in the opening 45 minutes. Spurs had most of the play, but until the final few minutes of the half they struggled to work the ball through a compact Palace formation. Up the other end the hosts won a succession of corners and free-kicks, with three of the corners coming from ludicrous errors by Spurs players, but were unable to get an effort on target. As for the visitors, they came into this match having won three games in the previous 10 days, and with a place in the top four back in their hands. They suffered an injury setback of their own 24 minutes into the match however, when Kieran Trippier hobbled off with what looked like groin injury. In doing so he became the ninth Spurs player who played in the World Cup to succumb to a muscle injury this season. Despite Palace’s resolve, Spurs did craft the best chance of the first half. It came on the half hour when Luka Milivojevic lost concentration for a second and allowed Harry Kane to snaffle the ball 30 yards out. The Spurs striker got the ball under control and didn’t mess around, driving a hard, clean shot at goal. Wayne Hennessey was equal to it however, getting down low to his left and turning the ball around the post. A similar pattern began to emerge in the second half, with Palace threatening on set pieces. They were trying to put Hugo Lloris under pressure, with the Spurs skipper continuing his shaky form. He came for a cross in the 50th minute and missed it, only for the ball to skim off James Tomkins’s head. Three minutes later Palace whipped in another corner. This time Lloris stayed on his line and the ball went straight through to Tomkins who this time had a clear sight of the ball but put his header wide. On the hour mark Tomkins became the next player to succumb to injury and shortly afterwards Spurs were ahead. Again it was a corner, but this time there was decisive contact, first from Harry Kane on the penalty spot who drove a header at goal and then, when Kane’s effort was deflected, Foyth pounced to turn the ball home with his head. It was the 20-year-old defender’s first goal for the club and he was swamped by his teammates. Palace were now precisely where they are at their weakest: having to chase a game. With 10 minutes remaining they finally exerted some pressure on the Spurs box. After Cheikh Kouyaté had the ball taken off his toe in the area just as he was about to shoot, substitute Jeffrey Schlupp followed up with a powerful shot, only to see it turned away by Lloris. As the end neared Palace had their best opportunity when the ball fell fortunately to the Norwegian substitute Alexander Sørloth in the box. Unmarked, he had time to size up his shot and drove it fiercely towards the near post. Once again though Lloris was there, punching the ball away just when he was most needed.