Sharing the details of our daily lives has become a modern obsession, and many of us are masterful practitioners of the dark art. Social media is, of course, our main platform for over sharing, allowing us to force our holiday pool shots, our politics, and our children’s pithy insights onto those silly enough to accept our friend requests. This is all well and good. Social media sites are designed with sharing in mind, and if you don’t like it you can always deactivate your Facebook account for a good seven days — the maximum amount of time adults can stay off social media before realising their lives have, in fact, less meaning without it. We’ve become so good at sharing — whether it’s an Uber Pool or a Facebook event that we are “interested” in possibly, maybe, potentially, attending — that the sharing movement has bled into areas where it most definitely does not belong. Such as restaurants, or, more specifically, the modern trend for ordering a handful of “share plates” instead of individual meals. For those who have not been outside since the turn of the century, let me give you a brief run-down of what the share plate movement looks like in 2018: a group of half-cut people order a bunch of dishes —either too many or too few — and one of the well-positioned diners ends up sated, while the rest wonder what the vindaloo parked at the far end of the table for the entire night actually tasted like. When the share plate plague first struck Melbourne and Sydney restaurants some years ago, I assumed, like most food fads, it would have a shelf life of approximately 18 months, before being replaced by some other equally ridiculous dining notion we would all have to contend with. But I was wrong. Everyone loves sharing food – loves it! – and to out yourself as a non-sharer at a Melbourne communal dining table is like saying that you don’t recycle or that you hate gin distilleries. People eyed me as if I was a psychopath and proceeded to order for the table But I am one of those people who gets so excited about food, I will download the menu from the restaurant’s website a good day before the booking and pore over it forensically. I will then get extra excited if there is something insanely beyond my skill level — such as sand crab anything — or a dish that I would never make for myself at home, such as a massive burger with duck-fat fries. I can spend a good 15 minutes weighing up which entrée to get, followed by which main, followed by which dessert. Small groups are usually no problem: sharing Asian cuisine or tapas among four friends makes actual sense, but when a large group wants to share at a gastro pub and you have a carefully curated entrée and main in mind, then it’s nothing short of a diplomatic minefield. In the early days of the share plate fad, I would offer my dining companions a weak protest about wanting to, um, you know, maybe have my own dish. People eyed me as if I was a psychopath and proceeded to order for the table. But then came the straw that broke the camel’s back. I went to an Italian restaurant with clearly marked primo and secondo sections on the menu —we are not talking a pizza joint here — and someone suggested we all share. I could see, finally, that no one else at the table thought this was a good idea, bar the person who had suggested it. The moment had arrived for me to go off-piste. Nope, I told my dining companions, I will be ordering separately. My declaration brought a few secret objectors out of the closet, while the rest attempted to transport limp ribbons of spaghetti from one central share plate to their small bowls. So by all means, share what you ate for dinner on Twitter and whether it was overrated or the dish of the century, but do not ask me to share my rigatoni in real life because that is where I draw the line. And Melbourne restaurant staff, you are not helping with your “our dishes are designed to share” groupthink speeches either. I was designed to eat, and I would like it in three courses, thanks very much. • Johanna Leggatt is a Melbourne-based journalist