Nobody who is familiar with Lakeith Stanfield will be surprised to learn he believes in nebulous and mystic forces beyond our comprehension, such as numerology, symbology and astrology. He puts his breakthrough, in the 2013 movie Short Term 12, down to them: “It was the third month of the year in 2013. Those are two numbers that I imbued with intention,” he recently reminisced (he also has a Roman numeral III tattooed on his neck). “And I kept seeing the same symbols popping up. It seemed to be something that was meant to be.” There is plenty more evidence to suggest that Stanfield does not operate entirely on our rational, Earthly plane: the several years he spent working on a marijuana farm, for starters. But Stanfield was right: it was “meant to be”. And now, it just is. When you look at everything the 27-year-old actor has done since 2013, there is little doubt the stars and symbols have aligned. He has been surfing the wave of black cinema’s renaissance: Straight Outta Compton (a good fit as Snoop Dogg), Dope, Selma, Get Out, not to mention the TV show of the moment, Atlanta. Now he has made it to leading-man status, in Boots Riley’s bizarro indie Sorry to Bother You, not to mention big-budget bit-part player in the new The Girl in the Spider’s Web, which is another affirmation of sorts. He may not be the biggest star on the planet but, right now, Stanfield is definitely one of the coolest. And part of his lovability is the crazy shit he comes out with and his casual indifference to what you think about it. Called upon to reprise his Get Out character at this year’s Oscars ceremony, for example (he just had to walk onstage and shout “Get Out!” occasionally), he all but hijacked the show, live-tweeting comments like: “Everyone at the Oscars got they bow ties too tight lmao”; and, “Dude I’m backstage scratching areas that shouldn’t be scratched.” Last April, he also displayed his celebrity naivete by tweeting out his own phone number, with the message: “I wanna say Hi to some of you guys.” Five minutes later came the follow-up tweet: “Whoah. That was a really bad idea.” Stanfield’s dress sense is legendary in itself. He has appeared on red carpets wearing a balaclava, a crazy giant wig, a chainmail shirt with extra-long sleeves, a rainbow-coloured women’s suit, or, for Selma, with half his hair shaved off. He explained of the latter: “That was a morning that is like many of my mornings, where I wake up and I just feel driven by forces I don’t understand.” On-screen, too, style observers have begun to cotton on to how Stanfield cuts quite the dash. As Darius, his character in Atlanta, he has sported an array of unlikely, way-cool outfits, wearing a brown blazer and polo neck for a night-time woodland drugs deal, or a Tuareg-style headscarf for a trip to the diner. Atlanta’s director, Hiro Murai observed: “The thing about Keith is, he can really wear anything and make it look cool, so we constantly try to push that and see what he can pull off.” The outer limits to Stanfield’s coolness have yet to be defined. Darius is indicative of the way Stanfield seems to have snuck in from the margins. Potentially a peripheral character in Atlanta’s mix, he has quietly stolen the show with his mix of stoner wisdom, obscure erudition and bewildering eccentricity. He will muse on Bostrom’s simulation argument; he’ll bring a poster of a dog to a shooting range; he’ll ask if they have dehydrated mango at the hardware store; he’ll come out with lines like: “I would say nice to meet you but I don’t believe in time as a concept, so I’ll just say we always met.” There is a lot of Stanfield himself in Darius, although the way he tells it, he got the part when the show’s creator, Donald Glover, walked up to him at a Hollywood party and said: “Hey, what’s up? I got this role you might be good for,’ and handed him a script. Maybe it was just meant to be. As fate would also have it, Glover was originally cast as the lead in Sorry to Bother You, but had to step down in order to do Solo: A Star Wars Story. He recommended Stanfield for the role. With Sorry to Bother You, an unclassifiable racial/workplace/late-capitalism/sci-fi satire, Stanfield is technically the straight man of the piece: a meek telemarketing drone who ascends the corporate ranks to the status of “power caller” when he learns to use his “white voice” over the phone. The story gets more extreme and absurd from there. Think Being John Malkovich meets Michel Gondry meets Idiocracy, with added race-awareness. Given his general ease with the unorthodox, Stanfield fits right in. None of this is to say Stanfield has simply been lucky. He came into the industry from a position of disadvantage. He grew up in Victorville, 90 miles outside Los Angeles, “very poor in a fractured family that was dysfunctional on both sides”. By his own admission, he was the weird kid in high school who wrote poetry and didn’t have many friends, but found a place in the drama society. He googled acting agencies and plugged away at auditions and lived out of his car, until someone saw something in him. Even then, after a role in the short film of Short Term 12, he fell out of the profession for several years (hence the weed factory job). When the short won an award, Stanfield didn’t find out for months; he had run out of credit on his phone. Few who saw Stanfield in the feature-length Short Term 12 (made five years later) could have failed to notice that he is an actor with a magnetic presence. It was another outsider role, you could say. Stanfield played a shy, emotionally damaged teen with a talent for rap lyrics. His doleful eyes are so good at communicating sorrow, but he is so natural on screen, he never seems corny. He never looks like he is trying too hard, which takes work. If Stanfield has made his own luck, he has also benefited from a moment of new possibilities for actors of colour. Until recently, to be a successful black actor meant fitting into one of a few pigeonholes. You could be a serious thespian in the Sidney Poitier/Denzel Washington vein. You could be a comic in the Eddie Murphy/Martin Lawrence vein. Or you could be an action hero in the Wesley Snipes/Will Smith vein. Being an idiosyncratic, sensitive, non-alpha individual was a luxury extended to white actors. Now you could say the same of not just Stanfield but many others, Glover included. Given the space that Stanfield has carved out for himself, the flashy, mainstream thriller The Girl in the Spider’s Web is the weirdest place we have seen him to date. Stanfield plays an NSA agent pursuing Claire Foy’s surprisingly athletic hacker Lisbeth Salander across cold, grey Stockholm, with car chases, shootouts and all that Bourne-like stuff. The screen warms up whenever he is on it, which isn’t that often, admittedly, but the film will do his reputation no harm. Next up, he’s in Rian Johnson’s mystery thriller Knives Out, alongside Daniel Craig and Chris Evans. Then he will appear with Adam Sandler in the Safdie brothers’ Uncut Gems. The new fear is that now that he is no longer on the margins, Stanfield’s edges will start to get sanded down. Nothing is more threatening to a unique outsider persona than success. Let’s hope that normality doesn’t go to his head. Sorry to Bother You is in UK cinemas from 7 December