With a flourishing bar and dining scene, and a number of diverse and arty neighbourhoods, cosmopolitan, multicultural Calgary is much more than just the gateway to the Rockies. Direct flights from London (daily from Heathrow, and multiple times a week from Gatwick) also make it a convenient starting point. Load-up and learn, with a food tour of the historic Inglewood neighbourhood. The tour stops at the high-end Rouge, in what’s now a heritage site, as well as taking in Alberta’s First Nations arts and food culture. Calgary city centre Style-up and get your cowboy threads sorted year-round at the Alberta Boot Company, or head to Smithbilt for the distinctive white hats that have become a symbol of the city – so that when the Calgary Stampede rodeo comes to town in July, you look the part. Head for the hills to start your roadtrip. Banff national park – Canada’s oldest – is an easy hour-and-a-half drive from Calgary. But don’t skip the picturesque and vibrant mountain town of Canmore, just outside the park’s boundary, where the peaks of the Rockies provide the backdrop to numerous music and arts festivals throughout the year. Cycling in Banff national park For a town with a population of just under 14,000 people, the town is overflowing with dining and drinking destinations. And it also claims the honour of being home to the largest number of Olympians per capita in Canada, who use the altitude to train. (If you can’t beat ‘em, join ‘em.) In the summer, hit the bike trails. A 13-mile trail connects to Banff, with an additional 50 miles of other pathways to follow. In winter, try out one of the newest crazes in these parts: fat biking. Extra-large tyres will take you across otherwise inaccessible snow-covered trails. Don’t fret, there are hand-warmers too. Afterwards, head on to Banff to warm-up at the thermal waters of the Upper Hot Springs. Horse riding in Banff It’s impossible to be bored in Banff with the myriad activities on offer. If you want action and adventure, try white-water rafting, rock climbing and horse riding. If you want to take it easy, just find a patio, order a coffee and sit and watch the clouds move over the mountains that hug the town. If you want something in between, how about a round of golf? Banff has some of the most beautiful courses in the world. You certainly can’t skip town without a fondue from the unironically kitsch Grizzly House. Lake Agnes Tea House Put simply, Lake Louise doesn’t look real. Its searing blue waters reflect back the towering glacier that created the lake 10,000 years ago. While in the winter the lake freezes over and becomes a fairy-tale setting for ice skaters and sleigh rides, in the summer it’s populated by canoes with travellers keen to glimpse the ice close-up. When you get tired of taking in the views from the genteel-surrounds of the Fairmont Chateau Lake Louise – if such a thing is possible – take the steep 2-mile (3.5-km) hike from the hotel to the Disney-esque Lake Agnes Tea House. First built by the Canadian Pacific Railway in 1901 as a shelter for hikers, this lakeshore log cabin sits in a valley of its own, and has been serving tea since 1905. The Athabasca Glacier The spectacularly scenic Icefields Parkway hugs hillsides and traces its way past more than 100 ancient glaciers on its 146-mile (235-km) route from Lake Louise to Jasper national park. With dramatic waterfalls and sweeping lakes at nearly every turn, you’re going to want to stop often. Head to the highest point of the parkway to stop at the viewpoint for the glowing turquoise waters of Peyto Lake. And leave time to explore the Columbia Icefield, the largest ice field in the Rocky Mountains. You can tour it in a massive all-terrain vehicle or, if you fancy a bird’s eye view, by helicopter. And at the Glacier Discovery Centre, tours will take you to walk on the up-to-300m thick ice of the Athabasca Glacier. The Rocky Mountaineer train – Jasper is a key stop Sweet little Jasper – home to just 4,500 people – has charm. Surrounded by natural beauty, it’s an adventure sports hub, and a key stop for the iconic Rocky Mountaineer train. You’ll be spoiled for choice for places to eat. Papa George’s – a family-run Jasper institution since 1925, offers comfort food, such as fluffy buttermilk pancakes, in a homely environment. Head out of town for one of the great Rocky Mountain experiences – a cruise across Maligne Lake. Here, you’ll find the stunning Spirit Island – its tiny grouping of trees, surrounded by crystal blue water, has made it one of the world’s most photographed beauty spots. Edmonton – ‘festival city’ Head east from the mountains to the metropolis. Nicknamed “festival city”, Edmonton always has something going on – from music festivals to fringe theatre, to farmers’ markets. Make sure you check out the atmosphere of the historic Old Strathcona, which has plenty of quirky, independent shopping, restaurants and bars. Encompassing more than 90 miles (150km) of multi-use trails and over 20 major city parks, the lush Edmonton River valley is the largest expanse of urban parkland in North America. Head down with a picnic during the summer, or save those aching legs and hire a Segway. Discover more adventures throughout the year in Alberta with Canadian Affair