Maurizio Sarri has regularly offered the impression that his Chelsea work in progress has been ahead of schedule. Do not get carried away, the manager has warned, there are many improvements to be made. And as for the Premier League title, well, do not look beyond Manchester City. Chelsea have been due a defeat but, when it came here against a rampant Tottenham team, who have had their share of difficulties during a strange season, it felt as though everything that could have gone wrong did go wrong; that all of Sarri’s worst fears crystallised at the same moment. His team started dreadfully and their day did not get any better, as their unbeaten record folded. It was impossible to give any Chelsea player more than five out of ten – apart from Eden Hazard, possibly – and their woes were summed up by David Luiz’s non-challenge on Son Heung-min ahead of Spurs’s third goal. By the end, Tottenham were showboating – witness the substitute, Érik Lamela, sashaying away from Hazard – and they could reflect on a pitch-perfect occasion, shaped by Mauricio Pochettino’s tactical plan, and illuminated by the zip and creativity from those in white shirts. Sarri had bemoaned Chelsea’s slow starts to matches. “It’s a mental problem,” he said during the buildup. The subtext was that his players had to be switched on at the outset. So much for that message. It was Chelsea’s worst start to a match all season: they were 2-0 down after 16 minutes and it is no exaggeration to say that the damage could have been heavier. Antonio Rüdiger was beaten on more than one occasion for pace, David Luiz did not have any sort of bearings, Mateo Kovacic laboured and seasoned Chelsea observers could not remember César Azpilicueta looking this rattled. Then there was Kepa Arrizabalaga, and the goalkeeper’s error for the second goal was inexplicable. He had already got his fingertips to Dele Alli’s header only to fail to keep the ball out and, when Harry Kane took aim from distance, having picked up possession and sauntered forward under no challenge, the danger appeared to be minimal. Kane’s connection was not exactly sweet. Yet almost in slow motion, David Luiz turned his back on the ball, appearing simply to leave it, and Arrizabalaga did likewise. Was he unsighted by David Luiz? Possibly. Was he flat-footed? Certainly. At first, it seemed as if Kane’s low shot had to have deflected off David Luiz. It did not. The ball bounced and skimmed, almost apologetically, into the net. Pochettino had started with Alli at the tip of a diamond midfield, behind twin strikers in Kane and Son Heung-min, and the approach worked beautifully. Part of the idea was to stymie Chelsea’s deep-sitting playmaker, Jorginho – he barely saw the ball during Tottenham’s initial blitz – and, also, to get Alli into dangerous areas. Alli found the breakthrough, though, from a free-kick, which was whipped in viciously by Christian Eriksen. Alli got in between Kovacic and Jorginho too easily and the attacking midfielder was free to celebrate his sixth goal in five games against Chelsea. David Luiz had conceded the free-kick for a nasty stamp on Kane. The first half was loaded with action and incident. Eden Hazard ought to have had a penalty on 14 minutes when Juan Foyth went into him from behind – a rash decision the youngster got away with – but the Chelsea winger went down too easily on 45 minutes to deserve one, following Moussa Sissoko’s challenge. Apart from that, it was all Tottenham. Son lifted a half-volley high, after a lovely one-two with Eriksen, and the South Korean was also denied by Arrizabalaga after beating Rüdiger. Arrizabalaga did well to keep out Toby Alderweireld’s flick – Foyth was narrowly wide with the rebound – and Son curled another effort over, before being thwarted by the goalkeeper after good work by Alli and Eriksen. Chelsea needed the smelling salts. Chelsea’s defensive record away from home in the league under Sarri had been impressive. Before this game, they had conceded only once. At half-time, that had felt like a mirage and it looked even more ridiculous when the third went in. Once again, Spurs’s pace and incision contrasted with Chelsea’s sluggishness as Alli funnelled a pass up the inside-right channel and Son tore away from Jorginho. Enter David Luiz, at high speed, but the defender had misjudged the situation terribly, overcommitting himself, and he was last seen heading towards Wembley Park tube station. Son continued his cut inside, held off Jorginho and finished low into the far corner. It was no more than he deserved. Sarri responded by hooking Álvaro Morata – which at least prevented him from being offside any more – as well as Kovacic and Willian, but he could have withdrawn anybody. Willian had gone close on 53 minutes but the only remaining question was how many more Spurs would score. Kane blew a gilt-edged chance, Alli was narrowly off target and it felt almost incongruous to see the substitute, Olivier Giroud, head the most hollow of consolations.