Another misunderstood week for pared-back turbocapitalist Gwyneth Paltrow, who was only honouring Stan Lee the best way she knew how. Having Instagrammed a snap of her with Chris Pratt in order to sell the dress she was wearing in the picture – inviting followers to click through to her Goop website should they wish to purchase – Gwyneth seems to have received word of Lee’s death. This is the classic retailer’s dilemma in the social media age. Do you break out a whole new post about the iconic Marvel comic creator, in which it probably is going to be tough to find a $650 Lurex party dress angle? Or do you simply retool the existing post, appending the words “UPDATE: I just heard about Stan Lee, he will be so missed”? I need hardly tell you which one madam plumped for. Even so, Paltrow’s tribute is quite overshadowed this week by the activities of Paris Hilton. To be honest, I wasn’t entirely sure that the Hilton hotels heiress was still going these days. I assumed that she had been acquired by a Hard Rock Cafe somewhere, and could be found mechanically declaring “That’s hot!” each time a customer ordered a strawberry daiquiri in Honolulu or wherever. Yet it seems her idiosyncrasies – and her humanitarianism – remain undimmed. This week, Paris broke off from a Mexican holiday to visit those in San Gregorio affected by the devastating 2017 Puebla earthquake, to whom she donated $350,000 (£270,000). So far, so good. According to a recent report by one charity, many are still without permanent shelter, food, access to medical care or school places. In this context, then, what is not to salute about a series of pictures of Paris with victims, proffering giveaway bottles of her new fragrance, Platinum Rush (the highly anticipated follow-up smell to Gold Rush)? As a source told the Daily Mail: “Paris gave speeches that had all the people crying with her kind, encouraging words of support.” Did they? I don’t want to put words into the brain of the San Gregorio mother shown looking in the presentation box of Platinum Rush that Paris is presenting her with, but I sense she is not thinking: “This sparkling floral-fruity fragrance reflects Hilton’s passion for sharing ‘the rush’ of love through the power of scent … As the scent evolves, the base brings a tantalising mix of sophistication and sensuality with Cashmere Musks, Sheer Patchouli, Liquid Amber and Vanilla Bourbon, creating a lasting memory.” Or any of the other bollocks off the press release. Still, it must be said that Paris also donated a truckload of branded Paris Hilton throw cushions to victims – and once more raised awareness of the debate over whether there is any wrong way to raise awareness.