Patients cannot rely on existing regulations to protect them from dangerous products that could lead to pain and physical harm, the chair of the government’s safety review of medical devices has warned. Responding to findings of a global investigation into the medical device industry, Julia Cumberlege said there were such serious failings with the licensing rules for medical implants that “patients certainly can’t rely on that system”. “If you look at the regulation of medicines, it’s pretty strict. We know it takes nine years for a medicine … to be brought to market,” she said. “With devices, that rigour is not there.” The Conservative MP Sarah Wollaston, a former GP and chair of the health select committee, described the findings of the investigation as “very concerning”. “It is vital that reported complications from medical devices are taken seriously and investigated thoroughly and in a timely manner so that the public can be protected from dangerous medical devices,” she said. An investigation by the Guardian and organisations including the BBC, Le Monde and Süddeutsche Zeitung, coordinated by the International Consortium of Investigative Journalists (ICIJ), has found a litany of failings in the way medical devices are allowed on to the market, lax rules on testing and a lack of transparency around how many patients suffer problems. Pacemakers, artificial hips, contraceptives and breast implants are among the devices that have caused injuries or in some cases death. We want to hear from readers to find out more about your experiences and perspectives on the story. You can get in touch by filling in this encrypted form. If you require an enhanced level of security please see here for other ways to contact the Guardian. Your responses will only be seen by the Guardian and we’ll be in touch if we are considering your response as part of our reporting. You can read terms of service here. In the UK, freedom of information requests to the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) revealed 62,000 “adverse incident” reports linked to medical devices had been received between 2015 and 2018. More than 1,000 of these incidents had resulted in death. Data provided to the Guardian reveals a collapse in the proportion of complaints reported by doctors or member of the public through the MHRA’s yellow card scheme that it assigns a specialist to investigate. So far in 2018, only 231 of the 15,436 reports received have prompted it to start a special investigation, compared with 3,300 of the 8,860 cases received in 2008. Lady Cumberlege, who is leading a safety inquiry into several medical products including vaginal mesh, said that during the course of her inquiry she had “heard a lot about the yellow card system. That it doesn’t work and it’s ineffective.” She said registries needed to record every patient receiving an implant and also monitor outcomes for surgeons and hospitals. Such a system could have avoided the suffering faced by tens of thousands of women who experienced complications from vaginal mesh, she said. In some cases, she said, centres of expertise should be assigned and stricter requirements should be introduced to ensure all surgeons carrying out new procedures are appropriately trained and qualified. “We must have surgeons who are trained to do this operation so it’s not just everybody having a go,” she said. Prof Derek Alderson, the president of the Royal College of Surgeons, said that all new surgical procedures and devices should be registered with data collected in national audits, before being routinely offered to patients. “All implantable devices should be registered and tracked to monitor efficacy and patient safety in the long term,” he said. “This requires government funding and support, and potentially national guidelines on the introduction of new procedures and technologies.”