Tokyo prosecutors are reportedly planning to extend the detention of Carlos Ghosn, the head of the Renault-Nissan-Mitsubishi group, as the heads of the alliance he shaped meet for the first time since his arrest. Ghosn will be held in custody for a further 10 days under prosecutors’ plans, after which they must decide whether or not to charge him with a crime, Japan’s Kyodo news agency reported on Thursday. Ghosn has been held for 10 days since his shock arrest following allegations by Nissan that he under-reported his income to regulators. The arrest has cast doubt on the future of the alliance, in which Ghosn was a key figure, between Nissan, Mitsubishi and Renault. Nissan and Mitsubishi quickly moved to oust Ghosn as chair of their respective boards after the claims, but Renault declined to remove him as chairman and chief executive. He also remains head of the car alliance. The alliance’s leadership, Ghosn apart, is meeting on Thursday in Amsterdam for an operational review which was scheduled before the arrest. It is understood Nissan’s chief executive, Hiroto Saikawa, is attending via teleconference. It is unclear whether Thierry Bolloré, Renault’s interim chief executive, will attend in person. The meeting is thought to be focused on operational issues of the alliance, which shares research and development, basic components, and some technology. A separate meeting of the board of Renault-Nissan BV, which runs the alliance, would be required to oust Ghosn. In a joint statement, the three companies said they “have all – individually and collectively – emphatically reiterated their strong commitment to the alliance”. The statement added: “The alliance has achieved unparalleled success in the past two decades. We remain fully committed to the alliance.” Car industry analysts have questioned whether Renault can continue to hold the upper hand in the alliance. The alliance sold 10.6m cars in 2017. Renault holds a 43.4% stake in Nissan, which owns 15% of Renault and 34% of Mitsubishi. Nissan has in recent years been the larger driver of profits for the alliance, which some analysts believe could be reflected in any restructuring of the unusual cross-ownership. Any change could also give an increased role to Mitsubishi, which currently has no formal role on the board of Renault-Nissan BV.