A protester has died after being hit by a motorist as demonstrators angry at fuel tax rises caused gridlock in parts of France on Saturday. Police said 47 other protesters had also been injured, three critically, as France’s newest people’s movement, the gilets jaunes (yellow vests), staged a day of action. The protester was killed at Pont-de-Beauvoisin, in the south-eastern Savoie region, where 150-200 protesters had gathered for a demonstration at 8am. The local prefect, Louis Laugier, said the motorist had been taking one of her children to the doctor when she was stopped by demonstrators at a roundabout. After talking to them, she tried to move off down a side road, where protesters banged on her car. “It appears the woman panicked, accelerated and ran over a person who later died,” Laugier said. The victim, a 63-year-old woman, was pronounced dead at the scene. The driver was arrested. Police said a total of 24 people had been arrested and that most of the injuries were caused by angry drivers trying to force their way through demonstrations. The French authorities said around 124,000 protesters were taking part in 1,000 protests across the country and in overseas territories, including Corsica. The grassroots movement, named after the neon yellow vests French motorists are obliged to keep in their vehicles, formed after President Emmanuel Macron raised fuel taxes. The leader is accused of being detached from the reality of daily life for ordinary people. On the Champs-Élysées in Paris, a group of gilets jaunes walked slowly back and forth over pedestrian crossings chanting “Macron resign” as police tried to keep traffic moving. In other parts of the country, demonstrators set up “filtering barriers” that blocked access to toll booths, motorways and major arterial routes. The government has defended the taxes as part of a programme to reduce the country’s reliance on fossil fuels. It has offered financial incentives to persuade motorists to swap older, polluting vehicles for newer, cleaner models.