When the opposition is down, keep your foot on the throat. In the infancy of his tenure but already desperate for a result, Stuttgart’s coach Markus Weinzierl would have hoped for opponents without that type of focus as his team opened the Bundesliga weekend at an anxious Mercedes-Benz Arena on Friday night. Unfortunately, he and they bumped into Eintracht Frankfurt instead. Few expected this to be much of a season for last term’s DfB Pokal winners after Niko Kovac’s departure for Bayern Munich even if his replacement, Adi Hütter, was coming off a Swiss Super League win with Young Boys – but recent weeks have raised hopes. Still, they had been stretched by a couple of injuries before travelling south, with the experienced defender Marco Russ and midfielder Mijat Gacinovic both staying home in Frankfurt with injuries. It left them down to the bare bones at the back, so Hütter decided the best form of defence was attack, replacing Gacinovic with a striker, Sébastien Haller – putting the Frenchman in the starting lineup with Ante Rebic and Luka Jovic for the first time. Following last week’s 1-1 draw with Nürnberg – after the visit to Stuttgart, it’s the only time Eintracht have failed to win in their last seven matches – there was a palpable sense of irritation around the squad, with only substitute Haller’s late goal saving a point. Higher standards have been set and, primed by Hütter’s team selection and tactical desires, they took it out on poor Stuttgart. Eintracht pushed hard from the start, with only VAR bailing out the home side after Rebic had appeared to give the visitors the lead a few minutes in before being correctly ruled offside. Yet even the manner of that finish, with Rebic outrageously rolling a dummy around goalkeeper Ron-Robert Zieler before tapping into an empty net, underlined just how confident his team was. Before long they were doing it for real, with Haller scoring the first and Jovic setting up Rebic for the second before the break. By the time substitutes Jetro Willems and Nicolai Müller combined for a late third, Hütter’s side were cruising. This sort of ballsy, best-foot-first plan is not at all out of character for Eintracht this season. With Stuttgart suffering their worst ever start to a Bundesliga season, having now lost seven of their first 10 - and Weinzierl’s record since taking over reading three matches, three defeats, no goals scored and 11 conceded – they were clearly perfect cannon fodder for a team on the crest of a wave. In a private moment, Hütter would be sure to sympathise with Stuttgart and Weinzierl. As a player, he had the chance to join 1860 Munich in the 90s but decided to stay at Salzburg. “I told myself that if I ever had the chance again to come to Germany, I’d take it,” he said in pre-season, but his start was more nightmare than long-held dream. The vagaries of the German fixture calendar can be tough on a new coach, with Pokal matches preceding the first fixture of the Bundesliga season. It can be a handy warmup – or, if you lose to lower-league opposition, it can pile the pressure on before you really get started. “We have to get the fans on our side,” Hütter had said on the eve of their Pokal match, with little sense of the sporting catastrophe on the horizon. A reverse against fourth-tier Ulm, which followed on directly from a 5-0 Super Cup humiliation at home by Bayern and Kovac, meant the holders were ousted after barely a lap celebrating with the trophy. The contrast with Kovac’s start was significant. In pre-season, Hütter and the sporting director Bruno Hübner were split between lining up in a 4-4-2 or retaining the three-man defence generally favoured by Kovac. “If it was an easy transition [from Kovac],” Hübner said in August, “then we wouldn’t have needed a coach. I’d have done it myself.” The leap from Kovac to Hütter was tough to negotiate. As 11 Freunde’s Tobias Escher wrote in September, there was some alarm even after the new coach got the monkey off his back, winning 2-0 at Freiburg immediately after the humiliation at Ulm. Freiburg had 22 shots in that match, something that had happened to Eintracht only twice in two years under Kovac. Under the Croatian they had faced the third-fewest number of shots in the Bundesliga in 2016-17 and the sixth-fewest last season. Anybody even loosely familiar with Young Boys’ glorious romp to a first Swiss title in 32 years knew that was highly unlikely to be the case under Hütter. He likes his team to press hard, attack and he certainly won’t chide them for taking risks. Commuting style would need time and confidence, two things that instantly diminished after those bad opening two results. They were also missing Kevin-Prince Boateng, who had been a leader on and off the pitch before exiting for Sassuolo. Hütter responded in the only way he knew how – by continuing to go for the jugular. Winning at Marseille’s Stade Vélodrome on the Europa League opening night gave Eintracht confidence and the coach credit, and the team have rolled with it since. Haller and Jovic in particular have looked unstoppable – the Frenchman already has seven goals in the Bundesliga having got nine in the whole of his debut season – and while the relative lack of clean sheets is apparently irritating the returned Kevin Trapp, who was delighted with Friday’s shut-out, few are complaining. That Europe proved the springboard is apt for a club with considerable history. At the Sportpresseball in the city on Saturday, Eintracht named half a dozen new “brand ambassadors” – Jay Jay Okocka, Tony Yeboah, Cha Bum-Kun, Jan-Aage Fjörtoft, Oka Nikolov and Chen Yang, with the first five of those attending the presentation. It underlined just what a past this club has. Now, if they win at Apollon Limassol on Thursday, Eintracht will already have clinched a place in the last 32 of the Europa League. For Stuttgart, loudly whistled off at half-time and again at full-time, such heights feel a million miles away even if – had Eintracht not unexpectedly beaten Bayern in May’s Pokal final – it would be them in Europe instead. “We can’t go on like this,” said Zieler afterwards, knowing their visit to Nürnberg on Saturday afternoon already couldn’t be more vital. Hütter, one imagines, would simply counsel Weinzierl to simply be brave. • Next weekend’s Der Klassiker is well set from all angles. Dortmund’s 1-0 win at Wolfsburg and Bayern’s concession of a late leveller at home to Freiburg makes the gap four points – meaning BVB could go into the international break seven clear with a win. • It should be something off the pitch, too. Expect widespread fans protests after Der Spiegel’s European Super League revelations, brushed off by Uli Hoeness as “a hoax”. • The feeling that Der Klassiker could be vital was reinforced by the inconsistency elsewhere, with Hoffenheim riding roughshod over Leverkusen after the latter’s big win at Werder Bremen last weekend, and Leipzig getting an impressive 3-0 victory at Hertha. Stuttgart 0-3 Eintracht Frankfurt, Hertha Berlin 0-3 RB Leipzig, Wolfsburg 0-1 Borussia Dortmund, Schalke 3-1 Hannover 96, FC Augbsburg 2-2 FC Nurnberg, Bayern Munich 1-1 SC Freiburg, Bayer Leverkusen 1-4 Hoffenheim, Mainz 2-1 Werder Bremen, Mönchengladbach 3-0 Fortuna Düsseldorf