I don’t care who knows it: gymnastics makes me cry. In a good way, I should add, not in an “is this the only sport BBC still has rights to?” way. It doesn’t matter if it’s Gabby Douglas becoming the first black gymnast to win the Olympic all-around title, or Epke Zonderland falling from the high bar and landing flat on his nose. There is something about the sheer ambition of gymnastics – coupled with the generous camaraderie that makes rivals look like the best of friends – that’s more tearjerking than an entire afternoon of Hallmark Christmas movies. This year’s world championships were always going to be emotional. And while Simone Biles’s record-breaking return to competition gave my lip a dangerous quiver, it was one of her competitors in the vault final that broke the dam. Her name was Oksana Chusovitina, and I last saw her perform two years ago at the Olympic Games in Rio. Back then, we held our breath as she prepared to execute the Produnova, the so-called vault of death – a highly dangerous routine even Biles herself had balked at because, she said “I’m not trying to die”. Chusovitina hadn’t managed to pull off the vault, or finish on the podium; and her routine had changed in the two years since. In Doha she stood at the end of the runway, long hair pulled back and slicked down, her face devoid of the glittery eye-make up that many of the younger gymnasts favoured. Hers was the last vault of the final. Biles and Shannon Olsen, in first and second place respectively, shouted encouragement: “C’mon Oksana, you got this!” Alexo Moreno, in third place, couldn’t take her eyes off the floor. Chusovitina had been ill during the build-up to competition, but Moreno knew what a threat the woman with a record nine world championship medals on this apparatus posed. Chusovitina licked her palms, and sprinted at the springboard like Tom Cruise at a helicopter. Only a backward step on landing betrayed her; she finished in fourth. Not bad for a 43-year-old. Chusovitina herself can be dismissive of the age gap between her and her rivals. “Perhaps it’s some sort of a sensation,” she says, “but I don’t think it is.” It’s hard for her to appreciate that to other 40-somethings – the ones taking up Pilates to fend off hereditary back trouble – her physical capabilities are as superhuman as anything Zack Snyder could imagine. My favourite quote about this Martina Navratilova of gymnastics comes from the 2008 beam champion from the Beijing Games, Shawn Johnson. “No one even knows how old she is anymore, because it seems like she’s been to the last gazillion Olympics.” Well, sure, Shawn, “seven” doesn’t have the same ring to it. But it’s still a record. More than a quarter of century in a sport that usually consigns its heroes to toothpaste endorsements and TV cameos in half that time. To me, the real power of Chusovitina’s story is not in the statistics – the fact that Biles wasn’t born when she started competing internationally, or that she has a son older than some of her teammates. It’s in the hand she was dealt and the choices she made. And it’s a particularly timely reminder that none of us choose where we are born. Chusovitina is from Uzbekistan; her first international forays were under the flag of the Soviet Union. After its break-up she returned to her home country to train – in terrible conditions, on substandard equipment – and still won medals. And in 2002, when Chusovitina was on the verge of retiring, her three-year-old son Alisher was diagnosed with leukaemia. With no medical facilities in her home country capable of saving Alisher’s life, and no health insurance, Chusovitina moved to Germany, where the gymnastics community helped raise funds for his treatment. Chusovitina kept training because the prize money was a vital source of income. “If I don’t compete then my son won’t live, it’s as simple as that,” she said. The story has several happy endings. Alisher was cured and his mother found out a few days after she won her first individual Olympic medal, in Beijing, at the age of 33. Chusovitina did eventually retire, after London 2012, and it lasted less than 12 hours. She woke up next morning and changed her mind. Last year she was the first gymnast ever inducted into her sport’s hall of fame while still active. “I feel like every year that I’m competing I’m leaving a little part of myself behind,” she said at the time. She was right. In Doha last week, four of the gymnasts competing were mothers; Chusovitina had been an inspiration to them all. “Oksana is a wonderful person,” said Aliya Mustafina. “By looking at her, I understood it was possible to come back.” Sure, not every athlete has the capacity or the drive to stick at their sport as long as Chusovitina, but her longevity is already creating a legacy. And her unshowy breaking of boundaries is as worthy of celebration as any medal she missed out on in Doha. Chusovitina said she was proud to know that she had set an example. She also said that her pre-tournament sickness notwithstanding, she could see now that she was perfectly on course in her preparations to qualify for the 2020 Olympics. “I could compete with all the girls with no problems at all,” she said. “I know and I am sure that I have a goal now.” What a goal it is. If she makes it to the vault final in Tokyo, I’m going to buy shares in Kleenex.