It is fairly well known that PL Travers, who wrote the eight original Mary Poppins books, hated the 1964 Disney film adaptation. The animation, the Hollywood version of Edwardian England, the playful verbosity of the songs and above all, the presentation of Mrs Banks as a larky suffragette are understood to have enraged the Australian author, as, surely would this: the co-option of Mary Poppins as a feminist. It is an irritating reflex to take beloved figures from childhood fiction and bend them to adult political ends, but it is particularly perverse in the case of Poppins, given her creator’s dislike of piety. The original Poppins is not quite the spit-spot version with whom most of us are familiar, but a far darker, more irregular creature, powered in places by what reads as sublimated rage and inclined to embrace something that sails close to atheism. None of which is to say that Travers was right to despise the Disney version. After many years of not watching or thinking about the movie, I have been forced to re-engage with it as my children work their way through the Disney back catalogue and in anticipation of Mary Poppins Returns, the Emily Blunt reboot, directed by Rob Marshall and due to open at Christmas. What strikes me is how devastating the original film was. Poppins is a cypher at the heart of the movie who exerts influence not, as Mr Banks specifies in his advert in the Times, by being a “nanny who can give commands”, but in accordance with the principle that one changes others by changing one’s behaviour around them – in the case of Poppins – through a combination of beady observation and strategic obliviousness. She is impatient, indignant, above all incredulous when presented with the weakness of others. (“Are you unwell?” she asks Mr Banks after doing some light magic at him and in what we would, these days, identify as gas lighting.) What is the purpose of this? The movie implies that Poppins is part of the longstanding dramatic tradition of the stranger as agent of moral change. One can laugh at the cod-profundity of the lines, but the opening scene – the best bit of acting Dick Van Dyke does in two hours – in which Bert glances eerily up at the sky, sets the uneasy tone for the film: “Wind’s in the east / Mist coming in / Like something is brewing, about to begin / Can’t put my finger on what lies in store / But I feel what’s to happen all happened before.” There is wonder in this statement, but also a nod towards forces not entirely benign. Which is not to say Poppins is anything but good. She is, however, clearly a woman acquainted with the limitations of others and while she is sent to the Banks household to comfort sad children, it is also her mission to critique the English: coldness as a vehicle for stability; blind adherence to tradition and emotional detachment as modes mistaken for virtue, all of which, over the course of the movie, Poppins smartly dismantles. There might have been a question of warmth with the character, were Julie Andrews not such a nuanced performer and there is real pathos in her Poppins, not just in the sadness when she says goodbye to the children, but in the nearest the movie gets to a torch song – a top pick for karaoke! – Feed the Birds. This is fanciful, but when she sings about the Bird Woman I always think Poppins is recognising the ease with which she, or any woman, might slip down the ladder, if we do not adhere to various misogynistic standards. The mad woman on the steps of St Paul’s is all of us and do not make me quote Gilbert and Gubar to prove it. Still, the question of feminism in the movie is a tricky one, not least because the film explicitly mocks the limitations of this kind of labelling, setting up Mrs Banks as a suffragette who is militant outside Downing Street – “take heart for Mrs Pankhurst has been clapped in irons again!” – and submissive at home. (The true feminist statement of the film is, of course, the heroine’s retort to Mr Banks: “Let me make one thing quite clear; I never explain anything.”) This is not quite true. For all her seeming invulnerability, Poppins exhibits regret at the end of the movie in a tender moment with her talking umbrella. She is a stoic who counters the stoicism of Mr Banks, an epitome of Englishness charged with the very American project of making those around her articulate their anxieties. (Notably David Tomlinson, who as Mr Banks delivers the heartbreaking monologue about his failures as a parent, a man “brought to rack an’ ruin in his prime.”) She does not have a love interest, which in the context of Hollywood heroines might be considered the most radical thing about her. What is it she teaches the children? Empathy; mindfulness; a sneaky determination to win (at the horse race). Tidiness. Not to gush. Not to worry, overly, about whether or not they are liked. Simultaneously to believe and not believe what they see. As in the books, she denies to the children that anything magical has happened, inculcating scepticism and something worthwhile about view point. In fact, scepticism is her greatest asset; a stand against credulousness and therefore systems, social and political, which would have the children mindlessly repeat what came before simply because it is familiar. And then she buggers off, truly a shocking moment of childhood. I remember the first time I saw this and could not believe a film was allowed to behave this way, break one’s heart so insistently then pretend the reunification of the Banks family was, in fact, a happy ending. No child I know bought into this. Poppins’ departure presages death and even as eight-year-olds, at some level, we knew it. And so she will fly back into our lives this Christmas. The makers of the new film say it is their intention to reintroduce joy at a particularly grim moment in history, but with Poppins it was never a question of joy pure and simple. It was, instead, a question of joy against the backdrop of the film’s only certainty, that whatever happens, the wind will change. It is not much as reassurance goes, but it will have to do. Mary Poppins Returns is released on 19 December in the US and 21 December in the UK