Nutritionist Kerry Torrens advocates a filling and sugar-stabilising breakfast, such as porridge, if you are heading out in the evening. Starting the day with a generous breakfast can help control your appetite later in the day. She recommends adding a dollop of probiotic yoghurt to help boost immunity. Generally aiming to “drink less” is too broad, says Rosamund Dean, journalist and author of Mindful Drinking: How Cutting Down Can Change Your Life; she recommends being more specific. For her, that means restricting alcohol to three days each week as well as limiting the number of drinks she consumes. Planning what you’re going to drink in advance, finding a signature soft drink and fully savouring the tipple in your hand are among her top tips. Not everyone can squeeze in some shuteye before a big night out, but if you can, power naps have a lot going for them. Just 30 minutes can make a difference, writes Nick Littlehales, author of Sleep: The Myth of 8 Hours. If that is impossible, he says you are can still get some benefits by finding a quiet corner, closing your eyes and disconnecting for a moment. Personal trainer Holly Davidson says it is important not to give up exercise until the new year. “Come January, you’re going to be really wishing you hadn’t done that.” She suggests continuing to schedule workouts, but break them into shorter blocks. The festive season brings an influx of sugary temptations that are hard to resist. Keep a selection of healthier snacks, such as fruit or nuts, in your drawer or bag. “Never go to a party really hungry,” says Davidson. “Have a snack before you go.” Jennifer Lawrence had H20 tattooed (incorrectly) on her hand to remind herself to stay hydrated. You don’t need to go to those lengths, but water is crucial if you want to avoid a hangover. Take regular sips throughout the day and try alternating alcoholic drinks with a glass of water when you are at an event. Rhinovirus, the predominant cause of the common cold, can end your festive cheer. A study published in the Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences found that the virus replicates better in lower temperatures, so keeping your nose warm with a scarf could help prevent a cold. The NHS also recommends washing your hands and being careful about touching your eyes and mouth to help stop you catching colds. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.