Let me introduce you to, if you are not already familiar with, Jennie Lee. Lee has become a fast hero of mine, although I only learned about her recently through Cathy Newman’s brilliant book, Bloody Brilliant Women: the Pioneers, Revolutionaries and Geniuses Your History Teacher Forgot to Mention. Lee, who was born in Scotland, was a Labour MP. She was the first minister for the arts, and is still the only person to table a white paper on the arts (A Policy for the Arts, 1965). She was instrumental in widening the remit of the Arts Council of Great Britain in 1967, particularly into the regions. Lee was so popular with theatregoers that she would be applauded by audiences whenever she went to see a show, which was often. (She was also involved in establishing The Open University and, a side note, was Nye Bevan’s wife: an absolute Labour power couple.) Jeremy Wright was unable to name a single female newspaper columnist when pressed five times How we need a Jennie Lee for these philistine times. This month, Jeremy Wright, the secretary of state for digital, culture, media and port (DCMS), gave us a surprising insight into his reading habits. He was unable to name a single female newspaper columnist when pressed five times (he eventually alighted on the Daily Telegraph’s Allison Pearson). He also said he does not subscribe to a single newspaper, but relies on aides to summarise their content for him. Of course, Wright is a busy man and pressed for time, but given that he is also responsible for “media ownership and mergers” and is also to lead a review into the future of journalism, it was an extraordinary admission. Wright also revealed his fondness for Lego. This was widely mocked, which was rather unfair. Because – and here’s the thing – at least it spoke of an actual interest. A real hobby outside of heckling on the green benches. Whether Lego falls under the category of culture is a different matter. Wright is just the latest in a long line of culture secretaries who appear to have no firm interest in any aspect of the brief. To be fair to the former incumbent, Jeremy Hunt, at least he is well known as a passionate lambada dancer, though he let himself down with his flakiness on BSkyB. We have now had three culture secretaries in just two years, such is the disregard for the office. Matt Hancock said he liked Ed Sheeran, and Karen Bradley apparently listened to Adele (the most mainstream, safest artists to pick, which smacks of focus groups). All several cultural divisions below Jennie. Politicians are often seen as individuals who go straight from university into the political arena, (sometimes via a brief stint in PR), and seem to have few other interests. They appear to read Hansard and little else. Jeremy Corbyn was slated for stating that Ulysses is his favourite book (people thought it pretentious), but at least it was evidence he reads for pleasure. Though he probably just read half of it, like the rest of us. One of the most excruciating mid-speech moments by David Cameron, was when he – an oft-professed fan of Aston Villa – forgot which club he ostensibly supported, and praised West Ham (who have similar club colours). Remember Gordon Brown saying his favourite band were Arctic Monkeys, who “really wake you up in the morning”, and then he couldn’t name a single one of their songs? The cultural deficit at the DCMS matters. The state of the arts in Britain does not make for good reading. The Arts Council England (ACE) budget for 2018 to 2022 has been cut by £156m. There seems to be no recognition of how powerful the arts can be in educating audiences, reflecting current events, exploring different views and opening up dialogue. In the past year alone, I have enjoyed Nicholas Hytner’s version of Julius Caesar at The Bridge, influenced by Trump’s America; The Jungle’s tale of life in the Calais refugee camp; Alan Bennett’s Allelujah!, a celebration of the NHS. In good news, the regions have gained support, but access is still often limited to a certain demographic: older, middle-class, affluent and white. As for sport, the 2012 Olympics were, agreed by almost everyone, a national success, but in London, grassroots sport has been cut by an average of £400,000 per borough, while youth crime increases. We need a culture secretary who is genuinely passionate about at least one of the areas in their remit, and who will advocate for more funding and attention. Someone who takes their role as seriously as Wright’s former departmental colleague Tracey Crouch did, or former shadow mental health minister Luciana Berger. It is true to say an austerity drive that has lasted years has created a pressing need for support and funding for health, education and industry. But quite often the arts can benefit all these areas. The creative industries contribute £90bn net to the UK economy. One report found that arts prescription on the NHS in Wales (known as social or community prescribing) has resulted in a 28% reduction in GP visits. Lee argued that the arts should be accessible to every adult and child, ingrained in everyday life; the education system; local communities, almost as an extension of public health. The UK has much to be proud of in the arts – we are among the world leaders – but Lee’s vision has not come to pass, and if anything we are going backwards. Culture desperately needs a Lee, not a seemingly indifferent minister who, if recent history repeats itself, will be replaced in about a year. •Hannah Jane Parkinson is a Guardian columnist