The German economy went into reverse in the third quarter, shrinking for the first time since 2015 as a weaker trade position and lower consumer spending weighed on Europe’s largest economy. Gross domestic product fell by 0.2% compared with the second quarter, following growth of 0.5% in the second quarter. It was the weakest since the first three months of 2013, when the economy shrank by 0.3%, and the first contraction since the first quarter of 2015, according to Destatis, Germany’s statistics office. The economy contracted between July and September as Germany’s foreign trade position deteriorated, with exports falling but imports rising in a country traditionally known as an exporting powerhouse. Destatis said there were “mixed signals” for domestic demand, with German households spending less but firms investing more in machinery, equipment and construction. Government spending was also slightly higher in the third quarter. The trade weakness was partly down to temporary factors, including disruption to car production before new and more rigorous emissions tests that came into force in September, but economists warned there were also some worrying structural developments in Germany. Carsten Brzeski, the chief economist based in Germany for the Dutch bank ING, said the worst economic performance since the beginning of 2013 was “another wake-up call for the eurozone’s largest economy”. He said: “Problems with the emission norms created severe production problems in the automotive industry, higher energy prices completely erased previous wage increases and also don’t underestimate the negative confidence effect from the World Cup. “We don’t dare to predict the performance of the national football team but at least the automotive sector should rebound in the coming months and somewhat lower energy prices should revamp private consumption. “However, the poor export performance, despite a weak euro exchange rate, suggests that trade tensions and weaknesses in emerging markets could continue to weigh on Germany’s growth performance.” Annual growth in Germany was 1.1% in the third quarter, weaker than the 1.3% predicted by economists and sharply lower than the 2% annual growth rate in the second quarter. Jennifer McKeown, the chief European economist at Capital Economics, said the latest figures suggested the German economy was on track for growth of 1.5% in 2018, weaker than the firm’s previous forecast of 1.8%. She added: “We still expect a healthy expansion of about 1.8% in 2019 but there are clear downside risks relating particularly to the situation in Italy. And for now at least, the contraction in German GDP coupled with the Italian government’s refusal to revise its budget plans will add to downward pressure on the euro exchange rate.”