It’s 11pm on a Thursday night and a gaggle of twentysomethings are crowding around a tub of Lego in London’s Waterstones Piccadilly, making wands. It’s an hour before the latest JK Rowling adventure, Fantastic Beasts: The Crimes of Grindelwald, is released in UK cinema screens. At the same time, Rowling’s script is being released as a handsome hardback on its own. Perhaps no other author could publish their jaunts into screenwriting as bestselling books, but this is Rowling, after all: the one author who can inspire adults to don school uniforms at midnight and head back to class – albeit one where they can drink Voldermorjitos. More than 20 years since the first book was published, there is still no equal to Harry Pottermania in literature or the flood of merchandise it has spawned: backpacks, chess sets, pyjamas, Lego, wands, soft toys. Even scripts published as books, a strange if lucrative endeavour (421,000 copies of Fantastic Beasts and Where to Find Them have sold in the UK alone) continue to attract fan excitement and marketing pizzazz. With Crimes of Grindelwald, booksellers up and down the country are preparing for a huge weekend of sales, with Waterstones holding more than 240 events across three days – efforts that even some fans feel more befits a fully fledged novel. As a physical object, The Crimes of Grindelwald is undeniably covetable and beautiful. But as literature? I am Potter-mad myself but even I remain unsure about the publishing of scripts. After seeing the film, it is hard to imagine what the reader gains from imagining a flying carriage chase laid out by Rowling over 12 scenes, rather than watching it as intended. It’s likely that some who buy it won’t read it at all: “To me, it’s a collectors’ item,” says Emily, 28. “I don’t know if people really read these when the film is out there – but I want to have it as I own the other books and I love the world.” “Literature takes many forms,” says Dr Martin Richardson, who teaches Durham University’s Harry Potter and the Age of Illusion module. “Of course, one would prefer them to be written in the form of novels. On the other hand, film scripts are better than nothing! In a perfect world, of course, one would prefer films and novels – but I’m greedy!” Nas, 23, is a fan regardless of format. “I am a poetry and plays person so I find the scripts really fun,” she says. “When Fantastic Beasts was announced as a film, I was very surprised. Of all the things JK Rowling could have done, I didn’t think it would be this. But I love it. A movie or book about Voldemort’s life would be amazing. She could announce anything and I’d probably love it.” Midnight launches are not the place for cynicism, not least when the original Potter generation is out in full force: extravagantly dressed and unabashedly enthusiastic twenty- and thirtysomethings, who will likely never be above waving a wand or hopping aboard a broom for a round of Quidditch. And with a Trumpian villain (Johnny Depp’s Grindelwald boasts the slogan “For the greater good” and gives rally speeches about wizarding superiority) and references to the Holocaust (he also implies he could prevent the upcoming second world war), The Crimes of Grindelwald seems aimed more at these older fans, and less so the younger ones entranced by the cuddly Nifflers (a kleptomaniac echidna). Not that any of this curbs children’s excitement. Nine-year-old Anais is positively buzzing. “I love the scripts,” she gushes. “I don’t read them differently to the books. I read them to myself. It is nice seeing Hogwarts from a different perspective.” The film’s critical reception has been somewhat muted, some panning it as both slow-paced and erratic, others pointing out possible plot holes. The author has enthusiastically written new backstories and new details ever since she finished the Potter books; she set up the website Pottermore in 2012 to publish her expanded wizarding world history and frequently answers fan questions on Twitter. But some are tired of her willingness to retroactively change details: characters who haven’t yet been born appear in The Crimes of Grindelwald, while the number of secret siblings and identities feel like a shorthand attempt to give new characters more emotional weight. “Rowling’s attention to detail was so satisfying partly because the original series had an endpoint, and the stories within it felt finished,” says children’s literature critic Imogen Russell Williams. “It was then very exciting in the play Harry Potter and the Cursed Child to have a sense of those stories not being as fixed as we’d thought. Again, though, there was an endpoint, a sense of finite context and resolution. But there’s a limit to how much stretching and experimenting you can do, especially on the big screen, before your universe loses its knicker-elastic and your audience becomes jaded and feels like it is being played with, unable to trust any ending or take any fact as truth.” With three more script books to come, at least – Rowling has planned five films for the Beasts franchise – all these niggling details may yet be explained. “There are some inconsistencies,” says Richardson. “But for me it doesn’t really matter and it gives the apologists and contributors to the Potter fan forums something to explain away. I am not looking for inconsistencies and flaws – it’s not holy writ.”