The Democratic Unionist party (DUP) has rejected any regulatory divergence between Northern Ireland and Britain in the Brexit deal, but there is already some divergence – and it will help keep the lights on, and the food safe, at the party’s annual conference on Saturday. Northern Ireland gets its electricity and trades its livestock in ways which distinguish it from mainland Britain and which have nothing to do with Brexit. Northern Ireland is part of a single electricity market with the Republic of Ireland, it applies extensive checks on livestock coming from Britain and has distinct rules on the transport of hazardous waste – pragmatic, uncontroversial measures which are not deemed threats to Northern Ireland’s place in the United Kingdom. However, DUP leaders who gather in Belfast for the party’s conference will thunder anew against different rules for Northern Ireland and Britain envisaged in the Brexit deal, branding them an existential threat to the union and therefore reason for the party to issue its own threat to pull the plug on Theresa May’s government. The former foreign secretary Boris Johnson is expected to amplify that warning in an address to about 600 party faithful. Additional rules and checks on trade between Northern Ireland and Britain, according to these views, would amount to a border in the Irish Sea and tilt the region closer to a united Ireland, the DUP’s apocalyptic scenario. Northern Ireland’s business and farming groups have in vain tried to persuade the DUP that the deal, including the backstop, would protect the region’s economy and pose no risk to the union. Sammy Wilson, one of 10 DUP MPs who shore up the Westminster government under a fraying confidence and supply agreement, branded the leaders of the business and farming groups as “puppets” of Downing Street. Much of the detail about the UK’s relationship with the EU post-Brexit remains unclear but Katy Hayward, a Queen’s University Belfast professor who studies the border, said there was no prospect of Northern Ireland being cleaved from the UK. “If you see divergence between GB and Northern Ireland, it would only be in those areas where it would make sense for Northern Ireland to be aligned with the EU,” she said. “It won’t be the case that a whole raft of EU law is dumped on Northern Ireland. My own reading is that there is no threat to the integrity of the UK.” The DUP’s critics accuse the party of diverging from reality or, at least, consistency. It favours different rules for Northern Ireland, for example the bans on abortion and same-sex marriage, when they align with the party’s social conservatism. It also invokes Northern Ireland’s uniqueness for economic reasons. During an outbreak of mad cow disease, the late Ian Paisley, the party’s founder, famously said his constituents were British but their cattle were Irish. That pragmatic streak glimmered in the party’s manifesto last year when it said it wanted Brexit to deliver “Northern Ireland-specific solutions” with “particular circumstances of Northern Ireland with a land border with the EU fully reflected” and a “proportionate regulatory regime which can promote competitiveness, with legislation to suit our local needs”. Such flexibility, after all, is already reflected in regulatory checks – identity documents and physical inspections – of livestock arriving from Britain, a system designed to protect agriculture and consumer safety. Northern Ireland also has strict controls on the transport of waste, especially hazardous waste, shipped to or from the British mainland, and it has operated a single electricity market with the Republic since 2007, a wholesale electricity trading pool which trades in sterling and euros. Over the past year, however, the DUP has hardened its position on Brexit and declared opposition to any regulatory divergence from the rest of the UK. “There cannot be a border down the Irish Sea, a differential between Northern Ireland and the rest of the UK,” the party leader, Arlene Foster, told the BBC last month. “The red line is blood red. All along we have said: ‘No new regulatory alignment.’” May has insisted the deal cannot be renegotiated but has offered a sop to the DUP and the Conservative party’s rebellious hard Brexiters by reviving the possibility of technological solutions to maintain an invisible border between Ireland and the UK. Alex Kane, a unionist commentator who often criticises the DUP, said the party’s alarm over Brexit was justified. “Northern Ireland having a future relationship with the EU which is not the same as the relationship between GB and the EU does raise existential and constitutional problems for unionism,” he wrote in the Irish News. Blanket opposition to any new regulatory divergence has shredded the DUP’s relationship with May, endangered its pact with her government and alienated traditional business and farming allies. But there is method to what some outsiders consider madness. Unionists have long memories of British government “betrayal”, such as the 1985 Anglo-Irish agreement with Dublin, an insecurity compounded by demographic changes which favour Northern Ireland’s nationalists. Intentional or not, playing the constitutional card helps distract attention from the cash-for-ash scandal and paralysis at Stormont, two issues which otherwise might cost the DUP votes come election day.