With an ice-skating rink, a huge ferris wheel and an attractive Christmas market (7 December-6 January), Ghent offers no shortage of opportunities to get into the Christmas spirit. But beyond the baubles and twinkly lights, there’s plenty to keep winter visitors to this Flemish city happy, from browsing the bric-a-brac stalls of the Bij Sint-Jacobs flea market to hanging out with the hipsters at the Holy Food Market, a cocktail bar and food hall in the beautiful 17th century Baudelo Chapel.1898 The Post is a cosy and cosseting boutique hotel in a former post office building. Doubles from £160 (zannierhotels.com) The Croatian capital takes the build-up to Christmas seriously, with elaborate street decorations, outdoor concerts and a traditional Christmas market which is regularly voted one of the best in Europe. Most of the action is centred on Ban Josip Jelačić Square and European Square, which have market stalls and live music, and Zrinjevac Park where the trees are hung with lanterns and wooden huts serve mulled wine and štrukli (warm pastries stuffed with soft cheese). But if you want to avoid the festive clamour, simply duck down one of the city’s side streets to find a range of vintage stores, vinyl record shops and quirky one-offs such as Što čitaš/Sapunoteka (Gundulićeva ul. 11), a secondhand bookshop-cum-natural cosmetics store selling products handmade from Adriatic olive oil and herbs. Or head east to Zagreb’s burgeoning design district of Martićeva, where studios and pop-up shops in former industrial spaces showcase the work of local artists and designers.Hotel President Pantovcak has light, spacious bedrooms overlooking gardens. Doubles from £78 (president-zagreb.com). For more information see adventzagreb.com Turin brightens up the dark nights of winter with the Luci d’Artista, a series of contemporary light installations designed by local and international artists . If Christmas shopping is on the agenda, the city has something for all budgets, from the vintage and secondhand bargains of the Balon flea market (Saturdays) to the designer labels on the elegant Via Roma. For a gift that is uniquely Torinese, head to the ever-popular Juventus merchandise store on Via Garibaldi, or to Venchi, for mouth-watering chocolates from one of Turin’s most venerated brands. Warm up with a bicerin – the local concoction of espresso, hot chocolate and milk – in one of the city’s many Belle Epoque cafés.Piazza Vittorio Suites are smart, contemporary apartments in a 19th-century building on a beautiful square. From £60 a night (torinosuites.com) Helsinki must be the only city in the world with a Christmas market that comes with its own sauna (1-22 December. But with winter temperatures barely nudging zero, the free blast of heat offers welcome respite from the Baltic chill. Helsinki is Europe’s unofficial design capital, so you can expect a superior level of merchandise from the Christmas stalls dotted around Senate Square: himmeli ornaments (geometric mobiles made of straw), pine and birch tar candles, carved wooden kuksa mugs and contemporary jewellery. The food market at the Old Market Hall is a great place to pick up Lappish delicacies, seasonal berries and jams. No trip to Helsinki, come rain, shine or snow, would be complete without a visit to the Allas Sea Pool. Its complex of outdoor pools (two of which are heated) and saunas is open year-round.Hotel F6 is a friendly boutique hotel a short stroll from the Market Square. Doubles from £220 (hotelf6.fi) Northern Europe doesn’t have a monopoly on festive cheer, so if you want to combine Christmas shopping with winter sun, head to Malaga. Start your day in true malagueño style with churros and chocolate at the Casa Aranda (Calle Herreria del Rey) before diving into the Atarazanas food market for edible souvenirs such as Andalucian cane honey, goat’s cheese and extra virgin olive oil. In the afternoon, take your pick of the city’s cultural venues – the Picasso Museum, Pompidou Centre, the Malaga Museum or the Russian Museum. Then head to Calle Marqués de Larios, the main shopping drag, at dusk when the Christmas lights are switched on: the spectacle attracts visitors from all over Spain.Room Mate Larios is a bold design hotel with a lively bar and a great location right on Calle Marqués de Larios. Doubles from £78 (room-matehotels.com) The seaside may not be the first place that springs to mind when planning a festive escape, but Le Touquet certainly knows how to put on the Christmas sparkle. From 30 November, the trees lining the promenade and avenues of this chic resort are festooned with fairy lights, and there’s a Christmas carousel, a skating rink and horse-drawn carriage rides. The pedestrianised Rue St Jean is lined with chi-chi boutiques selling everything from artisan chocolates (Au Chat Bleu has the best) to jewellery. Le Touquet is just an hour’s drive from Calais, so bring your car and join the locals stocking up on cheese and charcuterie at the marché couvert (Thursdays and Saturdays) and wines at the excellent Le Touquet-Vins, just outside the town.Hotel Bristol is a friendly, modern hotel with good-value rooms. Doubles from £85, (hotelbristol-letouquet.com). For more information, see letouquet.com With its wonky, half-timbered houses and narrow lanes, Colmar looks like the sort of place you might see on the front of a Christmas card. This canal-side town in the heart of Alsace has a popular Christmas market which takes over the old town (until 30 December. There’s a wooden carousel and animated nativity scene, stalls selling Alsatian specialities such as freshly baked pretzels and berawecka (spiced buns flavoured with fruit and nuts), and a craft and antiques market in the medieval Koifhus (customs house). If it all gets too much, take a moment to contemplate the true meaning of Christmas in front of the Isenheim Altarpiece, a Gothic masterpiece depicting the Redemption of Christ, on display in the chapel of the Musée Unterlinden.James Boutique Hotel is a contemporary bolthole a two-minute walk from the old town. Doubles from £99 (james-hotel.com) The beautiful town of Lecce, sitting on the heel of Italy’s boot, is at its most appealing in winter, when the tourist crowds thin out, the Baroque cathedrals and piazzas are beautifully lit and craft fairs and markets pop up in unexpected corners. Don’t miss the Fiera dei Pupi (puppet fair), held every December at the Ex Convento dei Teatini, a former monastery where you can admire nativity scenes painstakingly crafted from papier-mâché. Good buys include ceramic and terracotta homewares, and gourmet treats such as almond-stuffed figs and fennel-flavoured taralli biscuits. Southern Italy’s cucina povera comes into its own in winter with rabbit stews, roast lamb, chestnuts and the red wines of Salento featuring heavily on menus. If you’re visiting in the week before Christmas or the first week of January, look out for the living nativity scenes (presepe vivente) which this region is famous for.Risorgimento Resort, next to the town’s Roman amphitheatre, is Lecce’s most luxurious retreat. Doubles from £130 per night, with Essential Italy (essentialitaly.co.uk) Wrocław’s old town sparkles in winter, with huge Christmas trees, illuminated fountains and a Christmas market selling gifts, mulled wine and oscypek (grilled sheep’s cheese, with cranberry sauce). Get a bird’s-eye view of the Christmas lights from the observation deck at the top of the Cathedral of St John the Baptist, or check out the programme of carol concerts and festive recitals at the National Forum of Music, Wrocław’s world-class new music venue. The city is great value if you’re looking to buy some last-minute gifts. Good buys include colourful hand-painted pottery from the town of Bolesławiec, west of Wrocław, on sale at Vena (Rynek 4) and film and propaganda posters from the Polish Poster Gallery (ul. Św. Mikołaja 54/55. Hotel Puro has sleek, stylish rooms. Doubles from £50 (purohotel.pl) Copenhagen grabs all the limelight, but Denmark’s second city, Aarhus, can hold its own when it comes to shopping, culture, eating out and the obligatory dose of hygge. Head to the Latin Quarter for independent boutiques, cosy cafés and a charming Christmas market. Shop for Scandi homeware and fashion on Strøget, the city’s main shopping street, before heading to the rooftop of the historic Salling Department store (Søndergade 27), for a glass of mulled wine with panoramic views of the city, lit up for Christmas. And if that doesn’t get you in the festive mood, the giant Christmas tree – the largest in Denmark – carol singers and Danish food market at the Tivoli Friheden amusement park surely will. Hotel Scandic The Mayor has simple but stylish rooms in the city centre from £115 (scandichotels.com) This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.