There are many paradoxes in the whole Brexit process. And one of them is that my MP colleagues who now say they will use the “meaningful” vote in the Commons on the proposed withdrawal agreement to vote against it objected so strongly when 11 of us rebelled against the government in 2017 to secure that vote. As I know to my personal cost, that rebellion led to a torrent of abuse, threats of violence and deselection for the 11 Conservative “mutineers”. And now, nearly 12 months later, that vote is almost upon us. We often hear how important votes in the House of Commons are, but this one really, really matters. As MPs, we owe it to our constituents to think extremely long and hard before we cast our vote in December We live in a representative democracy. Each MP has to vote as a representative, thinking each time about the implications of how they vote for their constituency and constituents. Sometimes those votes and the decisions are easier than others. This time we owe it to our constituents to think extremely long and hard before we cast our vote in December on the withdrawal agreement and the outline of a future relationship with the EU. We owe it to them to read the 585-page draft agreement and the evolving future framework declaration. We owe it to them to talk to a wide selection of our constituents, not just our local party members and supporters, and to remember that for every standard letter campaign there are thousands of local residents who don’t contact us. What do they think? Do they want us to “just get on with it”? This is what I hear most frequently as I talk locally. We owe it to those who elected us to speak to local employers, local charities who have benefited from European Union funding, local students and others who want to continue to have the option of working, studying and travelling around Europe in the future. And we should definitely speak to the EU citizens living in our constituencies and those constituents married to, or with family members who are, EU citizens. The vote will then arrive and we will have to explain the choice we make – that day, at the next election and long into the future, because the vote and what happens next will determine the UK’s place in the world and our relationship with Europe for decades to come. And after a weekend spent remembering the enormous sacrifice of our predecessors as they fought and died over a divided Europe, these issues have added poignancy. Our debates should be long and impassioned. I’d be worried if we weren’t passionate about something so important. Some of us have extra responsibilities. I am working with the Treasury select committee, of which I am chair, to secure a government economic analysis of the longer‑term impact of the proposals and an analysis by the Bank of England of the shorter-term implications of what has been agreed. We will take evidence from ministers, regulators, economists, businesses and others on that analysis. I want all MPs to have both the analysis and our conclusions on it before they vote. I know other select committees will be doing the same in their respective areas. And we will have to explain the alternatives of not approving this withdrawal agreement to our constituents. On Wednesday night I received an email from a lady who said she was a strong remain campaigner (as I was) and wanted me to reject the deal. The trouble with that is that the most likely alternative is we leave the EU with no deal at all. And I believe that would be deeply damaging to our economy and our constituents. I cannot sign up to that. For me the ability to mitigate the damage caused by Brexit is best measured in protecting the jobs and financial security of my constituents. No deal was ever going to be perfect. No side in a negotiation ever gets its own way. It would have been better if the prime minister had been honest about this in 2016 and not allowed people to think a Lancaster House-style Brexit was even remotely deliverable. There are 650 people in this country who now need to do their jobs. We need to act as representatives of our constituents and not on the basis of our personal ideologies or preferences. UK politics has been in a holding pattern since June 2016. We have to move on. We have many, many pressing issues that we need ministers and civil servants, no longer quite so distracted by Brexit, to tackle. And we can only do that if we approve the withdrawal agreement, however imperfect it may be, so we can move forward as a country. • Nicky Morgan is the Conservative MP for Loughborough