In a world of culinary polarities, mixed messages and seemingly endless options, sometimes I just want choice to be removed, and to be presented with a plateful that hits every spot. Well, folks, say hello to mille, a vogueish treat that is at once delicate and hefty: Audrey Hepburn meets Big Narstie, in confectionery form. These are something like the lovechild of crepes and millefeuille – about 20 paper-thin crepes interspersed with licks of cream – and they have crept into the hearts and arteries of pancake and patisserie lovers alike this year. In London, where there now exist several specialist bakeries, including the fully dedicated Mille in Paddington, they can be bought whole or in slices that show them in satisfying cross section. There is some debate about where they originated: France and Japan both lay claim, but Mille’s founders Yulei Yang and Ying Ma speculate that the Japanese ran with a French idea, fine-tuning it and adding flourishes. Classic French patisserie and a Japanese predilection for culinary detail make natural bed partners, and the mille stack is their ultimate mattress, a blank canvas for blending all manner of flavours with whipped cream to swish in between crepe layers. Mille offers several Asian-influenced variations on the original crepe/cream combo – sesame, using seeds from Nagoya, Japan; matcha; Earl Grey tea – as well as classics such as chocolate, passion fruit and lemon. The top of each is decorated with the gentlest nod to its inner workings: a coffee bean and coffee-chocolate icing ploughed into little furrows, or a piece of lemon peel and a thyme leaf, for example. Backstage in Paddington, I try producing my own mille on a rotating cake stand with a miniature palette knife. They are as moreish to make as they are to eat; I quickly become transfixed by the exercise of evenly distributing the cream (harder than it sounds). What looks like a tiny amount once layered is a shockingly hearty dollop on every strata: the delicacy is deceptive. They then have to be refrigerated below 5C for 10 hours so the cream sets and can be sliced to create perfect slabs reminiscent of Pac-Man’s missing mouth. This stuff is Instagram gold and has the app aflutter. There are countless variations on the #millecrepe hashtag, all boasting stratified slices with different arrangements, from a rainbow of crepes to morsels of fruit alongside the cream in each layer. For me, the standout flavours are lemon and passion fruit; their acidity counteracts the richness of the cream. However, by far my favourite aspect of eating them is cutting through the layers with cocked fork (think satisfaction levels akin to trudging through fresh snow or watching a @drpimplepopper video). Mille are delicious, but I prefer taking a church and state approach to the delicate and slap-up. If I fancy the former, there’s the occasional eclair, and when I crave the latter, it’s simple: it’s a piece of cake.