My phone buzzed. It was my two gay dads calling to tell me the mayor of West Hollywood had declared 23 May to be Stormy Daniels Day. I was so excited I was beyond excited. I sent my two bodyguards, Brandon and Travis, to pick out a dress for me. “Keep in mind I have big boobs,” I said. They came back with a cutout bandage dress that fit perfectly and kept Thunder and Lightning – my nickname for my breasts – in check. Have I mentioned I have breasts? I mean not just breasts, but big breasts? Now I was ready to roll. I guess most of you are just here for the Donald Trump bits. But face it, this book would only be 50 pages at best if that was all I wrote, so bear with me while I tell you my early life story. My parents were both trainwrecks. The kindest thing they ever did was to neglect me and I grew up dirt poor in Baton Rouge, Louisiana. My breasts were not that noticeable when I was born. I didn’t really notice Thunder and Lightning until I was much older. That’s kinda it really. I was a smart kid – I got straight As in all classes. But because we had no money, no one paid any attention to me, apart from this one creepy guy who abused both me and my only friend. But I don’t want to make a big deal of it. Sure it was depressing, but that kind of thing went on a lot in the south and we just accepted it. The first guy I kissed died soon after. The second guy I kissed got murdered. So as you can imagine, I was nervous about kissing any other guys. But then my breasts grew a bit and one thing led to another and soon I was having the time of my life dancing in topless bars and appearing in porno films. OK, so this is the bit you’ve been waiting for. The money shot. One day, as I was just coming off set having had sex with a few well-hung guys – come on, what’s not to love? – I got a call saying that some big shot dude wanted to meet me in his hotel and was willing to pay me shedloads of cash for the pleasure. I checked my diary, gave Thunder and Lightning a quick wake-up call and went on over. Imagine my surprise when I found it was the weird bloke off The Apprentice. Donald Trump was lying on his bed wearing nothing but a white undervest and stained white Y-fronts watching a programme about sharks. “Come and join me,” he said, patting the bed. “I like your big breasts, bigly.” At that stage, I had no thoughts about having sex with him, but he asked nicely so I lay back and let him. So you want to know about his cock? Well, let me tell you it wasn’t quite the smallest I had ever seen, though it sure wasn’t big. But it was shaped like some kinda weird mushroom. So there we were, Donald lying on top of me for all of 10 seconds before shouting, “You’re the bestly, best” – and coming noisily. And that was it. He then invited me to be on Celebrity Apprentice. And promised to fix it so that I would win. I was quite tempted and we talked some more but we could both see it was never going to happen. “Ah well,” he said. “I guess that means we’ll have to stick with that Piers Moron moron.” To be honest, I forgot all about Trump for a while after that as I was too busy working on my career. First I went to have Thunder and Lightning made even bigger – aren’t they great? – then I divorced a couple of guys I’d forgotten I had married. It was late one summer evening that I met Glen, the drummer for the world famous rock band, Hollywood Undead. They’d had a huge success in 1998 with I Love You to Bits, Let Me Fondle Your Tits, which reached number 219 in the Albuquerque AOR charts. Glen and I hit it off immediately. I loved hearing about how groupies used to offer to give him blow jobs in car parks. I couldn’t believe that was true. Up till then, I had thought people only had sex in porno films. Anyways, we got married and decided to have a child. I told it to Glen straight. If he was going to be a dad, then he had to shape up and star in porno films. Because there was no way if we got divorced that he was going to get custody on the grounds that I was an adult actress. For a few years, Glen and I were the happiest couple alive. No two people ever loved each other more. Then I started getting death threats and orders to sign a non-disclosure about having had sex with a toadstool. Well, no one talks to Stormy Daniels like that. Not even the president of the USA. So here it is. The full story. Full disclosure. It’s been a tough few months. But I’m still here. Still performing. My next show is at the Miami Topless a Go-Go on Tuesday and I have 58 more films in development. Life is sweet. Apart from the fact that Glen and I are no longer together. Still. You win some, you lose some. And I’ve still got Thunder and Lightning. Digested read, digested: Storm in a Double-D Cup.