These are fun to make, but if you want to skip making the waffles use crisp thin biscuits instead. Makes about 25For the waffle batteregg 1 egg white 1 salt a pinchsugar 1 tbsp plain flour 100g butter 60g, meltedbutter for greasing For the marshmallow fillingwater 50ml vanilla pod 1, seeds scrapedglucose syrup 60g egg whites 100g (3-4 eggs)caster sugar 100g For the glazedark chocolate 200g, minimum 60% cocoa solids Start with the waffle batter. Beat the egg and egg white with salt, then beat in the sugar and finally the flour. Beat well, so there are no lumps in the mixture, then add the melted butter. Heat a little butter in a waffle pan. Spoon 100ml of batter into the pan and spread out in an even layer. Cook them until they are very crisp (without burning them). This mixture should make approximately 4 waffles. Leave to cool. Preheat the oven 130C/gas mark ½. Cut the waffles into 4cm-rounds. Place on a baking tray lined with baking parchment. Bake for about 5-10 minutes or until crisp. Cool on a wire rack. For the marshmallow filling, boil the water, vanilla seeds and glucose and whisk till the glucose is dissolved. Then whisk the egg whites and sugar until fluffy, mix in the glucose mixture and beat for about 7 minutes. Then place in a piping bag. Pipe small balls for marshmallow mixture on top of each crisp waffle, about 15g on each. Leave them to rest at room temperature for about 2 hours. Finely chop the chocolate and melt two-thirds of it in a bain-marie. When it has melted and has reached a temperature of 50C, add the rest of the chopped chocolate. Mix well until all the chocolate has melted. Gently heat all the chocolate in the bain-marie till it reaches a temperature of 31C. Now the chocolate is ready for use. Dip the flødeboller in the chocolate, so that the marshmallow and the sides of the wafer are covered but the bottom remains uncovered, then place on parchment paper. Let the chocolate set – then they are ready to eat. The flødeboller will last for a week. TIP You can sprinkle some with shredded coconut on top or, if you want to make the marshmallow pink, use beetroot juice instead of water in the glucose mixture.Trine Hahnemann is author of Copenhagen Food (Quadrille, £25) Makes about 20oats 200g desiccated coconut 150g plain flour 200g demerara sugar 100g unsalted butter 200g golden syrup 100g bicarbonate of soda 1 tbsp boiling water 4 tbsp Preheat the oven to 160C/gas mark 3 then line a baking tray with greaseproof paper. In a large bowl, mix the oats, coconut, flour and sugar together. Over a low heat, melt the butter and golden syrup together. Combine the bicarbonate of soda and boiling water, then stir into the golden syrup and butter. Then combine the butter-syrup mixture well with the dry ingredients. Once the mix is cool enough to handle, roll into 55g balls. Place the balls on the tray, with a good amount of room around them, then lightly press down and bake for 15 minutes. Let the cookies cool, and then eat them or store in an airtight container.Margot Henderson is chef/co-owner of Rochelle Canteen, London E2 So many new things have appeared in our supermarkets over the last decade that sometimes I’m torn between the joy of the new and encouraging you to bake with a more traditional ingredient. So this recipe manages to face both ways, combining the chewiness of oats with the slight sourness of dried cherries. Makes about 50 biscuitsunsalted butter 225g, softenedlight soft brown sugar 375g caster sugar 50g vanilla extract 3 tsp eggs 2 largeplain flour 300g ground cinnamon 1 tsp bicarbonate of soda 2 tsp rolled oats 200g dried sour cherries 200g Beat the butter, sugars and vanilla until light and fluffy. Beat in the eggs, one at a time, then sift the flour, cinnamon and bicarb together and stir that through, followed by the oats and cherries, until you have a consistent mixture. Heat the oven to 170C/gas 3 and line a baking tray with non-stick baking paper. Spoon tablespoon-sized dollops of the mixture onto the tray spaced 4-5cm apart; bake for 12-14 minutes until barely puffed and just starting to colour at the edges. Leave to cool for a few minutes then transfer to a rack to finish cooling, while you continue to bake – or freeze half to use later.From Short & Sweet by Dan Lepard (Fourth Estate, £25) Makes about 18-20plain flour 250g, plus extra for dustingicing sugar 110g unsalted butter 200g, softened egg yolks 2 fine sea salt a pinch For the fillingraspberry jam 130g caster sugar 2 tsp, for sprinkling Put all the ingredients apart from the filling into a food processor and whizz until a ball of dough is formed. Wrap it in clingfilm and chill in the fridge for 2-3 hours. Preheat the oven to 170C/gas 3 and line two large baking trays with baking paper. Take the dough out of the fridge and leave for an hour to soften. On a lightly floured surface, roll it out to 3-4 mm thick, then, using a 6cm cutter, cut out your rounds to make the bases. To make the tops, take half the rounds and cut out the centre, using a 2cm cutter. Keep rolling and cutting until you have 18-20 bases and 18-20 tops. Place the biscuits without a hole on the trays and put ½ teaspoon of jam in the centre, spreading it out slightly. Place the holey biscuits on top, pressing slightly so the jam rises out from the centre a little. Chill in the fridge for 5 minutes, then bake for 20-22 minutes, until lightly golden brown. Sprinkle the biscuits immediately with the caster sugar. Leave on the trays for 5 minutes, then put them on a rack to cool.From Bread, Cake, Doughnut, Pudding by Justin Gellatly (Fig Tree, £25) Favourite things heaped together make this pleasing pudding. For 4 good folkunsalted butter 125g caster sugar 40g orange finely grated zest of 1 plain flour 170g whole almonds 40g, ground finewhite breadcrumbs 40g, toasted To servegoat’s curd 1 tub – enough for 8 tsplemon curd 1 jar best homemade marmalade 1 jar Heat an oven to 170C/gas mark 3. Beat the butter and sugar in a bowl till quite pale. Add the orange zest and mix well then add in the flour, almonds and breadcrumbs. Mix well into a dough. Knead lightly and make into a roll, about 4.5cm in diameter. Refrigerate this for at least an hour or overnight. Line a baking sheet with baking parchment and upon this lay slices of shortcake mix cut to the thickness of a pound coin. Bake for 12-15 minutes until the palest golden. Heap the curds on the shortcakes – put goat’s curd first, then lemon, two teaspoons each – spoon over a little marmalade and heap them up. You can use only two biscuits, but if feeling brave, make a double decker and use three.Jeremy Lee is executive chef at Quo Vadis, London W1