After almost 40 years of helping backpackers travel on a budget, Rough Guides has launched a bespoke holiday service aimed at “time-poor” adventurous older travellers who no longer want to rough it. The move is the start of a transformation of the publisher’s entire business model from guidebook seller to online travel company. “In five to ten years we don’t want to be seen as a guidebook publisher: we want to be seen as a dynamic tech company that provides tailormade trips,” said CEO René Frey. The decision follows a survey that found that the majority of Rough Guides readers are 40-60, or older. Frey said those readers are “astonishingly loyal” but that selling guidebooks to an ageing readership was unsustainable. “The only way out is a transactional business model where you can grow much bigger.” Frey added that his background in newspapers and magazines had persuaded him of the need for a fundamental shift in the way the company operates. Sister publisher Insight Guides has already started to sell holidays, which now represent 18% of the overall business. The introduction of the Rough Guides trips will increase holiday sales to 30-40% in 2019. In five to eight years time, publishing will represent 10% of overall sales. Frey acknowledged that adventure travel is already a crowded market but said the Rough Guides trips offer something different by providing a platform that puts customers in direct contact with local experts in a destination. “This is going to change the way people travel. If you think about the Airbnb model, it is connecting travellers with owners. We are cutting the traditional travel chain.” Where Insight Guides holidays provide stylish hotels and experiences, Rough Guides trips will be aimed at travellers who want adventurous activities and to explore a destination independently, in keeping with the original spirit of the guides, launched by co-founders Mark Ellingham and Martin Dunford in 1982, with the Rough Guide to Greece. To book a trip, users enter their budget, destination, preferred accommodation type and activities and receive a tailormade itinerary from a local travel expert. The service has launched with 50 countries but will expand to cover more. • go.roughguides.com