They do not count for anything substantial, these autumn internationals, but to complete a clean sweep in such a series for the first time can do Wales no harm at all, what with the World Cup less than a year away. With this win, their fourth and most impressive of the month, they consolidate their position at number three in the world rankings – another irrelevance, but what confidence they seem to be developing, just as Warren Gatland’s long reign reaches its denouement. And what depth. Ellis Jenkins became the latest young Welshman to shine – and he was whistled up on the morning of the match. They reckon this particular youngster is a surefire bet to captain Wales, the last such certainty being Sam Warburton. Jenkins has the recently retired maestro’s belligerent stealth at the breakdown – and he has a sumptuous attacking game. How cruel his game was to end on a stretcher. Both teams suffered an injury in the build-up to kick-off, South Africa’s just a few minutes before; both teams rode them well. One might say both teams were enhanced by them, certainly in attack. Cheslin Kolbe replaced Sbu Nkosi on South Africa’s right-wing, and his fast feet caused Wales all sorts of problems in the first few minutes. Pieter-Steph du Toit was a toe-nail in touch away from opening the score after one of Kolbe’s routines. But Wales were next to test the opposition defence. They played their best attacking rugby of the autumn, allowing for the tiring Tongans of the last half-hour the week before. This was of the finest Welsh traditions, and it was from the start against fresh Tier 1 opposition. Their late call-up was at the heart of the game’s first try. Wales have dynamic flankers appearing from every angle these days. Jenkins is of the fleet-footed sort, and when he replaced Dan Lydiate Wales fielded two such in him and Justin Tipuric. They should consider it as a permanent policy, because their attack is transformed and do not seem to lose anything in defence. Indeed, Jenkins was over the ball on the stroke of half-time to thwart South Africa’s most concerted assault on their line. In attack, he’s yet another auxiliary centre. His outrageous dummy scuppered South Africa’s all-action man, Malcolm Marx, and he coolly sent Tomas Francis barrelling to the posts in the 10th minute. Six minutes later, and Wales were over again, this one straight from the set piece. South Africa’s wingers are electric, but defensive nous is not their forte. Aphiwe Dyantyi was suckered in by Wales’s move, which saw Jenkins feed his scrum-half and Gareth Anscombe, looping round from the blind, put away Liam Williams, who stepped inside to the line. South Africa’s efforts reached a pitch before the break, with Jenkins intervening again to keep Jesse Kriel’s lunge for the line off the ground. But Kriel was to end up with South Africa’s try, after the Springbok siege continued into the second half. Two penalties were kicked to the corner, but when Wales sacked the second drive (legally, unlike the first), South Africa kept the pressure on, before a stunning pass under pressure by Willie le Roux put Kriel into the corner. Handre Pollard missed the conversion from out wide, but five minutes later, at the start of the final quarter, Elton Jantjies landed a penalty to pull South Africa back to 14-11 down. Wales just could not take a hold of the ball, under so much pressure whenever afforded a glimpse of it. Jenkins played most of the game at No 8, because Ross Moriarty went off early, introducing another young flanker in Aaron Wainwright, and performed miracles at the base of the scrum. But Wales scrambled a chip to the corner, where Tipuric was over the ball to win a penalty, which Dan Biggar converted for a measure of breathing space. That space grew again when he repeated the trick after a brilliant Jonathan Davies counterattack. Wales were more than a score ahead. A ninth consecutive win and that precious clean sweep of an autumn series. Gatland’s finest hour may yet be to come. What a World Cup we have in store.