One million thank yous to all our wonderful Guardian supporters. Where would we be without you? No, literally: where? You’re the lead in our pencil, the oil in our engine, the wind beneath our … my God, I sound like Boris Johnson. I can’t apologise enough. I will endeavour to continue writing columns that DON’T sound like Boris Johnson – though may sometimes be about him – as long as you will have me.Marina Hyde, Guardian columnist I never cease to be amazed at the loyalty, strength and passion of Guardian supporters and I want to say thank you to each and every one of you. Without your incredible support it would be that much harder to fund the painstaking work of investigations – such as the work we did recently into the treatment of rape  survivors in the criminal justice system. Knowing that our readers support our work helped make that series of stories possible, and feedback from our readers gives us the motivation to keep on pushing to find out more and do our part to challenge injustice.Alexandra Topping, senior reporter Most of the time Guardian sport can feel like an extended chat with friends who love, care about and take pleasure in the same things. The rest of the time it can feel like a chat with friends who despise, with every cell of their being, your biased and wrong-headed interpretation of all the things they love, care about and take pleasure in. Sometimes it’s hard to tell which is which, or which is more fun. But the dialogue with readers is something we’ve always done on sport. It is the essence of our online coverage.Barney Ronay, football writer The long investigations I have worked on from modern slavery to corporate tax dodging are expensive in reporting time and legal work. Holding power to account in this way is still possible thanks to the independent financial backing members and supporters have given us. And when people with deep pockets use the law to try to silence us, knowing that readers are right behind us keeps us going.Felicity Lawrence, special correspondent Thanks to contributions from readers, the Guardian’s arts coverage remains proudly independent, dictated by our writers’ and editors’ taste and experience, not powerful institutions or wealthy stars. Our critics are able to travel around the country and beyond to seek out brilliance in every art form, and to investigate the stories behind the work – from funding to censorship.Alex Needham, Arts editor This has been the most intense and extraordinary period of British political upheaval in a lifetime. In little over two years, our team has covered a referendum, a leadership challenge, late-night Brexit negotiations, a snap election, a hung parliament, high-stakes summits, MP rebellions and the departure of more than a dozen ministers. In the chaotic and unpredictable months ahead, as we edge closer to the Brexit deadline in March, the support of Guardian readers is invaluable for powering our reporting.Jessica Elgot, political correspondent At a time when the global word order as we know it is collapsing, and nations gaze both inwards and outwards with confusion, doubt and fear, it’s essential to tell stories without agenda and hold elites to account without anxiety. It’s only with the support of our readers, who share our values and our mission, that we’re able to do this. The Guardian isn’t just a newspaper, it’s an ethos and an identity. That’s more powerful than any press baron will ever be.Nadia Khomami, news reporter and editor The thing that surprises people most when I talk to them about Guardian Australia is that we are not owned by anyone. No one tells us what to write, what stories to report on, or who to investigate. We are truly independent. That’s what makes them interested if they have not read us before. But those who do read us – and those who increasingly support us – know the value of this independence in the media landscape in which we live. They know the value of having a free-thinking, unattached news organisation that can look into places others don’t because of commercial or proprietorial interest. They trust us, and our fantastic team pays back that trust through truly excellent and unique reporting.David Munk, deputy editor, Guardian Australia What I love most about Guardian readers is the intensity of their relationship with us. You’re there to cheer us on when we do well, support us when we are threatened, berate us when we let you down, and to remind us of our values when we forget. The intensity of that relationship has only deepened since you started supporting us financially, not just by buying the paper. In some ways it feels like an uneasy relationship, but there is also a purity to it – you’re giving money because you believe in us, not because we’re selling a product. On Telethon Day, I always come in scared, thinking I’ll muck up the donations system and be incompetent on the phone but – like everybody else – I leave the building loving you lot, feeling better about the world, and boring people to death about how we have the best readers in the world.Simon Hattenstone, features writer Our readers have been supporting in depth reporting on gun violence through our Break the Cycle project, which has enabled us to produce distinctive work in an area plagued with partisan rhetoric and political inaction. Our readers contributed more than $200,000 to make this year-long project possible. And when 17 people – students and teachers – were murdered at a high school in Parkland, Florida, earlier in the year we invited a group of teenage survivors to guest edit our website. It was an extraordinary reporting experience that prioritised both the voices of survivors and gave a platform to a group of student journalists with a unique perspective on gun violence. None of this would have been possible without reader contributions.Oliver Laughland, senior reporter, Guardian US Last year I spent months locked in a room working on what would eventually become the Paradise Papers project. It’s thanks to supporters that I get the chance to take the time I need for investigations like that, and feel free to write whatever stories are there.Hilary Osborne, reporter As someone who writes daily about the NHS – a subject of huge interest to Guardian readers – I get something of significant value in my work from them beyond the financial contributions which help fund our journalism. Because a fair number of readers work in and around the NHS, I am lucky in that I quite often receive useful tip-offs. Readers taking the time to contact me has led directly to stories, one or two of which have ended up on the front page. This ongoing soft intelligence about the NHS really helps me in my work.Denis Campbell, health policy editor Reader support allows us to have a totally unique short documentary strand on our site that’s unlike anything else you can find on a news website. We know that our readers like us to try different things and to be brave in the format of our storytelling and their support means we can have the freedom to have this ambitious film strand.Charlie Phillips, head of Guardian documentaries I really like the feeling that I can keep returning to subjects close to my heart: justice for women, because I know there is support out there to do so. Whether it’s #MeToo, Kavanaugh or writing about low convictions for rape trials, I know that there are stories we need to keep returning to, that bit by bit we continue to fight the backlash. It’s wonderful to part of that network. It means that even in the darkest of times we hold our nerve. Thank you.Suzanne Moore, Guardian columnist There’s an assumption that fashion journalism writes itself. But reporting on it in a discerning and questioning way, and with an eye on diversity and getting the angle other publications don’t, requires several things: time, resources, manpower, and with that, the chance to go out and see what people are showing, doing and actually wearing. That’s what makes fashion worth writing about.Morwenna Ferrier, fashion editor When I started work in Washington, I never expected to be branded an enemy of the people by the US president. But that fate befell what he calls the “fake news” media covering Donald Trump’s White House. Each day serves up a bombardment of norm-busting conduct, hirings and firings, Twitter distractions and the question: can he really do that? Trump has reminded us why freedom of expression and holding the powerful to account are fundamental. Amid this maelstrom, I am forever grateful for the curiosity, support and solidarity of Guardian readers. They prick the infamous Washington bubble and keep us on our toes. They remind us what’s at stake for America and the world.David Smith, Washington DC bureau chief Newspapers can’t take on long, open-ended reporting projects unless they have a well-staffed newsroom that allows reporters the time to follow their instincts and investigate issues which look like they might be important. At a time when many newspapers are struggling financially, the support from Guardian readers has been vital in helping keep the newsroom well-resourced.Amelia Gentleman, reporter Untainted by a controlling press baron or commercial proprietor, our political and social coverage is our own, with no party line, but a rainbow of views where all shades of liberal and left people meet to think, talk, write and often hotly dispute. Only our readers support keeps us intellectually free – and free online for readers everywhere.Polly Toynbee, Guardian columnist Support from Guardian readers is crucial to our investigative journalism. Readers are a source of stories, tips, feedback, ideas and enlightenment. Crucially, they offer moral and financial support for our work, at a time when reporters are under threat globally. Luke Harding, foreign correspondentIn the six months since I took over as the Guardian’s Latin America correspondent, I have been on the ground to cover some of the most urgent humanitarian stories in the region. None of this first-hand, people-focused reporting would have been possible without the support of our readers. And to them I say: obrigado, gracias, thank you! We could not do it without you.Tom Phillips, Latin America correspondent The only reason our project on US public lands exists is that readers believed in it. It was launched after a massive crowdfunding appeal in 2017 that raised more than $110,000. Now our reporting is being cited by US politicians and republished by newspapers across the American west.Alastair Gee, homelessness and public lands editor for Guardian US As an institutionalised lifer on the Guardian’s multiple award-winning Football Weekly podcast, I think I vouch for all involved when I say how much we appreciate the support of our listeners, whether it is those who throw a few bob in the online cyber-hat or pay actual money to come to watch us on stage as we pontificate at our regular live shows. Although you could be forgiven for thinking otherwise, producing football opinion doesn’t come cheap and we appreciate the support of each and every one of our listeners.Barry Glendenning, deputy sports editorTechnology companies make up seven of the ten largest in the world. They have thousands of employees dedicated to ensuring that the only stories that get told about them are the ones they approve of – and often they succeed. But with the help of Guardian supporters, we finally have the numbers on our side to take them to task: to keep an eye out for “dark adverts” on Facebook, to find out when Apple’s trying to pass off substandard products as just the odd error, or to see if YouTube’s algorithm really does tend towards extremism.Alex Hern, Technology reporter What a debt we owe to Guardian readersFunding our news and comment and leadersHelping us report on thieves and crooksSport and science, art and booksNurturing an industry that’s close to failingWith contributions and the cheques they mail inGiving us the means to relentlesslyInvestigate injustice and the powers that beTo champion the underdog and people who needs usWhere would we be without Guardian readers?Mark Rice-Oxley, head of special projects For the 3.5 million or so EU citizens living in the UK to the one million or so British people living in Europe, Brexit has real and looming consequences, and many have turned to the Guardian to reflect and report on their fears and their experiences.We will remain vigilant in our reporting of them post-Brexit.Lisa O’Carroll, Brexit correspondentI’m so grateful to all the readers who support the Guardian, because they enable me to tell the stories I’ve always wanted to tell; from interviewing the father of a Sandy Hook victim to talking to Samantha Mathis, River Phoenix’s girlfriend who was with him when he died and who had never before told the story of what happened to him. Hadley Freeman, Guardian columnistIt makes all the difference in the world to be pursuing journalism that is not beholden to an oligarch, a tycoon or a corporation. It is everything to know that we are being supported in what we do by people whose only demand is to try to get to the truth and understand it. My proudest moment in any interview or conversation in Washington is when I’m asked who owns the Guardian, and I can truly say that “we do”. Julian Borger, world affairs editor I am constantly humbled by how generous our readers can be. When I wrote about sharing my house in Manchester with Yasser, a Syrian refugee, we were inundated with offers of support. A teacher training charity offered him a free place on their course, a college offered him unlimited English lessons. Three years on, Yasser has been reunited with his family in Manchester and is thriving. He will not forget the generosity shown to him by Guardian readers.Helen Pidd, North of England editor Guardian supporters come to us for bold voices who can offer hope and a path forward in these dark times. Bernie Sanders and Yanis Varoufakis wrote a pair of twinned op-eds for The Guardian proposing an international progressive alliance in response. Just a month later, they announced that they would be taking that idea, first proposed in this paper, and making it happen.Amana Fontanella-Khan, Opinion editor, The Guardian US 