Being a pop star has a shelf life. Sure, you can carry on chucking records out for ever (hiya Cher) and touring like the best of them (here’s looking at you Madge), but at some point it gets a bit boring, the money starts drying up and your creativity slides away at the thought of another session with Diplo. So what to do? Well, you could try acting a la Lady Gaga, Justin Timberlake and Lee from Blue. Or you could move into fashion like Rihanna (socks, trainers), makeup like Rihanna (Fenty Beauty) or comedy like Rihanna (wait, teasing Drake hasn’t been part of an ongoing skit?). But you know what really says “time to diversify the brand”? Furniture. Last month the artist formerly known as Louise Nurding, AKA Louise Redknapp, teamed up with high street dream weavers Harveys for her own range of sofas. Entitled Bold, the range varies from a £199 footstool all the way up to a large chaise with stool, a snip at £1,899. “I only design things I would put in my own home, and this collection is a true reflection of my personality and style,” the ex-Eternal singer mused to Hello. If you’re thinking: “What does Louise Redknapp know about furniture?” then you probably need to re-watch the video for 1996’s pre-Britney classic Naked, in which she performs on top of a stiletto-shaped chaise longue. Anyway, she’s not the only one dipping a toe into the world of interiors. In 2012, Justin Timberlake launched HomeMint, a membership service that helps you “design and curate” your perfect home, ie just buy a bunch of scatter cushions and you’re good to go. In 2013, Vanilla Ice designed his own range of chandeliers and wall lamps, while in 2015 Lenny Kravitz launched a 1970s-inspired furniture collection to “appeal to a diverse group of people” that included a table topped with a sheepskin pillow. Obviously – obviously! – Pharrell Williams has also tried his hand at furniture design, sketching out The Tank, a chair that looked like, well, a tank. Or, if you fancy getting up from your Louise sofa and making your way to the bedroom, then why not pull your Kylie Grazia Eyelet Curtains and luxuriate in a Kylie Atmosphere Duvet set. Yes, not content with joining Will.i.am in taking over the eyewear market with Specsavers, Kylie Minogue has had her own home range for more than a decade. Lionel Richie recently joined the party too, launching a bed and bath collection with US department store JCPenney. If you’re a pop star reading this and keen to get into the home furnishings business then all I ask is that you give the brand name as much thought as Catherine Zeta-Jones (yes, she was a pop star briefly in 1995, don’t panic) who christened her range of “bedding, décor and more” with QVC, Casa Zeta-Jones. Incredible.