Ivanka Trump has defended her use of a personal email account for government business when she became an adviser in her father’s White House. “All of my emails are stored and preserved. There were no deletions. There is no attempt to hide,” Donald Trump’s daughter told ABC News in an interview aired on Wednesday morning. Ivanka Trump reportedly used her personal account up to 100 times in 2017 to contact other Trump administration officials. The news drew immediate comparisons with Hillary Clinton’s use of a private server as secretary of state, which still prompts Donald Trump’s supporters to chant “lock her up” at rallies. The president apparently wanted Clinton prosecuted after he took the White House. But on Wednesday Ivanka Trump insisted there was no comparison between the two cases. “In my case, all of my emails are on the White House server. There’s no intent to circumvent,” she told ABC. “There’s no equivalency to what my father’s spoken about.” On the Clinton case, Ivanka Trump said: “There were mass deletions after a subpoena was issued. My emails have not been deleted. Nor was there anything of substance, nothing confidential that was within them. So there’s no connection between the two things.” Republicans and Democrats in Congress have requested information from the White House to determine whether the first daughter complied with federal record keeping laws. Investigations into Clinton’s use of private email dogged her presidential campaign and are believed to have contributed to her losing the 2016 election after she was admonished by the FBI. Donald Trump has also defended his daughter’s use of personal email, saying all her messages have been logged as presidential records. Ivanka Trump said in the interview that her email use violated no rules. “There is no restriction of using personal email,” she said. “In fact, we’re instructed that if we receive an email to our personal account that could relate to government work, you simply just forward it to your government account so it can be archived.” Ivanka Trump also said she has no fear of legal liability for herself or her family from the investigation by special counsel Robert Mueller into Russian interference in the 2016 election and allegations of collusion with Moscow by the Trump campaign. “I know the facts as they relate to me and my family, and so I have nothing to be concerned about,” she said. Trump said the investigation should be allowed to run its course, but echoed her father’s view that it has gone on long enough. “I think it should reach its conclusion. I think it’s been a long time that this has been ongoing, but I want it to be done in a way in which nobody could question that it was hurried or rushed,” she said. “And I think after this long period of time, we’re well beyond that point, so I think it absolutely should reach its conclusion.” This despite experts’ views that for an investigation of this depth and scope, Mueller is moving very quickly.