For a driver bidding farewell to Formula One having failed to deliver on the promise of his extraordinary talent, Fernando Alonso cut a cheerful figure before his curtain call in Abu Dhabi. The Spaniard bows out with two world championships but a palpable sense that far greater hopes and expectations are unfulfilled. Yet Alonso still has been both brilliant and compelling and F1 will be poorer without him. He has not ruled out a return but at Yas Marina his demeanour suggested a man who was positively demob happy after 17 years on the grid. Relaxed and laughing, he was happy to be saying goodbye to the sport for which he still has great affection. “I don’t know what the future will bring,” he said. “Definitely now I’m concentrating on the personal challenges, the triple crown and some other races that I will add next year. Further away, it’s impossible to think – but who knows? Life is long and beautiful. I like Formula One. I will always love Formula One, so if I will be here in the future as a driver, as a father, as an FIA boss or whatever. I will think.” Lewis Hamilton, alongside him, reiterated his previously expressed great respect for Alonso. It was a world away from the difficult beginning to their relationship together in Hamilton’s rookie year at McLaren in 2007. Perhaps one of the defining elements of Alonso’s career, however, is how it sits in stark contrast to Hamilton’s since then. Now 37, Alonso was 19 when he made his debut for Minardi in 2001. Already fearsomely quick, he proved to have an ability to optimise his machinery and drive around limitations. Extracting more from a car than it had has defined his reputation as one of the greatest of his generation. Four years later he won his first title, ending the run of five by Michael Schumacher, the driver he still rates as his greatest challenge. He followed it with a second, again for Renault, in 2006. When he then joined McLaren, further titles seemed a given. Yet there were none and Hamilton has taken five and Sebastian Vettel four. Since 2007, Alonso has won only 17 races. His character, a failure to be in the right place at the right time and sheer poor fortune have denied the Spaniard greater honours. Relationships with teams often proved difficult from such a demanding driver, seen clearly in his public criticism of Renault before the Japanese Grand Prix in 2006. The falling out with McLaren followed and Hamilton took the championship in 2008. In 2010 he opted for Ferrari just as Red Bull became dominant. Nonetheless, he would have claimed a magnificent title that year but for the Scuderia’s inexplicable strategic error at the final round. In 2012 their car was fifth fastest opening the season but he took it to the wire with Vettel. By the end of 2014 his faith in Ferrari had gone and he returned to McLaren and the optimism of their relationship with Honda that was to prove so bitterly disappointing. If his judgment on track has been sublime his timing off it proved costly. At the start of this season, he insisted he had no regrets and looking back in Abu Dhabi he reflected positively despite the frustrations. “More than the races or the victories, in the time I have spent in Formula One it is the people I have worked with and shared half my life with who have made the difference,” reflected Alonso. “I have worked with a lot of talented engineers, designers, drivers and media.” That he can still derive huge pleasure in his craft when on top was clearly evident after he won at Le Mans this year. Buoyed and beaming, he was irrepressible and tireless in dealing with a mob of journalists after the race. But making up the numbers in F1 is clearly not enough for a driver who is hugely competitive and has a relentless desire to win. Putting what might have been behind him, Alonso is finally calling time on what has been an all-encompassing passion. “You dedicate your entire life to Formula One,” he said. “You have no friends, no family, no free time, no privacy, no wife, no kids, no nothing. It’s just full dedication if you want to succeed. So I have other priorities right now.” In practice at Yas Marina, Max Verstappen led Daniel Ricciardo in a Red Bull one-two in the morning session. They were also strong in the afternoon, with Verstappen second to Valtteri Bottas and Hamilton in fourth behind Ricciardo.