What does exposure mean for a female writer? It’s a question with which the novelist Olivia Sudjic grapples in a new book-length personal essay, Exposure, just released by the crowdfunded publisher Peninsula Press. In this blend of memoir and critical analysis, Sudjic interrogates her own anxiety around the issue, reflecting on the social media age and critically appraising some of the most urgent contemporary writing by women. In doing so, she references a new canon of sorts, encompassing fiction and non-fiction (and the autofiction that resides between), which includes work by Rachel Cusk, Roxane Gay, Sheila Heti, Chris Kraus and Elena Ferrante. “Although I didn’t want it to be writerly, there wasn’t that much in the way of very contemporary essays about writing,” Sudjic tells me. “There are lots of books and essays about what it means to be a writer in, say, the 1980s, but not many from the social media age.” Yet social media have transformed the way we communicate. They are blamed for an increase in anxiety and for ushering in a culture of “oversharing”, while also providing everyone – not just writers – with the opportunity to create and blur multiple identities. “It’s a dizzyingly recent development that artistic personal exposure could achieve more than ruin or derision for women,” writes Sudjic, citing the backlash with which Cusk’s memoir Aftermath was greeted in 2012. Cusk’s retreat behind the veil of autofiction in her Outline trilogy is, Sudjic hints, a conscious choice: “[She is] pre-empting her own exposure, while blurring the boundaries between memoir, fiction and essay. To refuse categorisation defies assumption.” Female writers battle against a range of assumptions. So much of the criticism of women’s writing is explicitly personal – the words on the page aren’t always the only thing reviewed – the author’s mothering, her sexual experiences, her emotional responses all come under “literary” scrutiny. No wonder Elena Ferrante’s refusal to reveal herself is such an affront to some. “Using fiction as a form of defence is very much a symptom of the way that the internet means that we are always having to publicly stand by or defend ourselves even from the threat of attack,” Sudjic tells me. The personal essay is the only medium in which you are trusted to speak directly To an extent, categorising the work as fiction or non-fiction isn’t especially helpful. “Novels are never impersonal,” Sudjic says, though she notes that there is sexism at work in how frequently female fiction writers are assumed to have secreted their own lives on the page. Even with memoir, we see the creativity and agency inherent to storytelling stripped from female authors, as though they are merely diarists (not a charge, as the writer Roxane Gay has noted, ever levelled at Karl Ove Knausgaard). Autofiction, meanwhile, is nothing new, arguably just a voguish term for the sorts of roman a clef that have always borrowed heavily from personal experience. Authors such as Virginia Woolf and Sylvia Plath experimented with blurred boundaries long before the current fashion. Yet however you categorise the work, some of the most interesting female authors writing today are similarly experimenting, from Deborah Levy’s two “living autobiographies” to Sheila Heti’s Motherhood. In some ways it couldn’t be more timely. #MeToo has provided a vehicle for women to tell their stories. Though the price they pay may not be as severe as it once was, it still requires bravery to speak the truth of your experience with your real name attached (and, in the case of Dr Christine Blasey Ford, may even get you death threats). It has also seen memoirists such as Joyce Maynard and Mary Karr, who were unfairly blamed for a boom in confessional writing in the 1990s, reappraised. Maynard’s 1998 memoir At Home in the World, which told of her relationship with the much older JD Salinger, was excoriated in the press at the time. In a recent essay for the New York Times, Maynard recounted how she was shunned by the literary establishment, and how one critic used the phrase “that busy Maynard mouth” in reference to a recounted experience of forced oral sex. As late as last year, the Atlantic called Maynard “The Queen of Oversharing”. “I have yet to hear of a male writer (or, simply, a man) accused of ‘oversharing’,” Maynard tells me. “When a male writer exposes raw personal truths (let’s take Knausgaard, for example), he’s simply courageous.” How much has #MeToo changed the view takes of women who set out to tell their stories? “No doubt if [At Home in the World] were published today,” Maynard said, “a New York Times writer (Maureen Dowd) would be unlikely to label me a ‘predator’ – one of a long list of damning epithets applied to me for the alleged crime of telling the truth about the actions of a 53-year-old man who sought out an 18-year-old girl.” She added: “We certainly pay lip service to the concept that a woman’s stories are now respected and heard. Sadly, this did not occur in the recent Senate judiciary committee hearings over the supreme court nomination of Brett Kavanaugh, accused of attempted rape.” Perhaps it’s no coincidence that less than two years after the New Yorker declared the personal essay boom to be “over”, the medium is thriving, with Sudjic’s Exposure being just one example. “All these other systems are failing us,” Sudjic says. “The personal essay is the only medium in which you are trusted, or given the space if you like, to speak directly and not through any of those filters. So you can’t be let down in the same way.” “Obviously you have to be braced for the impact.”