As Black Friday unfolded across America with an apparent lack of the shopping-related fights often associated with the busiest retail day of the year, some social media users expressed their impatience – and an enduring optimism that brawls still might break out. Others warned that in age of spiralling economic inequality, such viral voyeurism has come to be unseemly. According to Reuters, 38% of Americans were expected to hit stores on Friday, with 60% of them expected to complete half of their holiday shopping. “Anxiously awaiting #BlackFriday fight videos to emerge!” one Twitter user wrote. “I’m so ready to see the fights in stores! #BlackFriday,” posted another. Another wrote: “Favorite day of the year!!! Watching all of the Black Friday fights!” But Reuters also reported that despite lengthy queues at major retailers for deals on items such as clothes and electronics, “there was little evidence of the delirious shopper frenzy customary of Black Fridays from past years, in parts of the country, especially the north-east, where crowds were thin due to record-cold weather”. And so, online, excitement gave way to frustration. “Haven’t seen any black Friday fights/riots yet,” wrote one Twitter user “… disappointed.” “I wanna see fights today pls entertain me,” wrote another. Ever helpful, some users posted pointers on how to film mall-free-for-alls. “When you video a stampede or fight today during #BlackFriday, please turn your phone to the side so we can enjoy it properly!” one user instructed. But there is a more serious side to Black Friday, at a time when economic injustice is increasingly dominating political conversations, such as that over the fight for a $15 minimum wage. And as the Guardian reported, many US retail workers are forced to work long hours, suffering extreme anxiety, during the holiday season. Workers told the Guardian they were pressured not to take time off, exacerbating stress. There has also been backlash of late against the enjoyment of Black Friday fight videos, which some maintain reflect classism. The Daily Dot website, for example, said in a post it would not be sharing viral fight footage. “From a privileged position, it’s extremely easy to watch a viral video of a holiday shopping fight, laugh, and then share the video yourself – you’re unaffected by this video and it feels good to assure yourself that you and the people in these videos are not alike,” the post said. “But … the core issue of these gross videos being circulated for the consumption of hundreds of thousands of hungry eyes [is that] they’re classist, voyeuristic and self-serving. “We instead act as aristocracy demanding to be entertained by people who are only trying to provide their families with gifts that, without these Black Friday through Cyber Monday discounts, they might not be able to provide.”