This friendly meeting, laced as it was with all kinds of potential drama, of the two Irish sides was a matter of expediency in the international calendar. A dull scoreless encounter ultimately drew a sense of fateful disappointment for the Republic of Ireland and their manager Martin O’Neill in particular, where Northern Ireland – the country he used to captain with much distinction – should have won. Regular chicanery over player eligibility and assertions of the Republic “poaching” Northern-born players; an apparent frostiness between managers Martin and Michael O’Neill over the issue; the omnipresent, controversial presence of James McClean in a Republic shirt against the nation who he was capped for at under-21 level, were just a clutch of the thorny matters in question. A joint bid to host the European Under-21 championship in 2023 may evolve into some kind of longer-term detente, but until then games such as this have to be, occasionally, negotiated. The Republic wilted in the second half and had goalkeeper Darren Randolph to thank for denying their more purposeful, if profligate, opponents. “It was very disappointing,” admitted the Republic manager. “We didn’t do enough going forward and could have given a couple of goals away. I’m the manager and it’s my responsibility but my overall disappointment is for the supporters who pay money. We should do more going forward.” Unsurprisingly more coverage centred on this Dublin congress than is normal for a makeweight game of this nature. Northern Ireland captain Steven Davis admitted earlier in the week there would be an “edge” to proceedings, not only in respect to natural cross-border rivalry but because both embattled outfits have Nations League games coming up, the Republic travelling to Denmark, while Northern Ireland – who were relegated last night from their group – host Austria on Sunday. As a symbol of progress – particularly in a week dominated by memories of the 25th anniversary of the Republic’s fraught night in Belfast to qualify for the USA World Cup – there were sightings of those much mocked half-and-half team scarves outside the stadium, although it’s fair to assume the uptake from the 2,200 visiting fans would have been slender. Both O’Neills lament the lack of game-changing quality in their respective squads, and the programme cover, a poignant etching of Johnny Giles and George Best together, only served as a reminder of a devilish, richer past. Conversely, these days Northern Ireland were relying on Liam Boyce of Burton Albion up front, while the Republic looked to Preston’s Callum Robinson, both essentially greenhorns. Still, a crowd of 31,241 which included some free tickets issued by the FAI, was notable enough. However the ferocious jeering of God Save the Queen by the Republic’s fans illustrated an unsavoury and unwanted undercurrent to this fixture remains. “People come to football to boo. I don’t agree with that kind of thing but it’s not something I can dwell on as I am concentrating on the football,” said Northern Ireland manager Michael O’Neill. “I think we should have won the game and we were in control mainly. It was a similar pattern to our Nations League games where we dominate possession but don’t take chances. “In terms of Sunday we’ll see and we have a bunch of lads desperate to play. I’ll probably make a few changes.” McClean, meanwhile, was both lauded and lacerated from both quarters respectively, putting paid to hopes that cooler, objective mindsets over the controversial winger might prevail. The Stoke player enjoyed a rousing tribute from the Republic supporters upon his second half substitution, an exercise somewhat at odds with a frantic, unproductive showing. Glenn Whelan won his 85th and final cap for the Republic, but of course those veteran legs of hoarding possession eventually reach tipping point. The Aston Villa man was substituted as early as the 35th minute and subsequently afforded one of the evening’s deservedly warmer receptions. Northern Ireland carved out the better of the overall openings, with both Gavin Whyte and Stuart Dallas going close while Shane Duffy should have done better with a close range header at the other end. But the affair simply lacked distinct quality; peppered with minor scrapping and hashed opportunities, epitomised by Boyce’s lack of clinical conviction on occasion. But Northern Ireland’s energy was certainly more noteworthy. The Dublin night ended laboriously and mutely compared to the earlier rancour. There was precious little to be uplifted about. That in itself should particularly concern Martin O’Neill, who is quickly running out of ideas and who had to endure boos from a section of the crowd, bookending the dullest of climaxes. Republic of Ireland Randolph; Lenihan• (Christie 84), Duffy, Egan, Coleman, Hendrick, Whelan (Hourihane• 36), Brady, McClean (Stevens 66), O’Dowda (Curtis h-t), Robinson (Maguire 66; Hogan 80) Northern Ireland Peacock-Farrell, Smith (Ward 74), Cathcart, Evans, Lewis, Davis, Whyte (Jones 61), Evans (McNair 65), Saville•, Dallas, Boyce (Lafferty 71) Referee S Vincic (Svn) League A, Group 2: Belgium 2-0 IcelandA4: Croatia 3-2 SpainB3: Austria 0-0 Bosnia-HerzegovinaC2: Hungary 2-0 Estonia, Greece 1-0 FinlandD1: Kazakhstan 1-1 Latvia, Andorra 1-1 GeorgiaD2: Luxembourg 0-2 Belarus, San Marino 0-1 Moldova League A, Group 1: Netherlands v FranceB1: Slovakia v UkraineB4: Wales v DenmarkC3: Cyprus v Bulgaria, Slovenia v NorwayD4: Gibraltar v Armenia, Liechtenstein v FYR Macedonia League A, Group 3: Italy v PortugalB2: Turkey v SwedenC1: Albania v ScotlandC4: Serbia v Montenegro (4pm), Romania v LithuaniaD3: Azerbaijan v Faroe Islands (5pm), Malta v Kosovo (5pm) League A, Group 2: Switzerland v BelgiumA4: England v Croatia (2pm)B3: Northern Ireland v Austria (5pm)C2: Hungary v Finland, Greece v EstoniaD2: San Marino v Belarus (5pm), Moldova v Belarus (5pm) League A, Group 1: Germany v NetherlandsB1: Czech Republic v SlovakiaB4: Denmark v Republic of IrelandC3: Cyprus v Norway, Bulgaria v SloveniaD1: Georgia v Kazakhstan (5pm), Andorra v Latvia (5pm)D4: FYR Macedonia v Gibraltar, Liechtenstein v Armenia League A, Group 3: Portugal v PolandB2: Sweden v RussiaC1: Scotland v IsraelC4: Serbia v Lithuania, Montenegro v RomaniaD3: Malta v Faroe Islands, Kosovo v Azerbaijan • All kick-offs 7.45pm GMT unless stated