Perhaps Darren Cahill, the coach of Simona Halep, put it best. “She’s been close these last couple of years, she’s worked really hard for it, she’s been kicked in the stomach a couple of times, when she’s had chances. They say the destination is more beautiful if there’s a bit of a bumpy road and you eventually get there, and that’s what happened to her today. It’s a magical moment for her, she did it the hard way against a great opponent and I’m just really proud of her, and really happy for her.” When Halep was edged out by Caroline Wozniacki in the final of the Australian Open this year, her third loss in three grand slam finals, the thought must have crossed the Romanian’s mind that maybe she was destined never to experience grand slam glory. Not a bit of it. On the stage where she won the junior title a decade ago, Halep found the inner resolve and resilience to overcome the American Sloane Stephens 3-6, 6-4, 6-1. The world No 1 is a grand slam champion at last. Her path to this point has been riddled with obstacles, none more so than the mental baggage she accrued here last year, when she led the unheralded Latvian Jelena Ostapenko by a set and 3-0 and then 3-1 in the final set, only to lose to a whirlwind of winners from the Ostapenko racket. But throughout the past 12 months, Halep has remained calm and on Saturday she silenced the doubters with a gritty, eventually brilliant, performance. In many ways, her triumph can be traced back to her defeat by Wozniacki in Melbourne, a loss that could have sent her spiralling but instead simply strengthened her belief. “That match also helped her,” Cahill said. “To know that she can step up on the big stage and play her best tennis, and then – if you’re not good enough to win – you shake your opponent’s hand and you’re pretty damned proud of what you’re able to accomplish. “That helped her today, to hang in there when things weren’t going well in the first set. She showed a lot of maturity; she’s grown up a lot in the last 12 months. Sometimes the losses do make you mature pretty quickly – you can go one way with your career and go downwards or you can suck it up, work a little bit harder and try to do it again, and that’s the way she went. This one was special.” Cahill said the work Halep has done with her sports psychologist, Alexis Castorri, who has worked with Andy Murray in the past, has been crucial to her development. Where last year she was emotional on court, as things went wrong against Ostapenko, on Saturday she was calm, even when Stephens was dictating things in the opening set. Trailing by a set and 2-0, things looked bleak but, suddenly, Stephens became passive and Halep sensed her chance. After four straight games took her to 4-2, she showed great inner strength to hold a tight game at 4-4 and, once she had closed out the set, she maintained her aggression, going for broke and slamming groundstrokes on both sides. As Stephens tired, Halep took her chance. “I was worried how well Stephens was playing early on,” Cahill said. “Simona was having trouble finding ways to win easy points, in the end that probably worked a little bit in her favour. Because there was no easy way to win points, she had to grind for every point and Sloane, you could see, late in the second set getting a little bit tired.” The monkey off her back, now Halep may just cut loose. “The pressure’s off,” Cahill said. “None of this talk about being No 1 and not winning a slam. I think now she can relax, go out there and let her game go.”