Donald Trump has called for Russia to be readmitted to the G7 club of world leaders, opening up a new rift with Europe at the start of an acrimonious summit in Québec. The US president argued that Russia’s suspension from the former G8, imposed in 2014 after its annexation of Crimea, should be reversed for pragmatic reasons. It marks a dramatic break from the position of Washington’s main European allies and parts of Trump’s own administration, who insist Moscow must abide by a peace accord in Ukraine before normal relations are resumed. His call won support from the newest invitee to the G7, the incoming Italian prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, who tweeted: “I agree with President [Trump]. Russia should re-enter the G8. It is in the interests of all.” However, it contradicts the tougher policies advocated by the UK, Germany and France, and in particular cuts across Theresa May’s initiative at the G7 summit to create a rapid response unit to combat state-sponsored aggressive acts such as cyber-attacks and the poisoning of dissidents – a proposal with Russia principally in mind. Trump’s call for Russia’s readmission was promptly discounted by European leaders. “The common decision of the G7 was to exclude Russia from the G8 format,” said Jean-Claude Juncker, the president of the European commission. “It can of course be discussed but … we have to respect principles of the European Union, which is that European states like Russia have to respect international order and the international rule of law.” The Russian government also appeared cool about the idea. “Russia is focused on other formats, apart from the G7,” Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said in a brief statement. Trump’s comments – coming at a time when his campaign is under investigation for possible links with Moscow – raised eyebrows in Washington. “This is weak,” Ben Sasse, a Republican senator from Nebraska, said in a swiftly issued statement. “Putin is not our friend and he is not the president’s buddy. He is a thug using Soviet-style aggression to wage a shadow war against America, and our leaders should act like it.” Tensions were already high in the run-up to the two-day summit in the Québécois resort town of La Malbaie after a public dispute about trade between Trump and his French and Canadian counterparts, Emmanuel Macron and Justin Trudeau. “Why are we having the meeting without Russia being in the meeting?” Trump asked reporters on his way to the G7. “Russia should be in the meeting, it should be a part of it. You know, whether you like it or not, and it may not be politically correct, but we have a world to run and the G7, which used to be the G8 – they threw Russia out – they should let Russia come back in because we should have Russia at the negotiating table.” At stake at the Canadian summit is the prospect of the current bout of tit-for-tat tariffs between the major western economies turning into an unrestrained international trade war. The tone in the immediate run-up to the meetings at La Malbaie showed no sign of compromise between a US president determined to disrupt the status quo to force more favourable terms for the US, and six US allies resolved to stop him. Trump is due to leave La Malbaie early, missing sessions on climate change and the health of the oceans, to fly to Singapore for a meeting with the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un. Trump’s first meeting at the summer resort on the St Lawrence River is with Macron, followed by sessions with the full summit, and then a bilateral with Trudeau in the early evening. The US president sparred with other G7 leaders over trade well into Thursday night, accusing the EU and Canada of unfair business practices, and then resumed his polemic soon after 6am US time, complaining about Canadian dairy tariffs. “Looking forward to straightening out unfair Trade Deals with the G7 countries,” Trump tweeted. “If it doesn’t happen, we come out even better!” Donald Tusk, the president of the European Council, said the coming summit would be “far from easy”. “What worries me most is the fact that the rules-based international order is being challenged, quite surprisingly not by the usual suspects but by its main architect and guarantor, the US,” Tusk said at a press conference in La Malbaie. “We will not stop trying to convince President Trump that undermining this order makes no sense at all, because it will only play into the hands of those who seek a new post-west order, where liberal democracy and fundamental freedoms would cease to exist. This is in the interest of neither the US nor Europe.” On Thursday, Macron berated Trump for imposing unilateral tariffs on imported steel and aluminium rather than going through international arbitration, and for walking out of a multilateral nuclear deal with Iran. “The risk is to create a world of survival of the fittest. That is not good for us nor for any of our friends in the world,” Macron tweeted. He added: “Tensions are mounting everywhere. This G7 is going to be demanding.” Macron called on other G7 leaders not to water down a joint communique at the end of the summit, at the expense of shared values, simply in an effort to win Trump’s signature, warning that a “G6 plus one” outcome was possible. He called on the other G7 members to resist what he warned was a potential US drift towards “further isolationism and crude hegemony”. “The six other countries of the G7 represent a market which is bigger than the American market,” the French president said. At last year’s G7 summit in Sicily, the leaders all signed a communique, but the statement made clear there were deep differences on the Paris climate change accord. “The American president may not mind being isolated, but neither do we mind signing a six-country agreement if need be,” Macron said, adding that US workers would be the first to suffer from a trade war between Europe and the US. The White House press secretary, Sarah Sanders, announced on Friday that Trump would leave the summit in Canada at 10.30am local time on Saturday, barely into the second day of G7 business.