The only problem with Tommy Fleetwood’s making of history was Brooks Koepka’s eagerness to do likewise. On a Long Island Sunday when Fleetwood joined the elite group who have shot 63 in the US Open, the Englishman’s bid for a maiden major title came up agonisingly short. Koepka is just the third man since the second world war and the seventh in history to defend the US Open title successfully. Koepka’s triumph came by one shot, at one over par, from the inspired Fleetwood. Koepka was even afforded the luxury of a bogey at the last before signing for a 68. The Florida native will not be in the ever-growing queue for those looking to criticise the United States Golf Association. It has, after all, bestowed $4m worth of cheques on him over back-to-back Junes. Koepka had not foreseen this scenario even two months ago. He had fallen victim to a long-term wrist injury so serious that the lifting of a coffee cup was problematic. After a doctor remedied the problem, he set his sights on defending the trophy claimed at Erin Hills 12 months earlier. It was, at that stage, a long shot. Koepka’s versatility was demonstrated here. Whereas a year ago he indulged in a scoring blitz to win at 16 under par, Shinnecock Hills required a battle-hardened approach. Koepka had been unflappable when reaching the turn in 33 and notching a birdie at the 10th. Thereafter came the key moments; the 28-year-old rattled home a bogey putt at the 11th when a far higher score had looked probable. He also saved par from tricky situations at the 12th and 13th before a wonderful approach to the par-five 16th gave him the two-shot cushion that was to prove crucial. For so long, this looked like being Fleetwood’s major. The Southport man was six shots adrift of the lead after 54 holes, meaning his final round was over by 4pm. What a final round it was, though; Fleetwood made eight birdies and one bogey, at the 9th. There was a bittersweet element, too, as he missed birdie chances at the 16th and 18th – the latter from nine feet – when seeking to become the first player to post 62 in the US Open. “I knew I had chances for the record but it is something very special to shoot 63 in the final round of the US Open,” he said. “It feels strange to feel a little disappointed not to have shot 62 but it’s been a great day and to equal the record is very special. There’s not many people who have done it, so it’s very special and one of the best days I’ve ever had on a golf course. “The crowds were amazing. They are always great with me and I am very grateful for the support I get over here. When I went on that run on the back nine I was just loving getting everybody going and roaring for me. It was very cool. That walk down 18 will live with me for a long time.” Indeed, by the time he took to the 72nd green the American galleries were chanting the name of Fleetwood. Such a scenario is almost unheard of for a European player when the leaderboard is laden with stars and stripes. Dustin Johnson, one of four co-leaders at the start of the day, delivered the kind of wasteful putting performance which also undermined his US Open dream at Chambers Bay in 2015. The world No 1 finished third at plus-three on account of a 70. Patrick Reed’s charge had fuelled prospects of victory at the Masters and US Open in the same season. He played his first seven holes in five under par. The brakes were soon applied, however, Reed dropping shots at the 9th, 11th and 12th. His 68 meant fourth place, one ahead of Tony Finau. The USGA, so wounded by fierce criticism of the course set-up on day three, loosened the shackles for the closing day. That, of course, suggests the tournament organisers are unclear as to what precisely they want from the US Open. The dramatic shift in scoring patterns between rounds three and four hardly pointed towards a planning masterclass. Rickie Fowler’s 65 was 19 shots better than he had produced on Saturday. Fleetwood improved 16 strokes from day three. Hideki Matsuyama signed for a 13-shot swing to the good. Phil Mickelson, the man at the centre of epic controversy, turned an 81 into a 69 before beating a hasty retreat to avoid post-round interviews. Justin Rose left himself with too much ground to make up having produced sixes at the 4th and 5th. A 73 and plus-seven total meant a share of 10th. His fellow Englishman, Tyrell Hatton, was a shot better off and tied sixth. Yet this was Koepka’s day, again. What a lucrative habit.