A heterosexual couple who were denied the right to enter into a civil partnership have won their claim at the UK’s highest court that they have suffered discrimination. Justices at the supreme court unanimously found in favour of Rebecca Steinfeld and Charles Keidan in a decision that will put pressure on the government to change the law. The pair, from west London, who believe that the institution of marriage is patriarchal and sexist, have fought a prolonged legal campaign to open up civil partnerships to opposite-sex couples. At present, heterosexual couples may only marry; same-sex couples can either marry or take up a civil partnership. Keidan and Steinfeld had lost their earlier legal challenges at both the high court and the court of appeal. In their decision, the five supreme court justices formally declared that the ban preventing opposite-sex couples from obtaining a civil partnership was incompatible with their human rights and amounted to discrimination. “The interests of the community in denying those different-sex couples who have a genuine objection to being married the opportunity to enter into a civil partnership are unspecified and not easy to envisage,” their ruling said. “In contrast, the denial of those rights for an indefinite period may have far-reaching consequences for those who wish to avail themselves – and who are entitled to assert them – now.” The government should have eliminated the inequality of treatment between same-sex and opposite-sex partners when the Marriage (Same Sex Couples) Act came into force in 2013, the judges said. “This could have been done by abolishing civil partnerships or by instantaneously extending them to different-sex couples … Taking time to evaluate whether to abolish or extend could never amount to a legitimate aim for the continuance of the discrimination.”“... Moreover, undertaking ‘research with people who are current civil partners to understand their views on civil partnership and marriage and their future intentions and preferences’ [as the government argued] is at best of dubious relevance to the question of whether the continuing discrimination against different sex couples can be defended.” When in office, the former equalities minister Justine Greening proposed extending civil partnerships to opposite-sex couples and building “a consensus for legislation” and drew up internal policy documents in early 2017 to prepare for the change. The policy was reversed after she left office. The memorandum, reported by the Guardian last month, showed that plans were well advanced to concede to Steinfeld and Keidan’s legal campaign.In the three-and-a-half-years since they launched their legal claim, Steinfeld and Keidan have had two children, Ariel and Eden. The couple’s commitment to equality and rejection of marriage because of its patriarchal associations is such that rather than give them a double-barrelled surname they have the fused family name of Keidstein. The only jurisdiction in the British Isles that permits opposite-sex civil partnerships is the Isle of Man. Some couples have travelled there for ceremonies, but their unions are not recognised in the UK. Other countries such as South Africa, New Zealand and the Netherlands allow couples to choose either civil partnership or marriage. In the Netherlands last year, there were 64,400 marriages and 17,900 civil partnerships, suggesting there is demand for both arrangements. Abolishing civil partnerships for same-sex couples to end the discrimination could mean dissolving legal ties that unite 63,000 gay couples – a course of action that would trigger political furore and legal uncertainty. Even the Marriage Foundation supports extending civil partnerships to heterosexual couples, believing they are “infinitely preferable to unthinking and risky cohabitation”. There was applause in court from supporters of Steinfield and Keidan after the judgment was read out. Keidan said: “The government is in a position to complete the circle of equality by making sure civil partnerships are now extended to everyone, to make sure the inequality is remedied.”Steinfield added: “After four years and four equality ministers we get there in the end. I’m frustrated that the government made us go though this at the cost of all this money.”