Doreen Lawrence has attacked the “institutional indifference” faced by the residents of Grenfell Tower and others living in social housing. The campaigner, whose son, Stephen Lawrence, was murdered in a racist attack in 1993, writes in the Observer that the indifference of the authorities to Grenfell residents meant “they had no right to safety and no right to be heard”. She adds: “Very few people in positions of power understand what this experience is like. I doubt they’ve ever had to live in poor housing or know what it is like to feel invisible, like no one cares.” Baroness Lawrence fought for years against a discriminatory and complacent police response to her son’s murder. In 1999, a public inquiry concluded that the police were institutionally racist, in a report which was expected to reset race relations in Britain. Now Lawrence has drawn a “striking parallel” between that inquiry and the public inquiry into the Grenfell fire, which is due to begin hearing evidence this week. In both inquiries, she says, “race and class play an undeniable part”. “We like to think that we have moved on since Stephen was killed, and that race is no longer an issue, but of course it is. It is the elephant in the room inside the [Grenfell] inquiry, and playing out via the Windrush scandal outside the inquiry.” For the past two weeks, relatives of the 72 people who died as a result of the fire have been giving testimony in a preliminary session of the inquiry. In the presence of Sir Martin Moore-Bick, the chair, painful accounts of the lives of those who died have reduced many to tears. Lawrence says she has “listened intently” to the heartbreaking stories. “I understand acutely the pain of those speaking out about their loss. Sitting in a public inquiry day after day, talking about your own grief while the world watches, is a very difficult thing to do. I know it really took its toll on me. “But these people are doing something essential: they are finally putting names, faces, hopes and dreams to the 72 victims who, until now, have otherwise been a number. For that bravery and truth, we are all grateful.” She commends the relatives for harnessing their anger, saying: “It was the same for me when I was fighting for justice for my son Stephen, after he was murdered. My anger became my motivation; it kept me driving forwards for years.” The institutional indifference faced by the Grenfell Tower community spreads to all residents of social housing, she says. “It’s the same indifference which too often sees dismissive landlords protected by a system that allows them to ignore social tenants’ fears and concerns.” Stigma towards social tenants is “still very much alive and well, and it’s the main reason these tenants can end up being ignored”. Recalling her own years in social housing, she says: “We need to look again at the basic deal which those who need social housing are offered. A social home should be a home and an opportunity to get on – as I did – and somehow we have lost sight of that.” Lawrence is serving on a commission established by the homelessness charity Shelter to scrutinise the state and role of social housing in the aftermath of the fire. The panel includes Edward Daffarn, a resident of the tower, whose blog predicted a catastrophic fire; Ed Miliband, the former Labour party leader; and the Conservative peer Sayeeda Warsi. Chaired by Mike Long, the minister of the Notting Hill Methodist church, close to the tower, the commission’s recommendations are expected to be presented to the prime minister before the end of the year.