Some of the greatest paintings of the 19th century, including works by Manet, Cézanne, Renoir and Gauguin, will return to their native France next year for the first time in more than half a century, on loan from the Courtauld Collection in London, to the Fondation Louis Vuitton in Paris. The paintings are among the greatest treasures of the London gallery, which would never normally strip its walls to loan so many at the same time. However, the Courtauld’s home in Somerset House is about to close for two years for a £50m project to rationalise its magnificent but awkward spaces, with the main rooms reached by steep staircases, and the most splendid gallery – the Great Room, once the home of the Royal Academy summer exhibition – broken into smaller spaces by partition walls. The exhibition, opening next February in Paris, will highlight the extraordinary collection assembled by the industrialist Samuel Courtauld, who inherited a textile fortune and used it to acquire one of the greatest collections of Impressionist works in the world. He founded the art history and conservation university, the Courtauld Institute of Art, in 1932 – the first time the subjects had been taught at university level in the UK – lavished gifts of art on it, and bequeathed his collection on his death in 1947. The classrooms and galleries were originally housed in his Georgian townhouse in Portman Square, before moving to Somerset House in the 1980s. The exhibition will reunite the London pictures with paintings and drawings once owned by Courtauld from other public and private collections, and will also show JMW Turner watercolours once owned by his brother Stephen. The Courtauld family had long connections with France. They were originally Huguenots who emigrated in the 17th century, renowned as silversmiths and silk producers. In the early 20th century, the development of viscose, artificial silk, made the family firm one of the largest textile manufacturers in the world. The paintings Courtauld bought in the 1920s, many from French dealers in Paris, included Manet’s A Bar at the Folies Bergère, Renoir’s La Loge, Gauguin’s enigmatic Tahitian nude Nevermore, and one of Van Gogh’s most famous paintings, Self-Portrait with Bandaged Ear. He also assembled the largest collection in the UK of works by Cézanne, whose work had been derided by critics, including one of the five versions of The Card Players, and one of the most beautiful of the artist’s many views of the Sainte-Victoire mountain in Provence. His passionate support of the impressionist artists influenced other UK collections. The National Gallery will loan the exhibition Van Gogh’s A Wheatfield with Cypresses, which was the first painting by the artist to enter a UK collection. Some of the paintings returning to Paris were last seen there in 1955 at an exhibition celebrating Courtauld’s achievements, which had earned him the Légion d’Honneur for his services to the arts in France.