I’ve just seen you again after about 10 years, three marriages and four children between us, and it feels as if nothing has changed. But of course it has. We’re in our 40s now; both older, a bit fatter (well, me, certainly), a bit more jaded. Those heady days of our 20s are well and truly behind us. Gone are the days of no responsibility – and even this lunch date had to be planned well in advance. We’ve had two children each, you’ve had two wives – both of whom I still felt a pang of jealously towards, even though officially you were never mine to begin with. Keeping in touch has been easier since Facebook has allowed me a window into your life. I’ve seen the wedding pictures, seen the children, seen your happiness – happiness with a woman who wasn’t me. It hasn’t always been the easiest thing, despite our mutually agreeable arrangement. Do millennials still have “friends with benefits”? Those friends with whom you can enjoy the excitement of sex and the beauty of friendship without the anguish of missed phone calls and the risk of being dumped? We’ve had years of this ever-so-sophisticated arrangement where we would regularly congratulate ourselves on avoiding the complications of relationships, feelings, love even. But I do love you. I loved you when we started our arrangement. I loved you when you used to bring home girlfriends and I and our other housemate would put things in her shoes (yes, immature, I know). I loved you when you left for another city to work and I cried for days. I loved you even when you danced at my wedding. And I loved you when I heard about your wedding. I once told someone about our relationship, and they asked how long we’d been together. I remember the look on her face when I said we’d never been together, never been on a date, never sent each other Valentine’s cards. That I had, however, done things with you I’d never done with my husband. Experts say that, if you’re lucky, you fall in love only three times in your life. I broke the rules by allowing you to be one of them. You weren’t meant to be about that. You were supposed to be a delicious anecdote at a dinner party, a giggle with girlfriends, a drunken, “Do you remember when…” You weren’t supposed to be the one that got away. • We will pay £25 for every letter we publish. Email family@theguardian.com, including your address and phone number. We are able to reply only to those whose contributions we are going to use.