At least five people have been killed and several others seriously injured in a shooting at the offices of a newspaper in Maryland. A man opened fire in the newsroom of the Capital Gazette in Annapolis, the state capital, on Thursday afternoon. Dozens of police officers and federal agents responded within minutes of the incident being reported, and a suspected shooter was arrested without a further exchange of gunfire. William Krampf, the county’s acting police chief, said five people had been confirmed dead, and that several others shot were “gravely injured”. Krampf said an item found at the scene was being checked for possible explosives. Phil Davis, the Capital Gazette’s courts and crime reporter, said the man shot his way in through the newspaper’s glass door before firing at people inside the office. Davis said he heard multiple colleagues being shot as he hid under a desk. There is nothing more terrifying than hearing multiple people get shot while you're under your desk and then hear the gunman reload Anthony Messenger, whose online biography said he was an intern at the newspaper, posted a series of tweets reporting a shooter at the office and appealing for help. Injured victims were taken to local hospitals including the shock trauma center at the University of Maryland and the Anne Arundel Medical Center, according to spokespeople. Four people were found dead at the scene and a fifth died in hospital. Danielle Ohl, another reporter at the newspaper, said fellow reporter Rachael Pacella was injured and hospitalized. “For those reaching out with support, I thank you,” Ohl tweeted. “I will say this: The Capital is not a big newsroom. There are about 20 news staffers, a few more advertising. We are close. We are family. I am devastated.” Larry Hogan, the governor of Maryland, said: “Your heart goes out to all the people who lost their lives, to all their families.” Officials declined to comment on any suspected motive for the shooting. Steve Schuh, the Anne Arundel county executive, told CNN that the suspected shooter was found by police hiding under a desk in the office with his gun on the floor beside him. Officials said the suspected shooter was a white man who used a long gun. He was taken to the department’s criminal investigation division in Crownsville and was not being cooperative. Police said they were not looking for other suspects. Bethany Clasing, a legal assistant who works on the floor above the Capital Gazette, told the Guardian: “I was really confused at first – it’s not like you would expect someone to come and shoot up this building.” Clasing said police officers arrived quickly. “They were shouting to ‘get down’,” she said. She was then evacuated across the street to a shopping mall. Carlos Linares, a mechanical engineer who was on the fourth floor of the building for a meeting with his lawyer, said he heard a man shouting at about 2.55pm followed by a commotion. “I’ve never see so many cops in my life,” said Linares, who said he was also in the Pentagon when it was attacked on 9/11. Officials said police officers responded to the shooting within 90 seconds of receiving an emergency call. About 170 people were soon seen streaming from the offices, many with their hands in the air, as officers evacuated the building. Gavin Buckley, the Annapolis mayor, praised the responding officers. “If they were not there as quickly it could have been a lot worse,” said Buckley. The mayor said city authorities recently underwent active shooter training. “We did not expect something like this to happen in our community, but we were ready,” he said. Lt Ryan Frashure, a spokesman for Anne Arundel county police, said the suspect was being interrogated by officers and the scene was being searched for evidence. “We anticipate this being a very long investigation, a very detailed investigation, by our detectives,” said Frasure. Joshua McKerrow, a photojournalist for the Capital Gazette, tweeted several pictures of officers responding to the shooting. McKerrow said an edition of the newspaper, featuring reports on the shooting, would be published on Friday. Two state highways were closed in Anne Arundel county because of the police activity, according to the Maryland state highway administration. Active shooter 888 Bestgate please help us The attack on the newspaper was the latest in a series of mass shootings in the US in the past year that have renewed calls among Democrats and activists for tighter restrictions on gun ownership, which are dismissed by Republicans. Gabrielle Giffords, the former Arizona congresswoman who was shot in the head at a constituency event in 2011, said: “Reporters shouldn’t have to hide from gunfire while doing their jobs,” adding: “We shouldn’t have to live in a country where our lawmakers refuse to address this uniquely American crisis.” The shooting prompted new condemnation of Donald Trump’s demonisation of the media. The president has repeatedly called the press “the enemy of the people” and encourages crowds at his rallies to join him in deriding journalists. Asked following the shooting about the president’s criticism of the press, Lindsay Walters, a White House spokeswoman, said Trump and his staff did not condone violence in any situation. “We stand by that,” said Walters. Trump said in a tweet that he had been briefed on the shooting. “My thoughts and prayers are with the victims and their families,” he wrote. “Thank you to all of the first responders who are currently on the scene.” The New York police department sent officers to the headquarters of major media organisations in the city as a precaution following the shooting in Maryland, according to Peter Donald, a department spokesman.