The victims of revenge porn must be given anonymity like victims of other sexual offences, Labour will argue as the government pushes through its “upskirting” bill. Research suggests one in three people who have had intimate images posted online without their consent withdrew their complaints when they could not be assured of anonymity. The issue of revenge porn hit the headlines again last week when two Love Island constants, Zara McDermott and Laura Anderson, were reported to have had intimate images and videos shared on pornographic websites while they appeared on the reality TV show. A Labour source said the party would not seek to amend the government’s bill to specifically outlaw upskirting – where victims have intimate areas photographed under their clothes by attackers – because it did not want to delay the introduction of the new law. Instead, Labour hopes to persuade the government to add the protection for revenge porn victims to the bill. The government has promised to fast-track its own legislation on upskirting this week after the Conservative backbencher Christopher Chope obstructed a private member’s bill submitted by the Liberal Democrat MP Wera Hobhouse. The government bill will go before a second reading bill committee on Monday, which will mean a quicker legislative process. Richard Burgon, the shadow justice secretary, said it was a “gross injustice” that victims of revenge porn did not have anonymity. “They have already had their privacy violated in a disgusting betrayal of trust, face having their identity made public when seeking to pursue charges,” he said. “It puts pressure on victims not to do so and lets perpetrators off the hook. The law needs to change. The Tories must act.” Image-based sexual abuse, the legal term for revenge porn, is not classified as a sexual offence, meaning victims are not granted automatic anonymity when they pursue charges. Dawn Butler, the shadow minister for women and equalities, said: “People who post revenge porn to try to humiliate their partners or exes are committing a serious, warped sexual offence, and should be treated as so by law. “The government must act to grant anonymity to victims of this vile crime, which has destroyed lives and sadly pushed some to taking their own lives. The Tories should ensure parliamentary time is given to change this law, which Labour will be proud to support.” The call to give revenge porn victims anonymity has cross-party support, including from Maria Miller, the Conservative MP who chairs the women and equalities select committee. Miller said the practice should be classified as a sexual offence. A Labour source said: “We are considering all options to get the law changed as quickly as possible to better protect victims. The Tories should set aside government time and bring forward legislation to parliament, which Labour will support.”