England must wish the World Cup was taking place next week rather than next year – at least their batsmen must. All of them are in sparkling form, flogging Australian bowlers to every corner of every ground they encounter. No one is hitting the ball with greater certainty than Jason Roy, who purred to his sixth ODI hundred at Chester-le-Street while posting another century opening partnership with Jonny Bairstow. Already this union has produced more 100 partnerships in one-day international cricket than any other English pairing and they are barely beyond the honeymoon stage. When asked whether he has ever batted better, Roy uses phrases that would probably not have leapt from the lips of his Surrey predecessors. It is hard to imagine Jack Hobbs or John Edrich or even Alec Stewart responding to such a question with: “Yeah, this is probably the best headspace I’ve been in, knowing my role in the team.” But we all know what he means; however matter-of-fact he wants to sound he is in the form of his life. He is also impressively determined not to get too carried away. Breaking records may be fun but he stresses: “Our main aim is just to make sure that these are just stepping stones to the bigger picture, which is the World Cup.” Barring some extraordinary turn of events England already know the identity of the key batsmen in their World Cup squad a year ahead of schedule, while the selectors may be more concerned by how they might strengthen their bowling options. Eoin Morgan has pointed out that selecting the best XI when everyone is fit is not a task that he is looking forward to, but it is a dilemma he welcomes. Oddly enough Alex Hales’s nondescript unbeaten 34 on Thursday must have been as satisfying as any of the other innings; with victory all but assured Hales was unusually restrained, determined that there should not be any hiccups similar to those experienced in the first match at the Oval; it was an innings of impressive self-denial. Yet Hales is still not guaranteed his place in the best team. This is not Roy’s problem. “It’s a tough call for the management,” he says. “But it has nothing to do with me.” Yet here is one of the oddities of any sporting team. The reality is that team-mates in a cricket side are inevitably rivals, fighting to retain their places, yet they are also obliged to be supportive of their colleagues. England’s one-day side seems as unified as they come. The players genuinely get on well; several of them go on holiday together even though they are compelled to spend weeks together when “working”, all of which reflects an unusually positive set-up. Roy reflects upon that in the only way he can when confronted with the Hales conundrum. “You obviously want everyone to do well. There’s no animosity outside the changing room. We are all very good friends. It’s just a case of wanting the best out of your mate.” But all of them naturally want to be in the best XI as well. For the moment this healthy competition seems to be spurring England’s top three to even greater heights and it may well be that Morgan and Trevor Bayliss are especially adept at exploiting this situation. Hence as the circus heads to Old Trafford for Australia’s final 50-over ordeal one senses England’s top three will not be resting on their laurels; they will be trying to outdo one another – in the most comradely manner possible.