Solange’s concert was bound to be emotional. Her most recent album, A Seat at the Table, chronicled the pain and beauty that comes with inhabiting the world as a black woman. The film clips that accompanied it imagined a world that centred the beauty of black women within an entirely black gaze. How do you bring this energy and vision to a space like the Sydney Opera House? We were lucky to be able to experience her in the first place. The artist has been dealing with chronic health problems and had pulled out of shows late last year and early this year to, rightly so, prioritise her wellbeing. She had also been reconsidering the way she performs. In her acceptance speech of the prestigious Harvard Arts prize, she said: “I cannot stand on a stage and just deliver the work for purely the sake of being entertained. I want to continue to create work that exchanges and engages and activates and continues to challenge myself and spaces on what it means to identify as an artist in this body during this time. I want to sculpt, I want to build, I want to tear down walls and build news ones, I want to dismantle, I want to disrupt, I want to bore, I want to quiet you down, I want to create frequency.” If this is the benchmark Solange sets for herself, she did what she said she wanted to do. Before she was even in the country, before she had even stepped on the stage, she was leaving her mark on black and brown communities. Call-outs for performers of colour were circulating a month or so before she arrived. Black and brown people who managed to get tickets were planning their pilgrimage. People drove up to 15 hours this week to see her. And she gave back to us. Solange’s performance was proudly black and it was a privilege to experience her proud blackness. It was a full sonic and visual delight. She seemed to effortlessly hit every single note, moved with grace and vigour, and didn’t break a sweat. She was backed by an ensemble of horns, back-up singers, drummers and keyboards, who were all people of colour. The stage was transformed with two pyramids on each side and a giant sphere hanging from the ceiling. It was black excellence. During her speech at Harvard, she spoke about artists performing or speaking their truths and talked about Nina Simone: “When I think of Nina Simone, I think about how safe many people feel with her voice pouring into their homes today, many of which wouldn’t have dared to embrace even some of her truths.” I did wonder whether the white audience members of her show could embrace her truths. When black international artists come to Australia, my elation is tinged with slight trepidation. In this case, I was worried the ballot that was required to buy a ticket might have meant there would not be as many people of colour in the audience. Could this audience understand her art in the way she wanted it to be understood? Australian audiences and cultural commentators are often embarrassing and don’t know how to respond or talk about proud exchanges of blackness. I recall seeing Kendrick Lamar in 2016 at the Byron Bay Blues festival with a predominantly white audience who felt entitled to yell the N-word while he was rapping. Jon Faine repeatedly said the N-word on his ABC talkback show when referring to the James Baldwin documentary I am not your Negro last year. Michael Cathcart did the same while interviewing Man Booker prize-winning author Paul Beatty and Mia Freedman dehumanised Roxanne Gay when she was over last year. This is not surprising when we consider how Adam Goodes celebrating his Aboriginality was received by many AFL commentators and spectators. I needn’t have felt this trepidation. Solange herself remarked that the last time she was in the country was when she was a backup dancer for Destiny’s Child in the early 2000s. She said things had changed here. This was, of course, code for telling us the audience wasn’t so white. She was right. I was surrounded by beautiful black and brown people. While her show is incredible regardless, it is black and brown people who truly get to experience her black girl magic. She pointed us out. She came down and danced with us. She told us we had a right to be mad. She told us some stuff is for us. And we knew she was right. The tickets were seated but she told us all to stand and dance. She told us how beautiful the black and brown people in the crowd were. Last night was a celebration of blackness and it was healing and affirming. • Solange is performing at the Sydney Opera House as part of Vivid festival until 4 June