Fewer people sought asylum in the European Union last year, although numbers remain higher than before the arrival of 1 million people in 2015 triggered a political crisis that continues to divide Europe. Showing a sharp drop in asylum claims, the latest report from the EU’s asylum office was published on Monday after emergency talks in the German government over asylum policy and a bitter standoff between EU nations over a migrant rescue ship that eventually docked in Spain after being banned from Italy and Malta. The EU’s asylum office counted 728,470 applications for international protection in 2017, a 44% reduction on the 1.3m applications the previous year. More than 1 million people entered the EU in 2015, many fleeing the war in Syria. Syria, Iraq and Afghanistan remain the most frequent countries of origin for asylum seekers, accounting for 29% of all claims. The fall in asylum applications reflects a sharp drop in people making the hazardous journey over the eastern Mediterranean to Greece, and the central Mediterranean to Italy, although there has been an increase in people travelling from west Africa to Spain, albeit from a lower base. Germany continues to receive more applications for asylum than any other country in Europe, with 222,560 claims in 2017. Italy, France and Greece received the next largest number of claims. The UK was in fifth place, with 33,780 applications, accounting for 4.6% of all EU asylum claims. But the backlog remains high: 954,100 claims are awaiting a decision, including 443,640 in Germany, the EU asylum office said. The EU has spent more than two years trying to agree common asylum rules, but talks are deadlocked over whether there should be a compulsory system for allocating refugees to different member states. EU leaders will discuss the question at an EU summit next week, although a German government spokesman dismissed reports of an emergency meeting taking place this weekend. Sophie Magennis of the United Nations refugee agency said the standoff over the Aquarius rescue ship brought into stark relief the importance of the EU agreeing on a mechanism to share refugees. “Now really is the time for EU member states to come together and to agree on their approach to this issue,” she said. “We do not have a crisis of numbers, we continue to a crisis of political will and that is something that needs to be addressed.”