Gomersal, where Jo Cox’s sister Kim Leadbeater lives, is a village just about equidistant from Bradford, Leeds and Wakefield in West Yorkshire. You can see green hills from most of the houses here, and streets much like Leadbeater’s, climbing up the sides of them. When Cox, two years older than her sister, was campaigning to be the local MP, she sometimes brought her two young children up from London and slept on the floor of Leadbeater’s spare room. When she was elected as member for the local Batley and Spen constituency in 2015 she got a cottage to stay in nearby, but would invariably stop here for her tea after she got off the train at Wakefield. Her sister remembers that as if it was yesterday. When Cox arrived, the story was always the same, Leadbeater recalls, with a smile, in her sitting room. “Jo was absolutely fantastic in so many ways, but also, like all big sisters, really quite annoying; quite dizzy, a bit forgetful.” There were three things in particular Cox would forget: she never had any cash, she had always missed a meal, and she never had anything to wear. “She would remember at the last minute she had some event to go to and she would be after borrowing shoes or clothes or makeup,” Leadbeater says. “Constantly. Food – mum or me would always have to feed her. And then money. She would order a takeaway here and when the delivery came, get her card out. I was like, ‘Jo, you’re in Gomersal, they don’t do contactless.’” Leadbeater, a lecturer in physical health at Bradford College and a personal trainer, was the organised one. Her sister’s mind was always on the bigger picture, saving the world. “Jo was hilarious. You could disagree with her, politically, but to this day I have never met anyone who didn’t like her. You couldn’t not like her. She didn’t have a bad bone in her body.” Birstall, where Cox ran a constituency surgery at the library, and where she was murdered two years ago yesterday, is only just over a mile up the road from Leadbeater’s house. The awful day itself, Leadbeater tries hard not to think about, but the facts of it are fixed in her mind. “There was an England game on that afternoon, and we were here ready to watch the football,” she says. “I had taken my car in for an MOT and I was jogging down the road to pick it up. Brendan [Cox’s husband] called me and said: ‘Jo has been attacked’. Bizarrely, I knew the worst straight away. When I spoke to my dad he was different. He was saying, ‘people get shot in the arm or somewhere and they recover. She’ll be OK.’ But I was thinking: ‘No, no she’s tiny, she is just a tiny little thing.’ The guy I was picking my car up from could see I was shaking uncontrollably. I told him what had happened and asked if he knew my sister. I told him that she was the local MP. He said he didn’t know her; he didn’t listen to the news because it was too depressing. And somehow I got the car and managed to drive to the hospital in Leeds. Shaking, shaking. And when I got there, they had just told my dad. After that it was just a blur. I was just thinking: ‘We can’t crumble. I can’t crumble for mum and dad’s sake. I just can’t.’” In the two years since, Leadbeater has held on to that thought, and tried her utmost to make it spread far and wide. She says that in the immediate aftermath of the murder there was a tangible sense locally that the community might become totally fractured. Community leaders and faith leaders got together to think of ways to prevent that happening. Almost spontaneously, a group called More in Common was formed and Kim ended up chairing it. From that developed The Great Get Together, the annual national shindig that inspired more than 100,000 community events when it launched last year, and which Kim hopes will be even bigger this year (it’s 22-24 June, next weekend, when Jo would have celebrated her 44th birthday). More in Common – the name comes from Cox’s indelible quote “we have more in common than that which divides us” – now has partners in France and Germany and the US. The original group still meets locally, too, including representatives from Huddersfield Town FC and the Leeds Rhinos rugby league team, right down to little voluntary groups, like friends of the Gomersal library. “It is bonkers but brilliant,” Leadbeater says. “There are all these amazing people. I tell them what we have planned and then everyone else does the same and we look at ways that we can maybe do some of those things together.” Leadbeater is not under the illusion that such initiatives on their own can heal deeper social divisions, but she believes that we have to start somewhere. Her sister was murdered by a Nazi-sympathising extremist, in whose mind community, integration, compassion – the things that Cox campaigned for – were the threat and the enemy. Leadbeater is particularly proud of the way that the first Great Get Together established new and lasting friendships across local cultures. Last year it fell during Ramadan and there was a big local Iftar – the sunset evening meal that ends the daily fast – and this time many people of all faiths, and none, joined in. “I knew nothing about Ramadan,” Leadbeater says, “but it was just about the most spiritual thing I’ve been to.” And then the following day, spiritual in a different way, many of the same people pitched up at a special rugby league game. Before the tragedy, Leadbeater was as much in a bubble as anyone else, always busy, only passing the time of day with her neighbours. Afterwards, she says, she and her parents and her partner, Claire, were really “scooped up by the community”. She knows everyone around about now and people have never stopped asking if there is anything they can do. She had to have the attic of this semi-detached house converted to store the many thousands of cards and messages they received from around Gomersal and the world. Keeping up with everything, trying to push the Jo Cox Foundation forward, has inevitably become more than a full-time job. Leadbeater was about to start a master’s degree at the time of the murder: that’s been shelved. She tries her best to keep her fitness business going, so as not to be totally consumed. “People call me Jo’s sister,” she says, “and I couldn’t be more proud that they do – but there also has to be some space to be Kim.” She and her parents have had to shoulder more of the public face of the campaigns since Jo’s husband, Brendan, stepped down from the Jo Cox Foundation and More in Common after historical allegations of sexual misconduct against him resurfaced at the beginning of this year. Cox denied a complaint made against him by a woman he met at a conference at Harvard in 2015, but said he regretted and apologised for some of his behaviour when he had worked as head of strategy at Save the Children. If anything, Leadbeater says, the allegations have made the last six months even harder than what went before. She has, obviously, no desire to dwell on the detail of what has been alleged, but thinks it was right that her brother-in-law stepped down. “I think he has to take some advice on where he goes from here, and he is doing that,” she says. “Do I condone inappropriate behaviour? Absolutely not. Will I continue to support Brendan as the father of two of the most precious children in the world who have had their mother murdered? Yes, of course I will. There is no grey area in that. And my mum and dad feel exactly the same. Brendan was a huge part in setting up the foundation, but he was one of a team of people and we have to keep that going.” Can she see a way back for him? “That’s up to Brendan, really,” she says, “I can’t speak for him, but what I will say is that he has done and is doing a brilliant job with the kids. He is such a good father, and there is so much of Jo in them obviously as well. They are tough little cookies.” It worries Leadbeater that the children are approaching the age – they are now five and seven – when they will begin to understand more of what happened. “I can’t face that at all,” she says, “but obviously we all talk about their mum all the time, we tell funny stories, and she is very much a part of all of our lives.” Leadbeater used to tease her sister a bit about her drive to be the best mother she could be. “She was so committed to the idea that the first three years of a child’s life are when their character is formed,” she says. “She had – obviously – read all the research. She worked extremely hard at being a full-on mum, and Brendan was the same. They were parents who made a point of answering every single question the kids asked – you know: “Why is that butterfly doing that, Mummy?” And she would launch into this very detailed explanation every time. She was so patient.” What an amazing gift for them now, I say. “Absolutely. They are so interested in life. So full of energy. She used to say: ‘We just want to let them have the most idyllic childhood and give them as many adventures as possible.’ So that now for me is a bit of my role as crazy auntie. And, actually, in the middle of everything they have been through, we all know that they are the most important thing in all of this. They will always know how special Jo was.” Leadbeater has not had any counselling about the trauma of what happened, not least the ordeal of the trial of Thomas Mair, which the family attended every day. Of her own grief, she says: “You live around it. It becomes a part of you. A few people would say, even quite early on: ‘Are things getting back to normal?’ They meant well, but I was like: ‘What? Things will never get back to normal.’” She has spoken to a few people since who have had relatives murdered, she says, and even 10 years on, the first thing they all say is: “I still can’t believe it happened.” Not surprisingly, she goes over in her head the whys of that afternoon. At one point, as we talk, she asks what I thought the reasons for it all were. I tell her a few competing thoughts come into my head. I suggest that there was, it seemed, in the weeks leading up to the EU referendum, a build-up of extreme rhetoric, particularly around immigration, that felt reckless. I mention a long story I wrote that involved reading through a year of the Daily Mail leading up to those weeks, and how in retrospect you could witness the progression of the forces of division. I mention that inadvertent admission of Nigel Farage’s sidekick, Andy Wigmore, when he said in a taped off-the-record conversation that his Leave campaigners were concerned they would be blamed for creating “a wave of hatred and racism” and that after the murder of Cox they thought “maybe we have gone too far”. None of these things directly explained the twisted motivation of the killer, of course they didn’t, but did they contribute to a climate in which “Britain First” demons might be let loose? It’s hard to argue otherwise. Leadbeater listens carefully. She talks about how she and her sister were raised to have strong opinions, but to always look for solutions and compromise, rather than anger. We speak a little about how the anonymity of the internet seems to have made people more tribal, less civil. Leadbeater herself has avoided social media of all kinds in the last two years. “It scares me, honestly,” she says. “I have seen a few things that people have said about me online, and you inevitably take it personally. There might be a hundred positive comments but all you hear is the one negative one: did I look a mess? Did I say the wrong thing?” Inevitably, she suggests, those kinds of questions were very much on her sister’s mind in the short time she was an MP. They talked a few times about it, but once in particular, at Leadbeater’s 40th birthday party, six weeks before Cox was killed. Twenty-five of Leadbeater’s friends gathered at a house in the country for the weekend, but she and Cox found some time to be alone with each other, and talked about the abuse Cox was getting online at the time, from all sides. She had initiated a cross-party group with the Tory Andrew Mitchell to try to find some solutions to the humanitarian crisis in Syria. “Some people had been so horrible, really personal, calling for her to be deselected and all of that,” Leadbeater recalls. “Jo was an emotional person and it really got to her. I told her: you just need to walk away from this if it is making you feel so bad. She was saying: ‘No, I just need a thicker skin.’” The other thing they talked about, an ongoing topic, was how Cox was getting a bit better at juggling her 24/7 parliamentary career with family and other commitments. She’d always joked that one day she would come back from her global role with Oxfam and be the MP for their home constituency, Batley and Spen. When the chance came up, the timing hadn’t been ideal, the children were so small, and her life with Brendan was in London. Leadbeater and their parents encouraged her by saying they could help support her. “We said we will do all the practical stuff, pick the kids up, feed you, and stay in the background. Jo, classic Jo, was ‘Ah, don’t worry! I promise it won’t affect your lives at all.’” Leadbeater smiles at the irony of that; the day before we met she and her mother had appeared on Loose Women, one of a series of promotional activities in London for the Great Get Together. Over the summer, after the Get Together is over, she plans to sit down and work through the strategy for the foundation – lobbying to make sure the new government’s loneliness commission, inspired by her sister, does its intended work; keeping track of the ways that the £10m Jo Cox memorial grant, administered by the Department for International Development to help women’s development projects, has the effect Cox would have wanted. Leadbeater lists these responsibilities dutifully. “I had a great bloody life before,” she says. How similar were she and her sister? “More so, I think, as we got older. As kids Jo was very shy, I was always the louder one. We did everything together, even though we were two years apart. We did BMX bikes and Fame dancing and Girl Guides. We saw less of each other as adults obviously, but people tell me our mannerisms are very alike. And I do find myself saying things and thinking, ‘God, that was like Jo’, which is lovely but also really strange.” And what would her sister have made of all their efforts, does she think? “Mum and Dad have been amazing, totally out of their comfort zone, and Jo would be laughing her socks off at some of the things we have done,” she says. “We had a decision to make. How do we respond? And I think you have to respond with something positive in the darkest times, otherwise you give in to anger and to hatred. And then the evil has won.” She shakes her head. “I’m not having that. I’m not having that at all.” I’m reminded she is from Yorkshire. She gives a smile. “The other thing is we know just what Jo would be saying. I hear her voice all the time: “Get out there, girl! Do something about it – do something good!” The Great Get Together takes place next weekend, 22-24 June. To get involved, visit greatgettogether.org