Maggie O’Farrell is the author of seven bestselling novels, including This Must Be the Place and the Costa prize-winning The Hand That First Held Mine. Her new book, I Am, I Am, I Am, is a memoir about her brushes with death, among them a severe childhood illness, an armed ambush, a near-drowning, and her daughter’s life-threatening allergies. You once told your husband you were more likely to become a mathematician than to write a personal memoir. What made you change your mind?You don’t necessarily choose the books you write; they choose you, in a way. Sometimes one arrives when you are least expecting it, a bit like an unplanned pregnancy. This book was very much like that. It just sort of appeared in the backs of my diaries. But I had huge trepidations about publishing it. I only let my publisher give me a £1 advance in case I changed my mind. Why?I knew because it was so personal that I needed to get it completely right, not just so that I was happy with it but so that my husband and family and anyone else who was in it was happy with it. I love reading memoirs, especially writers’ memoirs, but sometimes I feel viscerally shocked at how exposing they are to people who don’t have a right of reply. So, it was very important to me to write a memoir that didn’t fleece people I love. Do you think it is unusual to have as many near-death experiences?Perhaps I have had more brushes with death than most people, although a lot of them can be traced back to the illness I had as a child and the related medical conditions. But I do think people have more close encounters with death than they acknowledge. They put them away in their minds. It’s a natural human reaction not to want to think about them. The reactions I have had to the book have been very interesting from this perspective. People are usually amazed and say: “Seventeen brushes with death! How come?” I can see the wheels turning in their mind and they start to say: “Oh, yes, there was that time… and that time.…” The other person in the book who has regular brushes with death is your daughter, your middle child, who from birth has suffered chronic eczema and extreme allergic reactions up to 15 times a year. Daily life, just keeping her safe, sounds like a military exercise…It is a bit. I am not naturally a very organised person but I’ve had to become so out of necessity. You have to be very practical, make sure you have all her medication with you and that everyone she’s with knows exactly what to do in case she has an episode. She can go into anaphylactic shock just by sitting next to someone who opens a bag of peanuts. But the other part of parenting is the emotional work. It’s very challenging to have to explain to a three- or four-year-old why they’re in pain, why they look different to everyone else, why they’re in an ambulance, why they’re in an ICU. I have learned a huge amount. What’s the most important thing that being your daughter’s mum has taught you?The human need for narrative. It had never occurred to me before that it is a requirement that we have, a bit like oxygen and water and food. I found the thing I reached for again and again when she was having a crisis was making up a story for her about what was happening: why we were in the hospital unit; why her eczema was so sore; why she needed to put cream on every day. It was the only thing that helped, making up a story about her – and also about what happened to me. In saying to her, I was different at school as well, I was ill, I spent time in hospital, I was able to help her. I suppose in a sense that is what I was trying to do with the book. I was trying to normalise it for her and for other people when she’s older. To say, we all go through this. You’re not alone. You had viral encephalitis at her age, which confined you to bed for two years and is the subject of a very affecting chapter in the book. To what extent did the illness determine who you are?I think it must have done to a significant extent but it is impossible for me to disentangle who I might have been and who I actually am. Someone asked me, if you could turn back the clock and not have the illness, would you? I found that impossible to answer. I was really floored. I thought, well, actually I don’t know, maybe I wouldn’t. It is part of who I am and continues to feature in my daily life. How?I have huge balance issues and I can’t walk around in the dark – I need to be able to see where I am going. I drop cutlery and knock over glasses. Sometimes I see things that aren’t there: lights, flashes or spots in the fabric of my vision. When I’m very tired I see things upside-down. I also have a problem with sequencing – I wouldn’t be able to read out a phone number. You describe how you read a huge amount while you were ill. Is that what turned you into a writer?I would say it guided me on the path I eventually took. I pretty much read for two years. That’s all I did. I listened to audiobooks over and over again. And I would read from one end of my bookcase to the other and start again. Also, when you’re a child and you’re ill in hospital nobody tells you what’s going on and it is only by watching and interpreting the behaviour of the adults around you that you find out your destiny. So, I developed that writer’s skill of being an observer at an early age. How do you manage to find the time and the space to write?To do my tax return or to do the washing-up or the laundry I have to be very self-disciplined but never with writing. It’s what I want to do. Our domestic life is perhaps more demanding than others’ but for me writing is a coping mechanism. Sitting at my desk I can live an alternative life. In any case, being hungry for time at your desk is good for you. Children in that sense are very good editors. I cut a lot less from my books than I did before I had children. I Am, I Am, I Am is published by Tinder Press (£8.99). To order it for £7.64 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846