Late-night hosts on Monday discussed last weekend’s G7 summit, where tensions broke out between Donald Trump and Justin Trudeau, as well as Tuesday’s highly anticipated summit between Trump and Kim Jong-un. “Folks, it is an historic evening because as we speak President Trump is meeting with North Korean dictator Kim Jong-un,” Stephen Colbert began, noting that the situation would have been “unthinkable” just a few years ago. “Tensions are high and the United States is on the precipice of unthinkable international conflict,” Colbert said, “and that’s with Canada. Our relations have not been bad with Canada since they stole the word ‘bacon’. Canadian bacon is just round ham, you monsters. “If you’re one of those nerds out there who values the western alliance that has safeguarded democracy for 70 years, it was a tough weekend for you,” the host continued, noting the ongoing tensions between the US and its trading partners over the protectionist trade tariffs Trump declared shortly before the summit. “That’s like showing up to an AA meeting with Captain Morgan.” The host then showed the viral image of the summit, saying of Trump’s posture, “It’s like a toddler who put a Lego in his mouth.” He continued: “These meetings, every time they end with what’s called a joint communique, an agreement of intention between the nations. Trump agreed to sign it but after he left, Justin Trudeau said this about imposing tariffs on the US.” Canada’s prime minister told reporters retaliatory tariffs are “not something we relish doing”, but added that Canada “will not be pushed around”. In response, Trump called Trudeau “meek” and “dishonest” on Twitter while his director of trade, Peter Navarro, said there is “a special place in hell for any foreign leader that engages in bad faith diplomacy” with Trump. “Canadian hell,” Colbert quipped, “where Bud Light is on tap, they never play Gordon Lightfoot, and you have to choose between Ryan Reynolds and Ryan Gosling.” Trevor Noah also covered the G7, “when America and its closest allies come together for two days of meetings on economic issues”. Before the summit, Noah explained, Trump told reporters Russia should be allowed back into what was the G8 after being dismissed for the invasion of Ukraine and the annexation of Crimea. “I don’t know if Trump colluded with Russia, but if everyone was accusing me of colluding with Russia, I wouldn’t be caught dead mentioning their name,” Noah said. “But, clearly, Trump doesn’t know how to take a clue.” When asked about the annexation of Crimea, Trump blamed the Obama administration and reiterated his desire to have Russia rejoin the G8. “OK, that makes sense,” Noah said. “Russia annexing Crimea wasn’t really a big deal, but we must never forgive Obama for letting them commit the atrocity, which was not a big deal at all. Who even knows what a Crimea is? "Trump went into the G7 for a run-of-the-mill check-in with America's allies and came out full-on beefing with Canada -- the Ned Flanders of countries."-Trevor breaks down the weekend's G7 summit: https://t.co/kFE0ugXaxb pic.twitter.com/OqBNuYE191 “For a normal G7, Trump’s Russia obsession would have been more than enough drama, but for President Trump he was just getting started,” the host said. “Trump went into the G7 for a run-of-the-mill check-in with America’s allies and then came out full-on beefing with Canada, the Ned Flanders of countries.” Emmanuel Macron, Noah noted, called Trump “incoherent”, while Angela Merkel called the summit “somewhat depressing”. Noah went on: “The reason Trump went all Pusha-T on Trudeau is because he claims that Trudeau was super nice to him in person but then as soon as Trump left, Trudeau held a press conference saying that Canada still planned to retaliate against the new US tariffs.” The host then showed news segments in which Trump advisers escalated the conflict between the president and Trudeau, with Larry Kudlow accusing Trudeau of stabbing America in the back and Navarro making his “special place in hell” remark. “That is a serious threat and a very specific place in hell,” Noah said. “That sounds VIP as shit.” Finally, Seth Meyers addressed Trump’s comfort with authoritarian leaders and his contempt for America’s allies. “The Trump administration has now said harsher things about Canada than they’ve ever said about Russia, which actually did attack our political system,” Meyers said. “Compare Trump’s comments about Canada to what he said just last week about Russia.” Of Trump’s desire to bring Russia to the negotiating table, Meyers said: “Russia was kicked out of what used to be called the G8 for illegally invading Ukraine and annexing Crimea. Since then, Russia’s only escalated its hostility towards neighboring nations in the west, and yet Trump said he wants to let them back into the G8. “He’s so proud he remembers it used to be called the G8,” the host joked. Meyers then explained how Trump saved a Chinese state-owned cellphone company that had been sanctioned by Congress after the Chinese government agreed to grant $500m in loans to an Indonesian resort project from which Trump stands to profit. “Trump is much more comfortable with authoritarian leaders because, unlike our democratically elected allies, authoritarians can easily win Trump over by lining his pockets,” Meyers said, adding that “China has also approved 13 new Ivanka Trump trademarks in three months.”