When Kamila Shamsie began her novel Home Fire in 2015, Sadiq Khan had yet to launch his campaign to become London’s mayor and the idea of a Muslim home secretary would have been dismissed as a futuristic fantasy. As she stepped up to receive the Women’s prize for fiction this week, both had come to pass, along with several more chilling scenarios in her updating of the classical tragedy Antigone to multicultural Britain today. After the banker-turned-Conservative MP Sajid Javid was promoted to the Home Office, a supporter went so far as to create a twitter hashtag, #nostrashamsie. But to those who tell her that the resonance of the novel has grown exponentially since it was published last year, Shamsie briskly responds: “I’m not a soothsayer – these things were in the water.” The Pakistani-born daughter of a businessman and a leading critic and literary historian, Shamsie has lived in London since the mid-noughties. Two years before starting work on the novel, she became a British citizen, “so I was very aware of what was going on around citizenship and how easy it was to fall between the cracks. Until then, each time I signed a form for residency renewal I was incredibly tense: what would have happened if I had ticked one box wrongly?” The ancient Greek play on which Home Fire is based tells the story of a princess who is forced to choose between obeying the king, who is her uncle, or burying her brother, whose body has been left to rot as punishment for waging war on the kingdom of Thebes. Shamsie’s Antigone is Aneeka, one of three Muslim siblings, whose twin brother has travelled secretly to Syria to film Islamic State fighters in Raqqa. While their older sister tries to protect the family by reporting him to the police, Aneeka embarks on a cloak-and-dagger campaign to force the Muslim home secretary to allow her disaffected and frightened brother back into the UK, against government policy. The idea came about through “one of those funny confluences of events”, Shamsie explains. Her previous two novels, Burnt Shadows and A God in Every Stone, had been sweeping historical investigations, and she was keen to write something set in the present day that did not require a lot of research. “I was ready to write but not sure what.” In this creative hiatus, she met a theatre director who pointed out that there was a revival of interest in Greek tragedy and suggested she take a look at Sophocles’ Antigone. “My thought at that point was, let’s do something to fill the time,” she says, but she was struck by how pertinent the story seemed. Mohammed Emwazi, the British-born Isis executioner also known as Jihadi John, had hit the the headlines, along with a succession of stories about young British runaways who had dedicated their lives to religious war. Her home secretary, Karamat Lone, aka “the lone wolf”, is a paradoxical figure, a devoted father and self-made patriot who exhorts students at his old school in Bradford to follow his example. “You are, we are, British,” he tells them. “Britain accepts this. So do most of you. But for those of you who are in some doubt about it, let me say this: don’t set yourself apart in the way you dress, the way you think, the outdated codes of behaviour you cling to, the ideologies to which you attach your loyalties …” Shamsie’s own confidence in what it meant to be British had taken a knock when Theresa May, as home secretary, proposed that dual nationals should be stripped of their British citizenship. Having thought she had found a subject that didn’t require research, Shamsie realised she had settled on one that created a particularly acute challenge. “I really didn’t want to go to Google and put in ‘Isis recruitment’, because I grew up in a military dictatorship and I know how they can get into your heads.” In the novel, Aneeka coins the acronym GWM (Googling while Muslim) “and lots of people have come up to me and asked if I invented it, because that’s really what it’s like”, says Shamsie. “You know the state has access to your records and, as a new citizen, you wonder what would they think of me?” In a stroke of luck, the writer Gillian Slovo – a friend to whom the novel is dedicated – happened to be working on a verbatim play for the National Theatre about British recruits to Isis and generously shared her research. Slovo is the South African-born daughter of leading anti-apartheid campaigners, and it is not hard to see how that embattled heritage bonded two highly political emigre writers. “In the mid-1990s, Karachi was in the middle of really awful violence so those who could afford to stay out, did,” says Shamsie, the younger of two sisters, who went from the colonial redoubt of Karachi grammar school (“we did English O-levels and A-levels”) to university in New York. Partly, she says, this choice was due to financial pragmatism – American universities offered financial aid to foreign students, unlike the UK – but it was also a reflection of a shift in her generation of young Pakistanis away from Britain to the US. Now 44, Shamsie published her first novel at the age of 24 and moved to the UK nine years later, “because I love London,” she says. “I started to spend some time here every year, and in the course of the next decade the gravitational pull of the city grew stronger.” Today, she has more close schoolfriends in London than in Karachi, though she returns every winter to spend several weeks in a city where assassinations are a fact of daily life. “I’ve grown up in Pakistan and you know there’s violence all around but it’s a city of 20 million and you learn not to think about it.” Last year, when her parents made their annual summer visit to London, her mother felt anxious in a way that she did not at home. “I don’t think it’s because Pakistan is getting better, but because everywhere else is getting worse,” says Shamsie. Does that make her a pessimist or an optimist? “I tend to be an optimist about human nature but a political pessimist,” she parries. “I think we’re living in very, very scary times and we have to find ways of looking squarely at it and finding reasons for optimism.” Which brings us back to Antigone, the sister who is destroyed because she puts family loyalty above the state. “Here was this young woman who stood up to authority and, yes, it didn’t work out well for her, but in the process the tyrant learns humanity.” That, she says, is a kind of hope.