While Fernando Alonso’s career in Formula One may be entering its twilight years with a whimper rather than a bang, he clearly has no intention of going quietly into the night. His win at this year’s Le Mans 24 Hours was at once a statement of intent, a step closer to ensuring his place in the history books and a salutary reminder that, given the right machinery, he remains one of the greatest drivers of his generation. Alonso and his two Toyota teammates, Kazuki Nakajima and Sébastien Buemi, put in a superb drive to win the 86th edition of the grand prix d’endurance, beating the sister car of Mike Conway, José María López and Kamui Kobayashi into second. For the double F1 world champion the win, on his first attempt at Le Mans, means that he has secured two of the three victories required to equal Graham Hill, the only driver to have achieved motor racing’s triple crown. With wins here and Monaco now under Alonso’s belt, only the Indy 500 remains. On this form he will be desperate for a swift return to the Brickyard. “It is an amazing feeling. I am still in shock,” he said. “I was stressed at the end – I am not used to watching my own car racing. It was a tense 24 hours with the two cars being within a minute the whole race. I am trying to enjoy every second of this moment.” His enthusiasm for this race has been clear all week at the Circuit de la Sarthe and, when he climbed from the car for the final time with just over two hours to go, it was undiminished. “The only shame is that Le Mans is only once a year,” he said. “We should have this race every two or three weeks.” It was a strong team effort from all the drivers in the No 8 car, especially as they were pushed by the sister No 7 throughout. But the Spaniard put in an exceptional, pivotal stint through the night, exemplifying the mastery behind the wheel he has been unable to display of late in an uncompetitive McLaren in F1. Toyota, the only full works manufacturer team in the top LMP1 category, were the class act of the field and enjoyed a clear advantage over the privateers from the off. The winning No 8 car completed 388 laps and finished two laps ahead of the No 7. The pair had quickly established a strong advantage in the opening six hours where they competed fiercely with one another, exchanging the lead repeatedly. However Alonso’s car was put on the back foot after a 60-second stop‑go penalty for speeding in a slow-zone early into the 10th hour. It put the squad just over two minutes back when the Spaniard took to the wheel around 1.30am and he then put in a storming quadruple stint to haul them back into contention. He was running lap times in the 3min 19-20sec region of the 8.46-mile track and hitting them with a metronomic consistency and control, running at the limit through traffic in a bravura display of skill. Repeatedly between two and fours seconds a lap quicker than Conway and then López, he had almost halved the gap when he offered just to keep going at 4am. “Tell me if you want another stint? I’ve got into the rhythm of the night,” he said. It was a remarkable performance in darkness on the first time he has driven the circuit competitively. Nakajima replaced him and proved the pace was still there, finally passing Kobayashi for the lead through Mulsanne corner after 16 and a half hours. It proved enough, Alonso and Buemi were able to consolidate and extend their advantage to the flag. For his teammates the win will be of even greater import. Neither Nakajima nor Buemi has won Le Mans before but both came heartbreakingly close in 2016. They shared the leading Toyota that year when, with Nakajima at the wheel, it ground to a halt with one lap to go due to a fractured airline. Their elation and relief at finally gaining redemption was palpable. Toyota are now only the second Japanese manufacturer to win Le Mans after Mazda’s victory in 1991 but it has been some time coming. In 19 attempts they have repeatedly come close, second on five occasions, but this was the victory they craved. Fittingly the Japanese driver was given responsibility to see them over the line and this time there were tears of joy. If it was victory for the team, it was also the strongest possible vindication for Alonso’s pursuit of the triple crown, a goal that is now within his reach. The Rebellion racing privateer squad of Gustavo Menezes, Mathias Beche and Thomas Laurent was in third. LMP2 was won by the G-Drive Racing Oreca of Jean-Eric Vergne, Andrea Pizzitola and Romain Rusinov. The Porsche 911 RSR of Kevin Estre, Michael Christensen and Laurens Vanthoor took the flag in GTE-Pro and in GTE-Amvictory went to the Dempsey-Proton Porscheof Julien Andlauer, Christian Ried and Matt Campbell. Former F1 world champion Jenson Button was also competing for the first time at the race but his privateer SMP Racing car lost two hours in the pits due to a sensor failure and ultimately was forced to retire in the final hour due to an engine failure.