France v Australia, the opening match for my country at the World Cup. Time to stop the talking, time for action. I’ve been there and have had to cope with the pressure – pressure from the fans, the expectations of a nation and the pressure you put on yourself. Wanting to deliver. Everybody knows the first game is really tricky and really important, psychologically. You will all look at this fixture and think it shouldn’t be too complicated for Les Bleus. But this is a key moment for the French team. And we will find out a lot from the way things go and the way the team performs. You should have seen us in 1998, seen how we were shaking. With all respect, it was only South Africa we had to face for the first game but we were trembling. I remember we could hear them singing in their dressing room just before we went out for the kick-off. They seemed so cool. We were playing at home and there were big expectations. And we were really not very good for the opening hour of that game. We have to win the first game. For confidence, it’s vital. If you can win the first one then you know that a second victory will often mean you have already qualified for the next round and that’s important because it gives the manager a chance to make sweeping changes for the final group match. This is how it went for us in 1998 and in 2000 – and it allowed the other guys to play, to play their part, to bring their contribution and to feel concerned – that’s how you ensure a rock-solid team spirit. Didier Deschamps knows all about that, of course – he was our captain. His choices for this squad reflect his experience. He knows that France will need positive guys on the bench, bringing a good vibe but ready to step up if needed. When I look at this French side, when you look at the players individually – wow. There is just so much amazing talent. I really think it’s a challenge for Didier having so many talented young players coming through. I remember during Euro 2016 much of the offensive animation came from Antoine Griezmann and Dimitri Payet, who is no longer in the squad. Griezmann is the man for the situation, he’s shown what he can do. Scoring twice in the semi-final against Germany two years ago showed us he can cope with the big games, that he relishes the big stage. There are players like that, who can step up the level when necessary. But now Griezmann needs to show us he’s smart again by finding the right balance with Kylian Mbappé, the new kid on the block. I’m not sure he will play all the games but Mbappé can be one of the big stars of this World Cup. Didier has to protect him. He has to allow him to digest the pressure he will have around him. He is so young, it’s his first World Cup and the expectations are high – from back home, of course, but from around the football world. Here is a raw talent, a player who can change games and Didier will have to keep a close eye on him. Kylian has burst on to the scene in a way that is not so dissimilar to that of Thierry Henry back in 1998. Henry and David Trezeguet were the youngsters who brought their talent and insouciance to our team back then and Thierry finished the World Cup as our top scorer, with three goals. The other youngster who can make his mark for France is Ousmane Dembélé, who had an up and down season with Barcelona but who has a very special talent. Right foot, left foot, you can’t even tell which is his strongest, and in the recent warm-up game with Italy I was impressed with the way he went about the game. Mbappé and Dembélé have shown they are ready to perform for their nation. The challenge for my friend Didier is to find the correct system, to adapt his philosophy of the game to the players he has. A good example of this test for a manager is the burning Paul Pogba question. Everyone wants to know how to get the best out of Pogba, what’s the best way to allow himself to express himself? I think Didier has a decision to make. While he will be an important player for France, I think Pogba has to accept that he is part of a midfield that will have to provide balance – that he won’t be the star of the team because I think potentially we have a three-man attack that can frighten any team in Russia. A quick word about the host nation. I want to congratulate the Russians. I have been able to visit many of the stadiums and on an infrastructure level everything is very impressive, very well organised. I have felt the passion that is there around football and the fact they sold the tickets very quickly shows they have the football culture some may have doubted. This is such an important rendezvous for the Russian people. They know the eyes of the world are upon them. Russia is opening up to the rest of the world but it takes time. I have had the chance to spend time in the country as part of my role as a Fifa ambassador and I have to say I have not experienced any racism. I have seen people laughing, having fun among themselves but perhaps eyeing the outsider with curiosity. And, of course, we don’t know the Russians very well – there are all sorts of stereotypes knocking about and maybe we fear them a little bit. That’s why the World Cup is so important. It will help open their minds and that’s why I’m enjoying interacting with the people and trying to understand their culture and seeing how football can help move things on. I’m a great believer in sport as a vector for change. Let’s see how it turns out, but as far as I can see there should be no fear for the African teams in Russia. As for Australia, getting ready to play my national team, I hope they are afraid! And I hope France get off to a winning start.