Akira Nishino, the Japan coach, admitted his tactics in the final 10 minutes of their game against Poland were “very regrettable” and left him feeling unhappy, after he told his players to “stay put” and keep the ball without trying to attack, despite the fact that they were losing. Nishino decided to “rely on the other match” in Samara, where Colombia were leading 1-0 against Senegal – a scoreline that would put Japan through via the fair-play rule provided they did not concede again or pick up any further yellow cards. That controversial approach ultimately worked as Japan, who finished with an identical record to Senegal in terms of points, goal difference and goals scored, progressed to the last 16 because they picked up two fewer cautions. Nishino, however, sounded uncomfortable with a decision that went down badly with the majority of the spectators inside the stadium as the end of the match was played out to whistling and boos. “It was a very tough decision, of course,” Nishino said. “We conceded a goal, but with the time passing the other match moved [when Colombia took the lead]. When I put on [Makoto] Hasebe [in the 82nd minute] I told him what was in my mind: ‘Do not go for any high risks.’ I told him not to concede any yellow cards, go 4-1-4-1, defensive, and then I told him to tell the team to ‘stay put’. We could not concede another goal. So with the time passing it was my decision to stay put, and then when I used Hasebe it was the ultimate message. “I’m not too happy about this but I forced my players to do what I said. We did not go for victory, but we just relied on the other match. I view that it was slightly regrettable but I suppose at that point that I didn’t have any other plans. The World Cup is such that these things happen. And we went through. Therefore it was perhaps the right decision.” Aliou Cissé, the Senegal coach, refused to complain about the rule that saw his team eliminated. “This is the law of the game,” Cissé said. “We have not qualified because we did not deserve it. This is life. We have a number of rules which have been established and we have to respect that. We are fully committed and maybe because we are so committed, we get more yellow cards.”