Announcing its latest report, the Commons Treasury committee headlined its conclusions “Abolish ‘alpha-male’ culture to encourage progression of women in finance”. Given that equal access to massive City bonuses has yet to be widely understood as a priority, while the international threat from high-profile alpha maleness is already ranked at severe, this turned out to be a brilliant bit of PR. It sounds so promising. How quickly does the Treasury committee think we can eradicate alpha maleness? By which method? Would it be suitable for any type of infestation? Most important, would it work on David Davis? On inspection, the report, although no doubt correct in deploring the impact on recruitment of a culture that celebrates ugly displays of dominance, contains only a few hints on alpha male control and most are too culturally specific for export. “Abolish alpha-male culture” emerges as a plea for the guilty finance companies to do something about their woman-unfriendly culture of absurd presenteeism and of demanding, as opposed to earning, bonuses. So there is little, finally, from Nicky Morgan’s committee to trouble the very primates whose home territory features a gender bonus gap of 52% – a sizable fragment for victims of feminazism to shore against their ruins. Moreover, given that the relevant men are being urged to reform, you could argue that calling them “alpha males” – only a few steps down from masters of the universe and several up from silverbacks and big beasts – might be less effective in achieving behavioural change than some less obviously awed-sounding descriptor. Git? Or maybe tosser, being more insistently male, better captures, for instance, the kind of modern Bank of England manager who, recruiting from a shortlist of four women and one man, unerringly picks the man. Admittedly, some will find the term too imprecise, too binary, possibly on the reductive side, for use by a parliamentary committee engaged in an important quest for workplace equality. Aren’t there more kinds of men in the world than tossers and non-tossers? Where do manspreaders fit in? But the same surely applies to the term “alpha male”, with its insulting proposal that all the others are betas. What possessed the committee to endorse terminology so cherished by the world’s strongman enthusiasts? As it is, they echo, for instance, Nigel Farage excusing Trump’s rapey molestation stories as “alpha-male boasting”. It’s not just that the comparison is, as applied above, unfair to apes. More unhelpfully, it reflects back to the male referent, his valuation of his own eminence. The committee might as well have added that, as Farage once complimented “brilliant” Putin, if you poke the deputy governor of the Bank of England with a stick, he will respond. Of course, when finance committee member Rushanara Ali questioned witnesses about “alpha male” workplaces, “this culture of winning at all costs”, she did not mean it kindly. As deployed by Ali, and by countless men equally resistant to this idea of masculinity, “alpha male” is hardly less suggestive of deviance than “toxic masculinity”, “man child” or “narcissist”. But, as demonstrated by some prominent tossers, the quality of being not so much indifferent to criticism, as viewing it as a form of potency-guarantor, is as reliable an indicator of this personality type as an enthusiasm for Ayn Rand, a cartoon handshake or a disgust for unimpressed – probably menopausal – women. Look at the obsession of the “alt-right” with “cucks” or, more locally, at the valedictory column in which the Daily Mail’s departing hominid, Paul Dacre, dwells as boastfully on the loathing he inspires as on his important admirers: “I suffer my critics’ obloquy with pride.” Anyone still wondering how much men in financial services mind being called alpha males by Nicky Morgan should probably go back to the viral G7 photograph in which prestige – Angela Merkel – confronts dominance – Donald Trump, seated in what was described as the “alpha male” position. Smirking, legs spread, arms crossed, the president shows Merkel and a group of similarly appalled men whom (even if Macron did hurt his hand) he unquestionably considers beta, that their objections only harden his asinine – or should that be swinish? – resolve. Although analysts have long favoured dominant monkey behaviour as a parallel for the powerful human male’s, Trump’s thundering greed, idiocy, aggression, immaturity, cruelty, priapism, misogyny, destructiveness, egotism and impulsiveness indicate, as never before, its limitations as chief comparator, a sufficiently abject animal alternative having yet to evolve. Supposing there were real insights to be gained, following publication, in 1982, of Frans De Waal’s Chimpanzee Politics, from comparisons between powerful men and primates, it’s unfortunate that the relevant domineering, bullying or simply preposterous human conduct thereby got itself dignified as“alpha male”, in a borrowing from primatology, rather than, say, “apelike”, “chimpanzoid”, “bestial”. How differently we might then have viewed Martin Sorrell, recently mentioned in connection with a sex-buying claim (which he denies) and bullying, formerly a “pretty unique alpha male”. Ditto Philip Green, back when this rude bully (or “sex god” to Michael Gove) was “the archetypal alpha male”. On the left, Alastair Campbell, in his press monstering days, wowed even victims: “Alpha male… he could be a bully – but you can’t survive five minutes in that job without sometimes being a bully.” Substitute chimp (assuming tosser is out of the question) in each case and we might have learned something. For aspiring tossers, a range of study aids includes Putin’s walk and hints on the wide-legged “power stance” hilariously attempted by George Osborne and Sajid Javid, though never by Barack Obama, one of the legions of men to have demonstrated that power is not, however unlikely it might currently appear, the monopoly of thugs. Although, if we persist in calling them alpha males, that can’t but help. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnist