Tourists to New Zealand will soon have to pay double the fee that locals do to use huts and campsites located on some of the country’s great walks. The move is part of a trial by the government that seeks to gain extra revenue to maintain the network of walks – one of the country’s major tourist drawcards. “New Zealand’s nine great walks are premier tracks that pass through unique and spectacular scenery and are a magnet for international visitors,” said the conservation minister, Eugenie Sage. She said the seven-month trial from October will provide information on the effectiveness of pricing as a tool to manage visitor pressure. “It is also part of setting and maintaining a fair pricing system for New Zealanders.” Currently, the Department of Conservation’s (DOC) investment in maintaining the great walks exceeds the revenue from users’ hut fees by up to NZ$3.8m (US$2.6m) each year. “DOC expects to recover up to an additional $2.9m during the trial period, without significantly reducing bookings and visitor demand,” Sage said. “The increased accommodation fees may also encourage overseas visitors to use less visited wreat walks where prices remain the same.” Prices for huts for international visitors, including children, on the Milford Track will be $140 per night, on the Kepler and Routeburn $130 per night and Abel Tasman Coastal Walk $75 per night. Hut prices for New Zealanders remain at $70 per night for the Milford, $65 per night for the Kepler and Routeburn, and $38 per night for the Abel Tasman Coastal Walk. New Zealanders under 18 will remain free of charge. With almost five million international visitors predicted to arrive each year by 2023, the announcement is one way the Labour-led government is looking to increase revenue off the back of the lucrative tourist market. Tourism directly contributes $14.7bn to the country each year, with a further $11.3bn contributed indirectly. As part of its election campaign the party also proposed a $25 “tourist tax” that would be levied on visitors at the border. However, it was unclear when or how that might be implemented.