The first inkling most members of the public had that there may have been another mass shooting in America – this time at a newspaper office – came when a short and chilling tweet was posted, saying: “Active shooter 888 Bestgate please help us.” Active shooter 888 Bestgate please help us The tweet came from Anthony Messenger whose Twitter biography described him as an intern with the Capital Gazette in Annapolis, Maryland, calling for help at the address of the building in which the media organisation has its offices. Soon after, witnesses – including journalists from the newspaper – began describing dramatic scenes. Phil Davis, the Gazette’s crime and court reporter, tweeted shortly after 3.30pm local time: “A single shooter shot multiple people at my office, some of whom are dead.” A string of tweets followed: “Gunman shot through the glass door to the office and opened fire on multiple employees. Can’t say much more and don’t want to declare anyone dead, but it’s bad,” he posted. In one of the most chilling tweets of the series, Davis said: “There is nothing more terrifying than hearing multiple people get shot while you’re under your desk and then hear the gunman reload.” There is nothing more terrifying than hearing multiple people get shot while you're under your desk and then hear the gunman reload Aerial video footage came soon after, showing people evacuated from the building in a line with their hands up. Police soon confirmed that one suspect was in custody. “We believe there are no other shooters in the building,” Bill Krampf, acting chief of Anne Arundel county police, said at a press conference near the scene. Davis later noted that he was safely evacuated and was waiting to be interviewed by police. Joshua McKerrow, a photojournalist for the Capital Gazette and the Baltimore Sun, tweeted: “I am safe. Was not there” – even as he headed to the scene to start reporting. Soon after he posted a set of pictures showing heavily armed law enforcement officers standing guard at the scene and multiple official vehicles. Police response for shooting in my newsroom. @capgaznews. pic.twitter.com/0O1LtlXdps Earlier he had noted: “Massive police response to shooting in my newsroom in Annapolis.” As reports of multiple fatalities were confirmed by law enforcement, at 4.36pm local time, McKerrow tweeted one word: “Heartbroken.” Authorities said a reunification location was being established at the Lord & Taylor department store at the Westfield Annapolis mall, for witnesses or survivors to gather ahead of being reunited with loved ones. Donald Trump was informed of the incident and posted a muted tweet: “Prior to departing Wisconsin, I was briefed on the shooting at Capital Gazette in Annapolis, Maryland. My thoughts and prayers are with the victims and their families. Thank you to all of the First Responders who are currently on the scene.” The Maryland governor, Larry Hogan, tweeted that he was “absolutely devastated” and called the shooting a tragedy. An hour after his first post, McKerrow, the photographer, tweeted another message, listing the names of his colleagues who had survived the attack – including Messenger, the intern. “Chase Cook, Pat Ferguson, Paul Gillespie, Phil Davis, Selene San Felice, Anthony Messenger all ok,” he wrote.