And so on to the banks of the Baltic. Nobody ever really knows what to make of games such as these, the final demob‑happy friendlies of a tournament summer. At the end of an energetic 2-0 defeat of a forgettable Costa Rica England’s players waved a farewell to the far corners of Elland Road. From here they will travel east for their opening World Cup fixture in 10 days’ time unbeaten in 10 games, and with a leer of quiet confidence beneath the usual deflationary bluster. This was a productive run-out for a starting team of Plan Bs and second-choicers, with enough attacking vim in the shape of Marcus Rashford and Ruben Loftus-Cheek to suggest their early opponents in Group G may be harried by similar ferreting energy. Most obviously there was Rashford, who produced a goal that will live long in the memory for anyone staring down its line of flight. Beyond that there were some wonderfully bold moments as a mobile, tricksy centre-forward, completely overshadowing Jamie Vardy, who touched the ball eight times to Rashford’s 49 in the first half. Behind him Loftus‑Cheek was also excellent. He is a diligent footballer, able to turn in tight spaces, always looking for a passing option, at his best when he carries the ball across field stretching the defensive lines until they twang. On this occasion he completed 100% of his passes although there were only 34 of them. He remains a project footballer, somebody who looks at times like he has learned to play from a book. But England haven’t often had a footballer like this, not a flashy, explosive presence, but a genuine playmaker whose instinct is to keep the ball and move it on, to keep things ticking over, looking always for a sliver of space. Jack Butland Surprisingly given the nod ahead of Jordan Pickford but the Stoke keeper made a couple of decent stops. 7Phil Jones Did little wrong but did not come under much pressure and always sense he could drop a clanger. 6John Stones Only player to start both warm-up games but gave the ball away a couple of times. 6Harry Maguire Lucky to get away with it on two occasions when Joel Campbell got in behind him. 6Trent Alexander-Arnold Unlikely to oust Kieran Trippier for a starting spot in Russia but the youngest player in the squad coped well. 7Jordan Henderson Wore the captain's armband and constantly looked to press the opposition – but Southgate may prefer Eric Dier. 7Danny Rose Showed enormous bravery off the pitch this week and started brightly but was disappointing in second half. 6Ruben Loftus-Cheek Linked up well with Henderson and provided the assist for Rashford's opening goal. 7Fabian Delph Leeds lad gave a good account of himself at home and moved seamlessly into a deep midfield role. 7Marcus Rashford (pictured) Staked claim to a starting spot in Russia with blistering performance and scored terrific opener. 8Jamie Vardy Missed a chance to double the lead and only touched ball eight times in first half before being subbed on the hour. 5 SubstitutesDanny Welbeck (on for Vardy) Ever-reliable forward came off the bench and made an impact with diving header from close range. 7Kieran Trippier (on for Alexander-Arnold) Should have done better from set pieces after coming on but seems likely to get a starting spot. 6Gary Cahill (on for Stones) Did not have much to do but was vocal and Southgate may be swayed by his valuable experience. 6Jesse Lingard (on for Loftus-Cheek) Only had 10 minutes to impress but came close to scoring straight away and looked lively again. 6 Dele Alli (on for Henderson) Energetic when he came on, linking up well once again with Lingard and crossing for Welbeck's goal. 7Nick Pope (on for Butland) Is unlikely to feature at all in Russia but given his England debut by Southgate, who has done so well in harvesting team spirit. 6 – Ratings by Martha Kelner– Submit your own ratings at the bottom of the match report Loftus-Cheek must be the best option now if Southgate needs to alter the tempo or unsettle a defence with something more subtle. This is change in itself. In the past a Plan B for England has only ever meant a tall, aggressive man with a square jaw and flailing elbows. This time around B looks to be craft and movement, a footballer who looks to jab and move and tickle you to death rather than launching the footballing equivalent of an RAF stealth bombing raid. On a lovely summer evening there was also evidence of the usual meticulous planning by the FA. Prepare for playing dour Central Americans Panama by taking on dour Central Americans Costa Rica. Prepare for a journey deep into a harsh, hostile, dystopian terrain with a journey deep into Yorkshire. Before kick-off Elland Road was a riot of noise and colour. The atmosphere was subtly different to Wembley, the key point of contrast being that there was one. From the first whistle those angular corrugated stands were a noise funnel of songs and cheers, notwithstanding the parping racket of the dreaded England band. Best of all was the startling noise that greeted Rashford’s opening goal after 12 minutes, a bark of pleasure as the ball was sent dipping under the bar and into the top of the net. The goal was pretty much all Rashford’s work, a wonderfully executed example of the knuckleball-style shot from Cristiano Ronaldo’s Old Trafford playbook. Taking the ball in an inside-right position he had time to plant his standing foot and punt the top of his toe through the bottom of the ball, sending his shot on a strange dipping parabola over Keylor Navas, who could only wave it vaguely into his net like a man watching the last late-night cab disappear round the corner of Wellington Street while absent-mindedly cradling a kebab. Loftus-Cheek had been the supplier with a snappy short pass that will register as an assist. It was Rashford’s fizzed pass inside that gave Dele Alli space to dink a short‑range cross for Danny Welbeck to dive and head in off the post for the second, defying his own best effort to dive and head just past the far post. Welbeck now has 16 goals in 39 England games, only 25 of them starts. Only 15 out-and-out centre-forwards have scored more goals for the national team since England started playing football 147 years ago. Rashford produced plenty of other nice moments, most notably a beautifully impudent, Ronaldinho‑style elastico‑flap, easing the ball one way then twanging it back the other to burn Giancarlo González away in his thrusters. There was something heartening about seeing him play with such freedom so soon after the scolding he received on FA Cup final day. Gareth Southgate has been a significant positive influence. Say what you like about Southgate’s lack of what the great José will always refer to as “titles”. But he does know how to get the best out of Rashford. He was helped by the poverty of the opposition. Costa Rica were muscular and dogged here. That was about it. At the back Kendall Waston moved with all the limber athleticism of the cast‑bronze Don Revie statue outside Elland Road. But England will still move on with a little hope. There is a refreshing energy to the team and plenty of speed across the ground. The challenge, as ever, is to play above rather than below their capacities when the pressure bites. And to provide, as Rashford did here, just a little touch of beauty after those recent tournament scars.