The transfer carousel never stops turning – except for a few minutes yesterday when the whole footballing world paused to laugh at Germany – and it’s about to pick up speed. Because now that Serbia have joined Jogi Löw’s decrepit outfit on the plane out of Russia, the future of Sergej Milinkovic-Savic could be resolved. Juventus hope the midfielder will choose to join them from Lazio – and they plan to fund the purchase by selling Miralem Pjanic to Barcelona, even though the Catalan club have denied being interested in the midfielder. But Juve may be outbid by Manchester United – or even by Arsenal, who are considering breaking their budget to sign Milinkovic-Savic and not just for mischievous purposes, although seeing how the Serb works with Granit Xhaka could be intriguing. Speaking of mischief-making, sources in France are claiming that Manchester United and Paris Saint-Germain are mulling over a sensational swap deal: with Paul Pogba heading to the French capital in return for Marco Verratti. That could be a case of someone putting one and one together and coming up with one steaming pile but hey, the Mill’s just passing it on. If Pogba does move to PSG, he could partner N’Golo Kanté – and you can see how thrilling that that pairing has made France in Russia. Kanté’s representatives have reportedly told PSG that he will not make a decision on his future until finding out for sure who will be managing Chelsea next season. Juventus were also considering doing business with United for Anthony Martial – but are now thinking of holding fire and waiting until next year, when they can pick up the Frenchman for free, as they have just done with Emre Can. But that will entail persuading Martial to spend another 12 months under Jos´e Mourinho, which may be a hard sell. Convincing any half-decent player to leave Milan, on the other hand, probably won’t be difficult following that club’s European ban and that’s good news for United, who have the hots for the gnarled centre back Leonardo Bonucci. Everton are trying to flush out a slew of players. Morgan Schneiderlin is on his way to Marseille. Stoke are sniffing around Ashley Williams, who is expected to be replaced at Goodison Park by Jannik Vestergaard, a Dane currently with Borussia Monchengladbach. Yannick Bolasie could also be on the way out of Everton, with West Ham among the winger’s suitors. Huddersfield, meanwhile, are after a German World Cup winner so, of course, will have to cast their minds back to the country’s 2014 squad, which included Erik Durm. The Borussia Dortmund defender reckons Yorkshire sounds like a happier place than Germany to be right now.