Donald Trump and Kim Jong-un have signed a document together at the end of their talks in Singapore, after the US president hailed the “historic meeting” and the North Korean leader said “the world will see a major change”. Photographs of the document emerged online, showing that Kim committed to “complete denuclearisation of the Korean Peninsula” and Trump to providing “security guarantees” – a pledge secretary of state Mike Pompeo had suggested the US president would make on Monday. The two leaders also promised to “establish new US-DPRK relations” and made a commitment to recover and repatriate the remains of dead prisoners of war. They also pledged to hold “follow-on negotiations”. Trump said the document was historic and comprehensive and Kim said the pair had agreed to “leave the past behind.” Posing for photographs afterwards, Trump said he had learned that Kim was a “very talented man” who loves his country very much. Before the signing, Trump said the Singapore summit had gone “better than anybody could have imagined”. After a morning of meetings and a working lunch, Trump and Kim walked together without aides or translators, to a group of US and North Korean reporters. “We had a really fantastic meeting. A lot of progress,” Trump said. “Really very positive. I think better than anybody could have expected. Top of the line. Really good.” “We are going right now for a signing,” the president said. Asked what they would be signing, he said “We’ll be announcing that in a couple of minutes.” The two leaders walked back to the hotel and Trump appeared to show Kim the inside of the US president’s legendary armoured limousine, known as the “Beast”. They then stopped outside the hotel’s doors and had a short discussion with their aides before moving off with their entourage in different directions. Trump had given consistently upbeat assessments of the summit from the start of the historic meeting, predicting “tremendous success”. Sitting alongside Trump, Kim replied through an interpreter: “It has not been easy to come to this point. For us the past has been holding us back, and old practices and prejudices have been covering our eyes and ears, but we have been able to overcome everything.” Just a few months after both leaders exchanged insults and threatened imminent war, the men went out of their way to be gracious. Trump even declared it an “honour” to be sitting next to the North Korean leader. “I feel really great and we’re going to have a great discussion and, I think, tremendous success, it will be tremendously successful,” Trump said, adding: “It’s my honour and we will have a terrific relationship, I have no doubt.” At the start of the first ever meeting between a sitting US president and a North Korean leader, the two men walked towards each other and grasped each others’ hands and then turned unsmiling towards the cameras. Trump appeared to be speaking to Kim throughout the 12 seconds of their handshake. Kim could be heard replying in English: “I’m very happy to meet you in Singapore” as the US president patted his arm. The handshake took place in front of a row of alternating US and North Korean flags at the Capella Hotel, a former British colonial barracks converted into a luxury hotel on Singapore’s Sentosa island resort. As the two men walked off together through a high-ceilinged colonnade, Kim appeared to relax, flashed a smile and seemed to say something. At the end of the colonnade Kim said to Trump through his translator: “many people will think of this as a form of fantasy ... a science fiction movie.” Many people will think of this as a form of fantasy Then the two sat down on either side of coffee table in the hotel library to begin a one-on-one meeting with translators but no aides or advisors. That meeting lasted 48 minutes and the two men then strolled to a balcony to wave at the waiting press. Asked asked how the meeting was going, Trump said: “Very very good. Excellent relationship.” Trump and Kim then entered an meeting room where their top aides were waiting. They sat down at either side of a table with a five people on each side. Flanking the US president were the White House chief of staff, John Kelly, the secretary of state department, Mike Pompeo, the national security advisor, John Bolton, and a senior state department official who acted as interpreter. Kim was accompanied by the foreign minister, Ri Yong-ho, as well as the former spy chief and vice chair of the ruling party, Kim Yong-chol, and the head of the ruling party’s international relations department, Ri Su-yong. The North Korean leader said: “There will be challenges ahead but we will work with Trump. We overcame all kinds of scepticism and speculations about this summit and I believe that this is good for the peace.” Trump told Kim: “We will be successful. I look forward to working with you. It will be done.” For both men, the high-stakes encounter is the most consequential meeting of their lives, addressing the future of North Korean’s nuclear arsenal and a peace agreement to end the precarious and tense 65 year limbo that has endured since the Korean War. Even before the two leaders had left their separate city centre hotels and driven the 13 minutes through blocked-off police-lined roads to the island summit venue, the US president used Twitter to claim victory and hit back at his critics. “The fact that I am having a meeting is a major loss for the U.S., say the haters & losers,” Trump wrote. “We have our hostages, testing, research and all missle [sic] launches have stoped, and these pundits, who have called me wrong from the beginning, have nothing else they can say! We will be fine!” At dawn, three hours before the summit was due to begin, Trump focused on his domestic audience reminding them of the economic successes of his presidency, with the stock market up and unemployment down. And he made clear that, whatever the role of diplomats and aides in setting up the meeting, it would be the personal exchange between him and Kim that would be decisive. “Meetings between staffs and representatives are going well and quickly ... but in the end, that doesn’t matter,” he said. “We will all know soon whether or not a real deal, unlike those of the past, can happen!” Immediately after the summit, Trump is due to give an interview to Fox New commentator, Sean Hannity, the president’s most fervent supporter in the media. The president is also due to give a press conference. Kim also appeared to be focused on his own domestic audience, albeit it one without a vote. The front page of the Rodong Sinmun, the ruling party newspaper, was covered in pictures of the leader’s late-night stroll through the bright lights of downtown Singapore. It was highly unusual for state media to report on international events so speedily and to display the prosperity of other Asian nations so prominently. The US and North Korean have entered into two major previous agreements over the past 26 years aimed at trading North Korean nuclear weapons for security guarantees and economic incentives. Both those deals, in 1994 and 2005 fell apart amid mutual suspicion, with each side blaming the other for violations. In the absence of a deal, the Pyongyang regime has built up its arsenal. It is now believed to have at least two dozen warheads, including a thermo-nuclear bomb, and is close to building an intercontinental ballistic missile capable of delivering a warhead to the US mainland. Kim declared in the New Year that the regime had completed its mission to build a nuclear deterrent, and since then has suspended nuclear and missile tests. Negotiations to hold a summit began in March, brokered by the South Korean government. .