How abruptly the fun can stop. Rory McIlroy’s US Open buildup had included a series of Long Island golf outings in the company of friends, a reacquaintance with an element of the sport naturally lost when it becomes a professional pursuit. A return to the competitive scene delivered a reminder of its harsh realities. On a brutal opening day at the season’s second major, where stellar names did little to mask their disenchantment, McIlroy stood over an 11-foot putt on the 18th green needing to make it to break 80. The Northern Irishman’s attempt was to slide by, ensuring the matching of his highest single-round score in a major championship. US Open Thursdays have been curiously cruel to McIlroy recently; this 80 follows a 78 in 2017 and a 77 two years ago. Shinnecock’s par of 70 adds further bruising context. The damage this time was done in the early stages. Starting at the 10th, McIlroy found himself six-over after five holes, having produced back-to-back double-bogeys. There was another at the 1st, his 10th, to compound a first half of 42. McIlroy sought to repair some of the damage with birdies at the 5th and 6th but those shots were handed back to the course before his scorecard was signed. It would be unwise to ignore the extenuating circumstances. Blue skies and piercing sunshine barely disguised a menacing course, with the United States Golf Association exacting payback for 12 months ago, when Brooks Koepka triumphed at Erin Hills at an aggregate of 16 under par. Here, whipping winds added to the difficulty levels. “At least some of the pin positions were on the greens” was the cutting assessment of Jason Day after his nine-over 79. Nonetheless McIlroy is too fine a player to be posting numbers such as 80 in golf’s most illustrious tournaments. The 29-year-old looked out of sorts in his demeanour, with the key question whether that was a consequence of his on-course troubles or the cause of them. What changes between the free-flowing, ebullient McIlroy at his best and episodes such as this, the first round of the 118th US Open, remains one of golf’s great mysteries. McIlroy’s playing partners suffered problems of their own. Phil Mickelson’s agonising wait for a US Open win may well stretch to at least 2019 after he slipped to a 77. The left-hander could muster only a single birdie. Jordan Spieth, the third member of this heralded grouping, signed for a 78. He had opened bogey then triple-bogey after air-mailing the green from an adjacent bunker at the 11th. “It was just blah,” Spieth said. “It wasn’t fun; it wasn’t not fun. I’m not happy with my score at all. If I’m upset with anything it is with the decision I made on that bunker shot. I was trying too hard to get the stroke back I lost on the previous hole. All in all I ended up making six there. So I was four over through two and trying to figure out how to shoot four over on the day. “I thought that if I could shoot even [par] on the back and get in at four over I would be very much in the golf tournament. Then I went to six and got it back to five with the birdie on the 5th. Even par from there would have been good. But I caught a couple of tough breaks. I didn’t hit the ball very well either, compared to the rest of the week. I’ve been striking it beautifully. But I got a little off in the wind today.” It is, of course, an ill wind that blows no golfer any good. Ian Poulter’s brilliant renaissance continues apace after his one-under 69. “I feel confident, I feel happy,” he said. “I feel happy off the golf course and it makes that a lot easier on the golf course. “I don’t want to get carried away. This is day one of four extremely tough days and three bad holes on this golf course can take you home pretty quick. So a great start is what it is, but there’s a very long way to go in this tournament.” Justin Rose also made an impressive start, with a one-over 71. He perfectly articulated what was required. “Perseverance, commitment and discipline,” said the Englishman, the 2013 US Open champion at Merion. Spare a thought for the 23-year-old Englishman Scott Gregory, too, who found 92 beside his name at the end of day one. To his immense credit the 2016 Amateur champion accepted media duties. “I’ll forget about this quickly,” Gregory said after 10 bogeys, three doubles and two triples. He may take solace in being far from the only one needing quick deletion of a gruesome memory.