Main host: Gary Lineker The former England forward is very much the Galaxy Caramel of broadcasting – smooth and satisfying, if not a bit rich for some people’s taste – and he’s been in typically fine form at this World Cup, with an early dig at Alan Shearer’s likeness to Gianni Infantino setting the tone for Lineker’s relaxed and cheeky approach to hosting. Rating: 8½/10 Secondary host: Mark Chapman The hope pre-tournament was that Chapman would be sporting a full-on beard in Russia. It suits him and facial hair on a man is always a good thing. Sadly that’s not proved to be the case but ‘Chappers’ has still very much brought his A-game to proceedings; a consistently engaging and masterful presence on the BBC’s live and highlights coverage. Britain’s best broadcaster. Rating: 9/10 Main pundit: Alan Shearer An ultra-assured veteran of these occasions who has come armed not only with firm opinions but also anecdotes, as seen with his telling, ahead of Spain versus Portugal, of the Peruvian family who had saved for two years in order to watch their nation perform at this World Cup. Bravo Big Al, bravo. Rating: 8/10 Main pundit: Jermaine Jenas It’s been the usual mix of hard opinions and thoughtful analysis from the 35-year-old, who has also delivered the put-down of the tournament so far: arguing with Phil Neville over the merits of Uruguay’s Rodrigo Bentancur, Jenas snapped back with “no need to tell me how to play centre-midfield, Phil”. Brutal. Rating: 8/10 Main pundit (Neville): Phil Neville I want to like Neville but he makes it difficult. First there’s the ear-piercing loud voice, then the curious opinions (like saying no team had impressed him two days after Spain and Portugal’s sensational tussle) and, to top it all off, the propensity to whisper while on commentary duties. Is Phil in witness protection? Who knows, but, whatever the case, it’s unsettling. Rating: 5½/10 Main pundit (other): Rio Ferdinand An increasingly assured and strident presence whose only false step has been the weird voice he put on while praising Jesse Lingard during England’s 6-1 victory over Panama. Otherwise, sound. Rating: 7½/10 Main pundit (other): Frank Lampard One of the most articulate and thoughtful voices on the punditry circuit and brings calms to what occasionally can become an over-heated studio, particularly when England are playing. Rating: 8/10 Main pundit (other): Matthew Upson The former West Ham defender is having an impressive tournament on the back of nailing the basics – knowing his stuff and expressing it well. He also often looks startled, which is endearing. Rating: 7/10 Main pundit (other): Danny Murphy Putting a shift in and generally doing it well, although the former England midfielder could do with cheering up a bit and not talking so much when on co-commentary duties. Less is more Danny. Rating: 6/10 International voice: Cesc Fàbregas The 31-year-old’s decision to dress like a pilot for Spain versus Portugal was a bold one but having backed it up with sharp, clear analysis he flew and has continued to do so. Rating: 8/10 International voice: Didier Drogba The former Chelsea forward has improved after a pretty terrible start, needing as he was to be rescued by his fellow pundits during Australia versus France, but he remains a largely limited, ineffectual voice. Rating: 5½/10 International voice: Pablo Zabaleta A relative late comer to proceedings but, unlike his national team, the Argentinian hit the ground running and performed consistently well up until his recent departure. Such was the 33-year-old’s assured manner that he even turned getting Drogba and Neville to drink Mate, a popular South American drink, into a lovely, amusing moment. Rating: 8/10 Female voice: Alex Scott Research done, statistics gathered and analysis delivered with assurance and a smile as broad as Red Square, the former England international has proven to be a strong addition to Team BBC. Rating: 7/10 Main commentator: Guy Mowbray It’s a big responsibility being the voice of the BBC’s England’s coverage and Mowbray is very much the man to pull it off, bringing as he does a growling swagger to proceedings. Mowbray’s also good for a nice line, as seen at half-time of England’s 6-1 victory over Panama: “One, two, three, four, five, what a time to be alive.” Rating: 8/10 Secondary commentator: Steve Wilson The Blur to Mowbray’s Oasis: less epic but still very good. Wilson has been on hand to perfectly capture two standout fixtures – Spain versus Portugal and Argentina versus Croatia – and has arguably delivered the line of the tournament so far as 10-man Colombia chased an equaliser against Japan: “If necessity is the mother of invention we should see plenty of that from Colombia.” Rating: 8/10 Co-commentator: Martin Keown As ever with Keown, you come for the breathless analysis and stay for the made-up nicknames. He was at it right from the off in Russia, calling Diego Godin the “professor of defending” during Uruguay’s 1-0 victory over Egypt on day two of the tournament. Truly, a one-off. Rating: 6/10 Co-commentator: Mark Lawrenson Going into this World Cup I found myself curiously excited by the prospect of ‘Lawro’s’ dripping sarcasm and withering put-downs and, boy, there’s been plenty to be excited by. The former Liverpool defender was in particularly fine form during Australia versus France, with “dislocated shoelace” a phrase that will live with me forever. His outrage over VAR during Iran versus Portugal was also glorious. Rating: 7/10 Total: 125/170 Main host: Mark Pougatch ITV stuck Pougatch on a roof at Euro 2016; for this World Cup they’ve stuck him in a garish, green-screen mess of a studio and, as such, you have to wonder: are they testing the poor bugger? If so the 50-year-old deserves credit for continuing to helm proceedings with consistent excellence. Rating: 8/10 Secondary host: Jacqui Oatley The hardest working person in punditry showbiz, combining live and highlights hosting with at-venue duties, and always with ultra-professionalism. Oatley has received criticism for her handling of ‘Evragate’ and arguably should have come down firmer on the former Manchester United defender when he twice patronoised Eni Aluko during Costa Rica versus Serbia. Rating: 7½/10 Main pundit: Slaven Bilic Another tournament and another stunning display from the former Croatia defender. Nobody else combines gripping enthusiasm with bang-on analysis quite like Bilic, with the 49-year-old also on hand to deliver killer lines, none better than “to be fair, I don’t care” during a VAR-related debate post-Brazil versus Switzerland. His calming down of Martin O’Neill during Russia versus Uruguay was also great. A punditry superstar. Rating: 9½/10 Main pundit: Roy Keane Some say Keane is knowingly playing up to his persona of bitter, angry Irishman. I don’t buy that - what we have here is a bona fide grump bordering on full-on psychopath, encapsulated by his take on Carlos Queiroz’s time at Manchester United ahead of Spain versus Iran: “I should have ripped his head off ... excellent coach, though”. Terrifying and mesmerising in equal measure. Rating: 7/10 Main pundit (Neville): Gary Neville ITV’s big punditry coup has largely paid off with the former England assistant coach successfully bringing his mix of crisp analysis and amusing bluntness to the terrestrial stage. Saying that, there is a sense of opportunity wasted watching Neville do his thing without touchscreen and Jamie Carragher in tow. Imagine Batman without Alfred and Robin – it’s just not the same. Rating: 7½/10 Main pundit (other): Lee Dixon An experienced voice who has performed with assurance in the studio and on co-comms duties. I particularly enjoyed him claiming Roy Keane never liked any of his team-mates while knowing full well the former midfielder was sat next to Gary Neville in the ITV studio during Germany versus Sweden. Rating: 8/10 Main pundit (other): Ryan Giggs The Welshman knows what he’s talking about but sadly has the delivery of a tranquilliser gun, seen by his telling of a horrifically boring anecdote during Iran versus Morocco. I wish I could remember what it was about but I fell asleep halfway through. Rating: 5½/10 Main pundit (other): Ian Wright Loud shirts and jokes about men going to the woods - ‘Wrighty’ has been in full-on ‘Wrighty’ mode during this World Cup. The analysis is decent enough and we may get a full-on strop when England go out, which could be fun. Rating: 6½/10 Main pundit (other): Mark Clattenburg A useful and informed voice in a tournament dominated by discussions over VAR. The former referee is also far more Geordie than I thought, which has come as a pleasant surprise. Rating: 7/10 International voice: Patrice Evra Great players don’t always make great pundits and sometimes great players make truly terrible pundits, as has been the case with Evra. From his jaw-dropping patronising of Eni Aluko to the slouching posture and lazy delivery that suggests he thinks he’s doing us a favour, the Frenchman stunk out Russia. Rating: 1½/10 International voice: Henrik Larsson A voice so rich and comforting it could end wars, and with it has come some decent analysis. But overall the former Sweden striker has been nothing more than fine. Rating: 6½/10 International voice: Martin O’Neill Arrived late and arrived hard. The Republic of Ireland manager has been his usual mix of frantic, heart-on-sleeve emotions and off-the-fence analysis. A very good addition to Team ITV. Rating: 8/10 Female voice: Eni Aluko The former Chelsea forward has been excellent – consistently informed, opinionated and articulate. She also displayed the appropriate level of grace and simmering fury during Evra’s show of hand-clapping arrogance. Rating: 8/10 Main commentator: Clive Tyldesley Like Mowbray, Tyldesley brings a swaggering assurance to major tournaments. But the 63-year-old is also capable of some right clangers, as seen with a reference to Joseph Stalin after eight minutes – eight minutes – of the opening game. Oh, Clive. Rating: 7½/10 Secondary commentator: Jon Champion The veteran broadcaster has emerged from Tyldesley’s shadow to be the voice of ITV’s summer of football, with the double-act he has formed with Ally McCoist a genuine delight. Champion has been Champion in Russia and, all being equal, would be a genuine contender for the final. Rating: 8/10 Co-commentator: Glenn Hoddle I really like Hoddle. I know that goes against public opinion but I’ve always found him to be good for the type of tactical analysis you simply don’t get elsewhere. Yes he can go on a bit, but I’ll take that all day long if it means getting a better understanding of Costa Rica’s 3-4-2-1 formation. Rating: 7/10 Co-commentator: Ally McCoist Scotland are at the World Cup, after all, and they’re having a very good tournament. The former Rangers striker has brought not only jolliness to ITV’s commentary box but also some beautifully random history lessons, as seen by his telling of Ivan the Terrible’s storming of Kazan in 1552 during Poland versus Colombia. As mentioned, he’s also formed a cracking partnership with Champion. Rating: 8/10 Total: 121/170