Raheem Sterling might not have played here and would have accepted missing out. Gareth Southgate’s original intention had been to leave the forward out for the friendly against Nigeria as punishment for a tardy arrival at the national squad’s training camp last month. Yet, in the context of the player coming “under fire from every other direction” over the last week, the manager recognised this was the time to stand by his man. The protective shield flung down around one of their own is starting to feel like an indication of England’s strength. The player who has been attracting all the scrutiny, from tattoos to timekeeping, fronted up on and off the pitch at Wembley. Southgate had barely finished his media duties in the main conference room when Sterling took to the microphone for ITV Sport and addressed a turbulent week. The manager had made known his displeasure at the forward arriving 12 hours late following a mix-up over a return flight from Jamaica. “He’s honest,” said the player. “He tells you his exact mind. If I’d been left out, I wouldn’t have had any complaints. I had to meet up at 11 o’clock. The flight got delayed and I was a bit late in the morning. I completely understand where he’s coming from. I have to go out there and show him exactly what I’m capable of doing.” Then there was the ink on his right calf, a tattoo depicting a gun which the Manchester City player felt moved to indicate was unfinished and had a deeper meaning as his father had been killed by a gun. “People will see stuff in the wrong way,” he said. “I’m just looking to get over it and concentrate on football. To come here, express my talent and try and win football matches for this country. It’s a distraction you don’t need, but it’s one of those I’ve learned to deal with now and block out.” His coach and team-mates could draw proper encouragement from so much of his 73-minute display, a performance crammed with quick-footed interchanges with Southgate’s progressive No 8s or the overlapping wing-backs. Plenty he offered had been excellent but, given the build-up, perhaps it was inevitable that it retained some roughness round the edges. In his mind, the script would not have seen him booked for a second-half dive, or squirting shots from his clearest sights first wide and then high. “I should have scored,” he admitted. “But that’s how it goes.” In truth, it has been going that way for a while on this stage. Sterling’s last international goal was a tap in from a Jamie Vardy centre against Estonia back in October 2015. There have been 20 scoreless caps since that Euro 2016 qualifier and that drought, more than any tattoo or reprimand for tardiness, will trouble him most of all. The hope is the script will be far kinder in Russia. Southgate recognises the need to harness his talent, to retain his focus and ensure all the expectation of a player who had been so integral to City’s successes last season showcases that form in the tournament. The caution seven minutes after the break was unwelcome but justified for a buckle of the knees and eager tumble over Francis Uzoho after Sterling had touched the ball around Nigeria’s goalkeeper. It was a flashpoint, more reflecting exasperation at England’s sloppy start to the second half than anything more sinister, even if every blip in these pre-tournament friendlies must serve as an education for more competitive occasions ahead. “It looked a very tight call from where I was sitting because he was travelling at such speed,” said Southgate. “But this wasn’t about getting a response from Raheem. “With the form he’s in and the way he’s trained, I knew he’d play well. I had a decision to make whether to play him after turning up late but, actually, that wasn’t a decision after he started to come under fire from every other direction [over the tattoo]. The late arrival was 10 days ago, so how long do we go on with something? You’ve always got to balance what the message is to the rest of the group, and what’s most important at that moment in time. The situation was one we didn’t want to happen. We don’t want to see that happen again. But that was the best way to deal with it, in my opinion. “The most important thing I do in the next six weeks is protect the players. They respect each other and understand how important it is they support and protect each other. I got the level I expected from Raheem.” He had quickly identified William Troost-Ekong as vulnerable and concentrated his sprints in the space occupied by the Bursaspor centre-half. This was a player escaping with the ball at his feet, and a performance offering flashes of his quality: the sharp spin off a befuddled Troost-Ekong, only to clip his shot over the advancing Uzoho and wide of the far post; an attempt battered marginally over the crossbar; and a calmly slid pass for Harry Kane to score the hosts’ second. The hope is his personal rewards will come in Russia.