Donald Trump told Republicans he was “1000%” behind their immigration reform effort but did not offer a clear path forward as his administration faces extraordinary, bipartisan condemnation for its practice of separating children from their parents at the border. At a close-door meeting with House Republicans on Capitol Hill, Trump expressed concern for the families being separated by the “zero-tolerance” policy, members said, but he did not take responsibility for the practice. Instead the president urged the Republicans in the room to pass legislation that keeps families together. “The president does want this to end,” the congressman Carlos Curbelo, a centrist Republican from Florida who has led the charge for immigration reform, said after the meeting. Curbelo said Trump told members his daughter, Ivanka, had appealed to him to stop separating families at the border. But he was disappointed that Trump demanded Congress act to resolve the problem and did not acknowledge that he could stop the separations without legislation. In April 2018, the US attorney general, Jeff Sessions, announced a “zero tolerance” policy under which anyone who crossed the border without legal status would be prosecuted by the justice department. This includes some, but not all, asylum seekers. Because children can’t be held in adult detention facilities, they are being separated from their parents. Immigrant advocacy groups, however, say hundreds of families have been separated since at least July 2017. More than 200 child welfare groups, including the American Academy of Pediatrics and the United Nations, said they opposed the practice. They are supposed to enter the system for processing “unaccompanied alien children”, which exists primarily to serve children who voluntarily arrive at the border on their own. Unaccompanied alien children are placed in health department custody within 72 hours of being apprehended by border agents. They then wait in shelters for weeks or months at a time as the government searches for parents, relatives or family friends to place them with in the US. This already overstretched system has been thrown into chaos by the new influx of children. Immigration advocacy groups and attorneys have warned that there is not a clear system in place to reunite families. In one case, attorneys in Texas said they had been given a phone number to help parents locate their children, but it ended up being the number for an immigration enforcement tip line. Advocates for children have said they do not know how to find parents, who are more likely to have important information about why the family is fleeing its home country. And if, for instance, a parent is deported, there is no clear way for them to ensure their child is deported with them. When an influx of families and unaccompanied children fleeing Central America arrived at the border in 2014, Barack Obama’s administration detained families. This was harshly criticized and a federal court in 2015 stopped the government from holding families for months without explanation. Instead, they were released while they waited for their immigration cases to be heard in court. Not everyone shows up for those court dates, leading the Trump administration to condemn what it calls a “catch and release” program. By Amanda Holpuch Read more  Unbowed by mounting public anger from lawmakers, religious leaders, human rights advocates and business executives, Trump and his administration have defended the policy, which has led to the separation of more than 2,300 children from their parents in five weeks. That anger was captured by a protester, who shouted at Trump as he walked through the Capitol before the meeting on Tuesday evening. “Mr President, fuck you,” she yelled across the marbled rotunda. As Trump left the meeting, he faced a rare protest by Democratic members of Congress who shouted at the president to abandon his controversial immigration policy while waving signs that read: “Families Belong together”. “Mr President, don’t you have kids? Don’t you have kids Mr President?” The congressman Juan Vargas yelled as Trump as he left the meeting room with Kirstjen Nielsen, the homeland security. “How would you like it if they separated your kids?” Trump told reporters as he left: “We had a great meeting. These are laws that have been broken for many years – decades. But we had a great meeting.” House Republicans – barreling toward a vote on a pair of immigration bills – were hoping the president would rally skeptical members of the caucus around a proposal that sought common ground between moderates and conservatives on an issue that has fiercely divided the party. But instead Trump said he would sign either proposal that came to his desk, members said. “He said we need to pass one of the two bills,” the congressman Kevin Yoder, a Republican of Kansas, said after the meeting. He added the president was “agnostic” about which of the two measures they should pass. During his remarks, which were expected to focus on immigration, Trump spoke about his recent visit to North Korea and his trade policy, members said. He also openly mocked the Republican congressman Mark Sanford, a conservative critic of the president who lost his primary this month after Trump endorsed his opponent, they said. The meeting on Capitol Hill came at a delicate moment for Republicans, as several lawmakers in both chambers rushed to defuse the spiraling political crisis sparked by the Trump administration’s immigration crackdown. Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, said that “all of the members of the Republican conference support a plan that keeps families together” and endorsed a narrow plan that would allow law enforcement to detain parents and children together while their immigration case is adjudicated in court. But Democrats immediately rebuffed the plan, saying that Trump could easily use his executive authority to end family separations. “There is no need for legislation,” the democratic leader, Chuck Schumer told reporters on Tuesday. “ There’s no need for anything else. You can do it. Mr President. You started it, you can stop it – plain and simple.” Under the administration’s new enforcement policy, all adults are arrested for crossing the border illegally. As children cannot be held in an adult jail, they are held separately. House Republicans have also included a provision to end family separations in their compromise immigration proposal that would also provide billions of dollars for Trump’s border wall and his other hardline security demands. The bill is set for a vote this week in the House, alongside a more conservative plan. The fate of the bills remain uncertain, and Republicans left the meeting unsure of whether Trump had done anything to advance their cause. “Here’s what I’m absolutely – 1000% – sure of,” said the congressman Mario Díaz-Balart, a Republican of Florida, said of Trump’s endorsement: “without his support, without his approvals there’s no shot of it passing the House, there’s no shot of it going anywhere.”