It’s hard not to heave a weary sigh as Lily Allen’s fourth album gets under way. From the title down, No Shame has been trumpeted as a ballsy return to form following 2014’s Sheezus – and yet the opening track, Come on Then, sounds remarkably like something off that album. A relative of Wind Your Neck In or URL Badman without the latter’s acerbic wit, it’s a prickly, defensive whinge about “the socials”, their cyclical relationship with the tattle mags and tabloids and Allen’s depiction therein. Of course, Allen has plenty to feel prickly about – growing up in public, she’s been given the kind of hard time that Twitter’s grimmer corners and sidebar-of-shame authors seem to reserve exclusively for young women who make their voices heard. Nevertheless, as she demands to know why what’s written about her is “so far from the truth”, it’s hard to assuage the feeling that you’ve heard this all before, and not just from her. Modern pop is already waist-deep in songs bemoaning haters, deceitful journalists and the disparity between public perception and reality. It’s the equivalent of 70s rock stars complaining that life on the road was lonely and tedious: a complaint about a downside of stardom that’s been repeated to the point of cliche. A groan of “here we go again” is no way to start any album, especially one heralded as a big comeback. Yet the rest of No Shame is not like its opening track at all. At its centre are a suite of songs depicting in unsparing detail the collapse of Allen’s marriage, and the emotional tone shifts continually: from self-loathing to blame-laying, from denial to melancholy, nostalgia and regret. It never otherwise deals in prickly defensiveness; Family Man and What You Waiting For are not songs from which the author emerges covered in glory. It all feels very realistic. You listen to Allen accusing and admitting, contradicting and doubling back on herself, filled with second thoughts, and think: yeah, that’s probably exactly what divorce is like. It would be a hard listen were it not for the fact that the music is so great: tropical house shot in soft-focus and slow-motion, orchestrated 70s singer-songwriter ballads, every melody and chorus finished to a uniformly high standard. It’s the negative image of Coldplay’s similarly themed Ghost Stories, an album that moped around in its dressing gown, too listless and depressed to come up with a memorable tune. Elsewhere, her confidence shows up in other ways. Scattering your album with guest spots from UK rappers – Giggs, Meridian Dan, Lady Chann – could look like a desperate lunge for contemporaneity, but it never does. Allen’s early work bore the sonic hallmarks of an artist who’d spent their life with “one foot in the rave”, as she puts it on Trigger Bang, immersed in London’s urban music past and present: it takes an innate understanding of reggae, ska, calypso and hip-hop to blend them so successfully into the pop confection of 2006’s Alright, Still. Similarly, on No Shame, she seems to know exactly what to do with her guest stars: their appearances feel integral, never grafted on; the moment Lady Chann and Allen start singing together on Waste is pure joy. On Three, meanwhile, she’s confident enough to even try a gushy paean to her kids, something all rock and pop artists should be contractually obliged not to do – if Stevie Wonder at the zenith of his powers couldn’t get the baby snaps out without making you want to die of embarrassment, you’ve got no chance. So it proves. Writing a song from the point of view of a toddler proves impossible to do without sounding cutesy; the piano ballad accompaniment is the least interesting on the album. Pushing Up Daisies meanwhile, hymns a new relationship with til-death-us-do-part fealty. The lyrical update of When I’m 64 is very witty – will you still need me, it ponders, “when we’re just a strain on the NHS … when I’m a Daily Mail-reading know-what’s-best” – but feels weird after seven tracks that depict a marriage falling apart in unforgiving depth. It’s as if Ingmar Bergman’s punishing Scenes from a Marriage had ended with the cast putting paper hats on and doing the conga. So, No Shame is a slightly odd album, where the horror of divorce is laid bare next to cheery pledges of everlasting love, where stuff wrapped in cliche coexists with songs that are painfully honest and revealing. Still, as Allen would doubtless point out, she never claimed to be perfect. What she is, No Shame strongly suggests, is ready and able to tough it out.