Former fans of Morrissey are to stage an anti-racism party to coincide with the singer’s forthcoming gig in Manchester, in protest against his support of the far-right leader Tommy Robinson. Earlier this month, the former Smiths frontman criticised the “shocking treatment” of the English Defence League leader, who was jailed for 13 months for being found in contempt of court. Morrissey also repeated his support for the rightwing party For Britain, set up by the ex-Ukip candidate Anne Marie Waters. The Manchester-born musician is set to perform at Manchester’s Castlefield Bowl on 7 and 8 July. The “One Nation Under A Groove” protest party will be held at the nearby Revolution bar in the city’s Deansgate Locks from 3pm until midnight on 8 July. Entry is free and organisers said Morrissey fans were welcome to attend before or after the singer’s concert. Dave Haslam, who DJed at the city’s Hacienda nightclub, said he had organised the event “in response to Morrissey’s divisive views, and his support for the far right”. “Manchester is our home. It’s a city built on immigration, a city with an amazing legacy of great bands and wonderful clubs,” said Haslam. “Music brings people together. Strangers become brothers, sisters. All this positivity spreads into the city and beyond.” In April, Morrissey added to a long list of controversial comments when he claimed that “halal slaughter requires certification that can only be given by supporters of Isis”. The singer, who once referred to Chinese people as a “sub-species” and said that British identity was under threat from immigration, denied accusations of racism. “As far as racism goes, the modern loony left seem to forget that Hitler was leftwing,” he said. On Monday, the former Smiths guitarist Johnny Marr told Channel 4 News that he felt no loyalty to his former bandmate. “I don’t feel the need to stick by anyone unless I agree with what they’re saying,” he said. “Of course I disagree with what he’s saying. I don’t think that’s really a surprise that I would disagree with what Morrissey’s saying. I think everyone would expect that I disagree.” Announcing the protest party in Manchester, Haslam said in a statement: “Morrissey hasn’t lived in the city for 30 years – he lives abroad in tax exile – and has now joined the ranks of various rightwing politicians, tax exiles, tabloids, and media hate-slingers seeking to divide our community. “There are counter-arguments. There are many of them. But for now, I’ve decided to counter the hate by throwing a free party, a celebratory all-dayer of beautifully diverse soul-filled, hope-filled music.” Party-goers were told to expect “solidarity, love, unity, positivity, reggae, funk, soul and disco”, and music played by more than a dozen of the city’s most prominent DJs. While admission is free, donations will be collected for the charity Love Music Hate Racism. “It might not be coincidence that the venue is just a few hundred yards from where Morrissey is playing,” said Haslam. “Morrissey fans on their way to or back from his concert are more than welcome.”