Until now, England’s footballers had not given the overall impression they were drastically alarmed about the possibility of racism marring the World Cup. Ashley Young was asked last week if his family would accompany him to Russia and made it clear that, this being his first World Cup, of course they would be there. Danny Welbeck was asked the same question and pointed out that when Arsenal had played a Europa League tie against CSKA Moscow in April it had passed off without any issues. But then came Danny Rose’s response and the realisation that, inside the England camp, there was at least one player who had already decided he could not risk his family being in Russia and asked them to stay away. That, plainly, was not an easy conversation for the England and Tottenham Hotspur left-back when his father, Nigel, regularly travels from home in Doncaster to watch him play in London, sometimes not getting back from night games until 3am and being up for work at 7am. Rose could hear his father’s voice crack when he asked him to stay at home but he also remains convinced it is the correct decision. “I’m not worried for myself. But I’ve told my family I don’t want them going out there because of racism and anything else that may happen,” Rose said. “I don’t want to be worrying, when I’m trying to prepare for games, for my family’s safety. “My dad’s really upset. I could hear it in his voice. He said he may never get a chance again to come and watch me in a World Cup. That was emotional, hearing that. It’s really sad. It’s just how it is. Somehow Russia got the World Cup and we have to get on with it.” It is the first time an England footballer has taken such drastic action before a major tournament and Rose’s decision-making has clearly been influenced by his memories of England’s under-21 game in Serbia in October 2012. On that occasion he was subjected to monkey chants and pelted with stones before being sent off for kicking the ball into the stand, his second bookable offence. Nigel described it as like “a bad dream”. In which case it is easy to comprehend why, almost six years later, Rose says he has “no faith in the justice system”, why he feels “numb” about the prospect of something similar happening again and why Fifa’s latest fine – £22,000 for the Russian Football Federation for racist chanting in a friendly against France – is “disgusting” and “laughable”. With that in mind Southgate invited Rose to stand up in front of the other England players one night last week and talk about his views on racism in the sport. The meeting was called to discuss the possibility of racial abuse in Russia – and what, specifically, to do in that situation – but not even Southgate knew at that stage that Rose had, as a one-off, asked his family to stay at home. “For the benefit of the other players I asked him to share his experiences,” Southgate said. “What was clear was that he felt let down by the authorities and that was sad to hear. He’s part of our team and part of our family. We intend to support our players as well as we possibly can, so it’s very sad. None of us know what is going to happen in Russia but, sadly, he thinks there’s the possibility of something happening that he wouldn’t want his family to experience.” As he often does, Southgate spoke very eloquently on the subject, talking of the need for better education in the countries that have the worst problems but also recognising there were no easy answers and expressing his pride that he would be taking “one of the most diverse squads to have left England” into a World Cup. “A lot of the players have children and our kids don’t think anything of who they talk to – people of all race, colour and religion,” Southgate, preparing for England’s final warm-up game against Costa Rica, said. “They are born into this world with no prejudice at all. It’s only when they put their beliefs on to them that their opinions can change. We’re victims in this world of prejudice, thinking that comes from others, and that’s very sad. “The landscape has changed enormously in the 25 to 30 years I’ve been involved in the game. It’s not perfect but huge strides have been made. We can make some differences in football but we can’t affect everything because the problems are societal and football is a reflection of society.” Would he encourage his players to walk off the pitch in Russia if they heard racial abuse? “In an idealistic world people would say to do that, but the realities of that are we would be thrown out of the tournament. “Some people would say: ‘Well, you should still do that.’ But I don’t think the players would want that because they have worked all their lives to get to a World Cup. The idea is they want to raise and confront the issues, but they also want to play in the tournament. “It’s a really difficult and delicate balance for us to get right and it’s impossible for me to say the things that would please everybody. But I think everybody knows how strongly I feel about the subject. The players are clear on where I stand and the support they have from me.”