Donald Trump’s kingmaking role in the Republican Party has been reinforced by the results of primary elections on Tuesday. Mark Sanford, an arch conservative critic of Trump, lost his bid for re-election in his coastal South Carolina district after the President attacked him on Twitter while Corey Stewart, an ardent Trump supporter who campaigned to protect Confederate monuments and praised a white nationalist, won the Republican Senate primary in Virginia. Sanford, a three term incumbent and former South Carolina governor, was defeated to Trump weighed in against him. Although Sanford is a member of the House Freedom Caucus and ideological conservative, he has long been critical of Trump on issues like tariffs and civil liberties. His opponent, state representative Katie Arrington, had attacked Sanford for being insufficiently loyal to the White House. Trump attacked Sanford on Twitter at 4:12PM, less than three hours before polls closed. He said “Mark Sanford has been very unhelpful to me in my campaign to MAGA. He is MIA and nothing but trouble. He is better off in Argentina. I fully endorse Katie Arrington for Congress in SC, a state I love. She is tough on crime and will continue our fight to lower taxes. VOTE Katie!” Sanford, who had previously served as governor of South Carolina, made headlines became a national figure in 2009 when he visited Argentina to pursue an extramarital affair with Maria Belen Chapur, a woman he described as his “soul mate.” Sanford told his staff that he was hiking the Appalachian Trail. The other key Republican contest of the night featured Stewart, the chair of the Prince William County board of supervisors, edging out Nick Freitas on Tuesday night to win the U.S. senate nomination n the swing state where Hillary Clinton eked out a victory in 2016. He will face the incumbent, Tim Kaine, who was Clinton’s vice-presidential nominee, in November. Stewart, a conservative firebrand, has taken a host of controversial positions, including birtherism, and was fired from a volunteer position by the Donald Trump presidential campaign in 2016 for protesting the national Republican party after the release of the Access Hollywood tapes. Stewart again received national attention in 2017 when he almost upset the establishment favorite Ed Gillespie for the Republican gubernatorial nomination in Virginia. He based his insurgent campaign on his support for Confederate monuments and labeled his opponent “a cuckservative”. Gillespie lost to Democrat Ralph Northam in the general election. In a statement, Kaine described Stewart as “a cruder imitation of Donald Trump who stokes white supremacy and brags about being ‘ruthless and vicious’.” The National Republican Senatorial Committee declined to comment on Stewart’s win. In addition to Stewart’s win, the night also posed other challenges for Virginia Republicans. In the state’s 10th congressional district, a suburban district that Clinton won by 10 points, the Democratic favorite Jennifer Wexton won her primary easily. In contrast, incumbent Barbara Comstock had to fend off Shak Hill, a Trumpist candidate who was endorsed by the former administration official Sebastian Gorka. In another key race, the former CIA officer Abigail Spanberger won the Democratic nomination to face Dave Brat, a Tea Party insurgent who famously beat the House majority leader Eric Cantor in 2014. The suburban Richmond district is considered a potential Democratic pickup in 2018. In South Carolina’s gubernatorial primary, Henry McMaster, the unelected incumbent seemed well prepared for a runoff. McMaster, who was the first statewide elected official to endorse Trump in 2015 when he was state’s lieutenant governor, received 45% of the vote. The margin was not enough to avoid a runoff in the Palmetto State but McMaster finished far ahead of his Republican challengers.