There may be a couple of imposters in this Test series who go by the names of Shadab Khan and Dominic Bess. They have broken into their respective teams purporting to be spin bowlers but, fiendishly, they appear to have designs on being proper batsmen. It is a path well-trodden, of course, with two modern examples in Steve Smith of Australia and England’s Kevin Pietersen. The former transformed from jokey leg‑spinner to the world’s No 1 batsman – albeit banned at present – while the latter began life sending down off-breaks in South Africa before realising his talents lay elsewhere. Could Shadab and Bess follow suit one day? These are early days in their careers, of course, but there is already some evidence to suggest they possess the requisite talent, technique and temperament to push for promotions down the line. Take Shadab in Malahide, London and Leeds. The wrist-spinner is only 19 years old and four caps into his career, but is already trusted at No 7. Ice-cool half-centuries in three successive Tests have come against Ireland and England, the most recent of which, a 52-ball 56 on Friday, saved Pakistan’s first innings from total ruin. Though a counterattacking cameo that pierced attacking fields and contained 10 fours, the right-hander’s previous scores of 52 and 55 were compiled over 85 and 105 balls respectively. Factor in the foreign conditions and it is little wonder Pakistan’s head coach, Mickey Arthur, says “he is certainly going to be a superstar in future”. Bess, who unlike his counterpart is still waiting for his maiden Test wicket, appears cut from similar cloth with the bat. We knew this confident 20-year-old could play before his debut at Lord’s but nevertheless the 57 that followed in the second innings, when all hope was lost, was one of the few highlights in an otherwise lamentable team performance. In Leeds he earned a spot in the middle order, coming in at No 4 on the first evening as nightwatchman after Alastair Cook’s late demise and earning hearty backslaps from his captain, Joe Root, when the pair walked off at the close of play. Mission accomplished? Not so for Bess, who at times was barely distinguishable from his senior partner once the rain relented and indeed went further than him – and Dawid Malan – as his impish 49 helped push England into the lead through some fine, correct cricket shots and wing‑heeled running between the wickets. “It’s nice to see because 18 months ago his batting wasn’t at the level it is now, so that shows the work he has put in which is great,” said Graham Thorpe, the former middle‑order stalwart who now works as England’s lead batting coach. “It’s nice to see him and Sam Curran come in – and even Keaton Jennings coming back – feeling so settled in the dressing room, too. That’s credit to the senior players. Your environment can be questioned but that’s because of the performances we’ve had.” Bess certainly settled in here, with Mohammad Amir stared down and driven through extra cover (twice) like an old pro, while Hasan Ali and Faheem Ashraf were left distinctly unimpressed by a series of crunching shots square of the wicket that delighted the oiled-up array of nuns, butchers and sandpaper‑brandishing Australians in the old Western Terrace. When Bess sauntered down the pitch to Mohammad Abbas to whip a ball through leg for three, you half-wondered whether it would be followed by a post-play press conference declaring how hard it is being him in this England dressing room. But just as thoughts turned to a second Test half-century, a ball reared from a good length, took the shoulder of the bat and was held comfortably at slip. His executioner? Shadab, who, it appears, is not ready to give up the day job just yet.