The Week in Patriarchy is a weekly roundup of what’s happening in the world of feminism and sexism. If you’re not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. This has been a sad, terrible week – one that reminds us that despite outward appearances, you really never know what kind of pain or struggles people are dealing with internally. We lost Kate Spade and Anthony Bourdain, two cultural iconoclasts – and lost them in the most tragic way possible. I don’t know anyone whose lives haven’t been touched by suicide, and the problem in America is only growing – since 1999, the rate went up 25%. The best thing we can do for each other is be there, to sit with each other, and to reach out if we suspect someone is struggling. Just being present for someone does more than you’d think. The actor and writer Rob Delaney, who has written frankly about his own suicidal episodes, tweeted yesterday that therapists refer to suicide as a permanent solution to a temporary problem. And I think that’s what we need to relay as well – that those kinds of feelings are temporary, that you can feel better. If you need help, please reach out to someone. An Iowa judge has temporarily blocked the state’s extreme anti-abortion law, ruling that it was unconstitutional. It’s not over by a long-shot – anti-choice advocates want to take this one to the supreme court – but I’ll take my good news where I can get it. Underneath his “I don’t give a fuck” punk persona, he was clearly someone who deeply gave a fuck. And who felt a moral urgency to tell stories of people with less power, to teach us the histories of war & oppression, and to persuade us that we are all more similar than different. This afternoon, I received text alerts from my kids' school that they were on lockdown. I thought you might like to know what happens, from the perspective of my 12yo. I just picked her up from school and she was rattled and full of adrenalin. Bourdain was one of the men out there doing work of reexamination & personal reflection & of truly listening to women, perhaps spurred by, but not limited to, Asia Argento. In addition to loving his writing & his show, I deeply appreciated this effort. https://t.co/PjsBKTtco5 In other NFL news, don't miss that two women just resigned from the NFLPA commission on domestic violence because the group "exists in name only" https://t.co/hoTqx6Tb8n Anthony Bourdain’s incredible New Yorker piece that led to his breakout book, Sady Doyle on the incel movement, and Adam Serwer on why we need to “just say it’s racist”. The “culture war” between midwives and doctors Children are being torn from their parents’ arms and people are still worried about national treasure Samantha Bee using a bad word. On a scale of one to 10, I’m over hypocrites at a nine. I’m calling all of my friends, even the ones I haven’t spoken to in a while. Think about doing the same.