“Welcome to our village, wee one,” is how Jacinda Ardern announced the birth of her daughter to New Zealand, and the world. The prime minister posted a photograph of her and partner Clarke Gayford cuddling their first child on her Facebook page late on Thursday afternoon (NZ time). “Feeling very lucky to have a healthy baby girl that arrived at 4.45pm weighing 3.31kg (7.3lb). Thank you so much for your best wishes and your kindness. We’re all doing really well thanks to the wonderful team at Auckland City hospital.” Ardern, 37, becomes only the second world leader to give birth while in office, the first being Pakistan’s Benazir Bhutto in 1990 – with whom, coincidentally, Ardern’s daughter shares a birthday. News of the birth was met with a flurry of excitement in New Zealand, the culmination of a nationwide “#babywatch” that began with the announcement of Ardern’s pregnancy in January and reached its peak on Sunday, which had been her due date. Morgan Godfrey, a political commentator and writer, remarked on Ardern’s typically down-to-earth approach despite being under the global spotlight during the pregnancy. “Jacinda Ardern arrived at hospital in her own car, with Clarke driving. No crown limo or special ambulance. Her baby was delivered in a public hospital alongside everyone else’s. No private hospital. No extra special attention. New Zealand, remain your understated self.” He added: “Three cheers for the public health system, too.” Guy Williams, a television personality and comedian, spoke for many New Zealanders when he tweeted that it was a “proud day to be a Kiwi”. He added: “Anyone who claims this isn’t a historic moment for our country is dismissing the ingrained prejudice we all still have towards women in the workplace.” Winston Peters, the leader of the populist New Zealand First party and deputy prime minister, is now acting prime minister. He said after Ardern was admitted to hospital: “It’s a happy day and on behalf of the coalition government we wish her and Clarke all the very best.” A host of Ardern’s Labour party colleagues shared their congratulations, as did the leader of the opposition National party, Simon Bridges, who wished the new parents “every happiness” on Twitter. Ardern intends to take six weeks’ maternity leave before returning to work, with Gayford, a television presenter and “first bloke”, remaining at home. Gayford had himself announced that “our little girl has finally arrived” on Twitter, adding that both mother and baby were “healthy and happy”. Helen Clark, the former Labour prime minister and former head of the UN Development Programme, wrote in a Guardian article that “the new arrival in our country’s first family” was significant, not only because Ardern was prime minister, but because she was not married, and Gayford would be the stay-at-home parent. “For young women, the example Ardern is setting is an affirmation that they too can expect to have that choice. For young men, Gayford being the full-time carer of a baby sends a powerful message that they too can exercise that choice,” Clark wrote. Ardern has said there will be little disruption during her time off; she will be in regular contact with Peters and involved in major decisions. She had previously said she planned to have labour induced if her pregnancy ran far beyond the due date. Peters had already taken over some of her duties, including running cabinet meetings, before her last day in parliament earlier this week. But his refusal to repeal a controversial “three strikes” policy, and decision to sue heads of department of his own government, has sparked tension within the coalition. Bridges said on Radio New Zealand earlier this month that the issue had “underlined cracks” in the coalition. “We’ll see the power dynamics of that and who’s really in charge,” he said. Reporters had been on high alert since Sunday, with many camped outside the hospital. The news website Stuff compiled the “perfect playlist” to welcome the infant. Titled “Waiting for Womb Fruit”, the playlist hedged its bets with the opener: Hey Boy Hey Girl by the Chemical Brothers. *Jacinda Ardern gives birth to her baby*Journalist (to baby); "How do you like New Zealand so far? Beautiful isn't it?" The news and pop culture website the Spinoff began its own live blog – only in part a meta-commentary on the fervour – on Sunday afternoon with “There is no baby”, promising “further updates as they come to hand”. After four days of minutiae, taking in the quality of hospital canteen scones and an extended reflection on whether babies were born with political bias (concluding that they are in fact “agents of chaos”), it culminated on Thursday with: “6:15pm: A baby!” Hayden Donnell, a co-author of the blog, described it as “groundbreaking” and himself as “very tired”. He said most New Zealanders were supportive of the baby, singling out for exception one media personality who had vocally dismissed the prime minister’s pregnancy as “not a story”. “Obviously I disagree with that because I have been covering the story for four days. It’s a joyous moment for New Zealand, is the main point I want to make.”