Fernando Hierro, the manager who admitted he never expected to be standing on the touchline at the World Cup, said he has “no doubts” about David de Gea, despite the goalkeeper gifting Portugal a goal. The Portugal manager, Fernando Santos, meanwhile insisted Cristiano Ronaldo was the best player in the world following his hat-trick to secure a 3-3 draw in Sochi, saying: “I’m glad he’s Portuguese.” He also expressed his hope Ronaldo would still be around and scoring goals in Qatar in four years’ time. Spain had been thrown into crisis when it was revealed that Julen Lopetegui had agreed to take over at Real Madrid after the World Cup, prompting the Spanish football federation to sack him on the eve of the tournament. Hierro, called on to take over the team as an emergency measure, said: “We have to be very proud at the way they overcame adversity. They showed character, conviction, pride, and personality. “This is a team that has no doubts. It knows what it wants, how to play. It is a pleasure to work with these players. These have not been easy days. I am very grateful to every one of them, and all the staff, who adapted rapidly in difficult circumstances. I repeat, it hasn’t been easy.” Asked about De Gea, who allowed Ronaldo’s shot to slip through his hands for Portugal’s second goal, Hierro said: “I embraced him and that’s it. We know that goalkeeper is a special position, with a special psychology, and we have no doubts about him at all. None. We’re a team. We’re a family and we will not leave anyone aside. We don’t have the slightest doubt about any member of the family. Hierro added: “When you have a star like Ronaldo, a detail can change a game. It’s lucky for whoever has him. I have a great relationship with him, he’s a great lad but I wouldn’t change him for any of mine.” Ronaldo’s hat-trick makes him the first player to score in four consecutive World Cups. “I’ve said it so many times: he’s the best in the world and I hope in Qatar he will score again,” Santos said. “People talk about his physical condition but mentally he is so strong. I’m glad he’s Portuguese.”