I have two pieces of wonderful news for you. The first is that Julia Roberts has just joined Instagram. The second is that, if her first two posts are any indication, Julia Roberts possesses an innate flair for expressing herself through clothing. Take her first post. In it, she sits smiling on the floor, reinforcing the basic sentiment of the image by having “LOVE” splashed across her sweater. The second image is trickier, as evidenced by the “You can’t make everyone happy. You are not an avocado” slogan on her T-shirt. What does it mean? Is it a veiled message to someone? Does she literally have to remind herself that she is not an avocado? We may never fully know. But we should probably get used to it. After all, history has taught us that a celebrity’s first Instagram post is usually the perfect distillation of their entire personality. Don’t believe me? I’ve brought evidence. Election Night 2012 A post shared by  Madonna (@madonna) on Nov 8, 2012 at 6:36am PST Madonna joined Instagram on the day of the 2012 election, where she dressed her entire crew in Barack Obama T-shirts and posed righteously for the camera. She’s still political to this day, although less directly; now she’s more likely to demonstrate her leanings with inspirational quotes about kindness, or possibly selfies taken with filters that make her look like a rabbit. Just after the 2018 election, Madonna posted a picture of herself sympathising with two sad clowns. A week later, a selfie with James Corden. What does it all mean? A post shared by Will Smith (@willsmith) on Dec 14, 2017 at 5:36am PST Will Smith is a man who enters fully into any and all promotional activity offered to him. Plus, he loves The Ellen Show. Want proof? On joining Instagram last December, Smith posted a photo of him gurning on the set of Ellen to promote Bright, a film that even he must have known stank. But there he is, selling it for all the world. Guess what his next post was? That’s right, another photo of him gurning on the set of Ellen. And the next one. The one after that was him gurning on the set of Ellen in a funny hat. After that? A three-photo set of him gurning on the set of Ellen, which was followed by a photo of him goofing about with Ellen DeGeneres. There’s a theme here, but I don’t see it. A post shared by Beyoncé (@beyonce) on Nov 6, 2012 at 2:13pm PST Beyoncé beat Madonna to Instagram by a matter of days, but joined with the same basic message. Wearing a Texans For Obama T-shirt and pulling a face halfway between “I am serious about this” and “I think I can smell a fart”, Beyoncé’s post is still so popular that people keep commenting on it every single day. And no wonder, because it set the scene for her whole approach to Instagram: lots of photos of Beyoncé wearing clothes. Rock. You. Instagram. We're open for business... #InstagramGetsRocked A post shared by  therock (@therock) on Feb 17, 2013 at 3:44pm PST As a man with a perfectly defined sense of self, Dwayne Johnson’s opening Instagram salvo is typically flawless. It’s a photo of him looking bulky (because strong) at a junket (because promotion) for a not very good film (because PROMOTION) while laughing (because relatable) and holding a WWE belt (because never forget your core fanbase). This picture should be carved on to his gravestone. Get ready. #MissionImpossible A post shared by  Tom Cruise (@tomcruise) on Jan 25, 2018 at 5:00am PST Tom Cruise only joined Instagram this year, but he already knows exactly what he wants from it. Pictures from his upcoming films. Posters of his upcoming films. Videos of him promoting his upcoming films. Pictures of him receiving awards for his films. Most of his posts are watermarked with the name of the production he’s promoting. There is not a trace, not a single iota of anything even tangentially personal. Quick guess: Cruise doesn’t know what Instagram is, and has never used it. Come get me, Instagram... A post shared by  Robert Downey Jr. (@robertdowneyjr) on Apr 13, 2015 at 5:01pm PDT On the other hand, Robert Downey Jr definitely uses his Instagram. Although his feed is studded with the heavy promotion of the famous, there are also much more personal moments too. Here he is, for example, sitting with his best friends the Avengers. In fact, the Avengers feature so heavily in Downey’s posts that you worry what he’ll do when Iron Man leaves the franchise. Brace yourself for something heartbreaking. #LIVEITUP A post shared by  Jennifer Lopez (@jlo) on May 17, 2013 at 5:09pm PDT Look at Julia Roberts’ first post again. See how simple it is? See how it personalises her? Jennifer Lopez has no time for that. Her Instagram debut was this: a graphic telling people what her Instagram handle was. It’s an ugly image, too. It looks like the sort of thing that gets flyposted outside crap nightclubs. She’s better at it now, though. Her most recent Instagram story involved her 10-year-old daughter going to a meeting to get her first book published. OK, fine, she hasn’t got better at it at all.