The green machine is back up and running. Ireland head to Sydney with the series all square after a first away win against Australia for 39 years, founded on their ferocious physicality and led by the indomitable Peter O’Mahony. They were clinging on at the end but Ireland were worthy victors, winning the collisions, bossing the breakdown and getting over the line thanks to Johnny Sexton’s goalkicking. David Pocock was far from a spectator but he was outshone by his opposite number O’Mahony and as a result the Wallabies could not click into gear. Australia outscored Ireland three tries to two but the penalty count – 15-12 in the visitors’ favour – was a more telling statistic. Tadhg Furlong scored the crucial try for Ireland, rounding off a sustained period of dominance in the second half and while Sexton was not at his very best his mere presence on the field sufficiently worried the Wallabies. Australia, meanwhile, lacked a cutting edge aside from the first two minutes and last five – do not be surprised to see Taniela Tupou start in Sydney such was the impact of the “Tongan Thor” off the bench. His introduction finally gave the Wallabies the means to get over the gainline and it was his try with just a few minutes remaining that threatened an unlikely comeback, not least with Jack McGrath in the sin-bin. Ultimately, however, the Wallabies could not find the fluidity that had eluded them for the majority of the match. They were nowhere near as polished with ball in hand as we have come to expect and a fourth try at the death would have been rough justice for Ireland. Australia’s sloppiness was all the more surprising considering the ease with which they cut Ireland open within 90 seconds of the opening whistle, Bernard Foley flicking the ball back inside to Kurtley Beale who scythed through and under the posts. Ireland, however, were undeterred and their cause was helped by a yellow card shown to Marika Koroibete for a tip tackle on Rob Kearney. They ruthlessly took advantage by kicking to the corner and driving to a few metres short before Conor Murray fizzed a pass to Andrew Conway who crashed over. Sexton added a penalty before Conway went off with a hip injury but Ireland’s returning fly-half added another three points with O’Mahony beginning to exert his influence. Australia were reeling and conceded another penalty, Sexton duly taking advantage, but they were back to within two with a penalty try – Cian Healy sent to the sin-bin for intentionally collapsing the maul. Australia then lost Will Genia to a broken arm – a telling blow considering his replacement at scrum-half, Nick Phipps, is nowhere near the same level – but Ireland dealt far better with a numerical disadvantage. Sexton shanked a difficult kick at goal but O’Mahony’s superiority kept Ireland on the front foot and the visitors perhaps should have capitalised on a fine line-break from Furlong – Garry Ringrose was in support but the bullocking prop could not find him. As it was Australia held out to go in at half-time 14-16 down, thanks in the main to a trademark Pocock turnover and he was at it again early in the second half after a fierce start by Ireland. They kept coming though, going through phase after phase, winning penalty after penalty and coming agonisingly close through Keith Earls in the left corner. Australia’s defence was heroic but finally Furlong broke the dam to put Ireland more than a score ahead with Sexton’s conversion. Another Sexton penalty gave Ireland a 12-point lead but fatigue and injuries were beginning to kick in, so much so that Joey Carbery came on for the lock Devin Toner. A string of penalties in Australia’s favour then eventually led to Tupou’s close-range try after McGrath was shown a yellow card for a deliberate knock-on – Foley’s conversion bringing the Wallabies to within striking distance. Tails up, Australia made their way from their own line to over halfway with worrying ease as far as Ireland were concerned but a loose pass and subsequent knock-on – of which there were far too many from the Wallabies – ensured all roads lead to Sydney.