Morrissey has expressed sympathy for the founder of the far-right English Defence League, Tommy Robinson, who was jailed last week for 13 months for being found in contempt of court. Robinson had broadcast an hour-long video to Facebook outside Leeds crown court, making comments that risked the collapse of a trial, which still has reporting restrictions placed on it. He had previously received a suspended sentence for another incident of contempt, after he attempted to film defendants in a rape trial in Canterbury last year. Hundreds of Robinson’s supporters massed outside Downing Street in protest following his arrest. Speaking on blogging site Tremr, Morrissey said: “It’s very obvious that Labour or the Tories do not believe in free speech … I mean, look at the shocking treatment of Tommy Robinson.” His comments came as he underlined his support for the right-wing party For Britain, set up by ex-Ukip candidate Anne Marie Waters. Having previously voiced support for them because “they have the best approach to animal welfare”, he now adds: “Anne Marie Waters seeks open discussion about all aspects of modern Britain, whereas other parties will not allow diverse opinion. She is like a humane version of Thatcher ... if such a concept could be. She is absolute leadership, she doesn’t read from a script, she believes in British heritage, freedom of speech, and she wants everyone in the UK to live under the same law. I find this compelling.” For Britain describes itself as “a positive, pro-British, pro-democracy party, which believes in preserving the culture and values of the decent British majority”. Elsewhere in the interview, the former Smiths frontman opened up about his diet, saying he orders from the children’s menu in restaurants, adding: “I’ve always found food to be very difficult because I only eat bread, potatoes, pasta and nuts … all stodge. I can’t eat anything that has any flavour.” Long given to controversial statements about politics, animal welfare and more, Morrissey recently gave another interview in which he made a link between halal meat producers and Isis, and attacked Theresa May, Sadiq Khan, Diane Abbott and others.