For a cool $1m (£750,000) you can own your own ghost town. That figure will buy you an entire abandoned settlement, the former mining town of Cerro Gordo in the Inyo Mountains of California: 300 acres of land, an empty hotel, a saloon, a chapel and the homes of miners who once dug for silver and lead. In the 1870s, it was a violent place that averaged a murder a week. Nowadays, its private owners operate public tours at $10 a head for thrill-seekers. From video games to horror movies and dystopian film and fiction, the ghost town comes wreathed with decrepit appeal. Its abandoned state leaves it ready to be filled by our imagination. Time has stopped; nature has started to overtake. The result is both a memento mori and a salutary lesson in our overweening presumption that our world is always progressing. The ghost town shows us the opposite. In his book The Rings of Saturn, the German émigré WG Sebald – who was well aware of the terrible ghost towns created by the second world war and the Holocaust – writes of the way settlements develop to the west, moving on towards the sun, leaving behind the derelict and the dispossessed once resources – and people – have been used up. This is certainly true of the US, where land is expendable and exploitation is the founding economy, evoking scenes of tumbleweed and Hitchcockian gothic. Detroit’s decayed status as Motown has left parts of the city vacated, as the car economy moved elsewhere, leaving entire districts prey to what has become known as “ruin porn”. In western Europe, the ravages of the Black Death – which took the lives of more than one-third of the continent’s medieval population – meant thousands of villages were abandoned and gave rise, eventually, to the darkness of the tales of the Brothers Grimm. In England, the Victorian visionary Richard Jefferies imagined a post apocalyptic metropolis in his book After London, in which the suburbs were quickly subsumed by nature. (In the alternative nightmare of another visionary, England Have My Bones by TH White, the opposite happens: London becomes so sprawling that the New Forest becomes a Tube stop). War and other military manoeuvres left British rural sites such as Tyneham in Dorset – evacuated for use as a training area in 1943 and never returned to its inhabitants – as skeletons of themselves, testaments to a forgotten mid-century and a kind of utopia. Patrick Wright, in his book The Village That Died For England, vividly describes Tyneham’s stone ruins lying in a “valley of lost causes”. He also notes that modern measures “taken to convert the village into a safe visitors’ attraction have disenchanted the place”. Health and safety have no place here. As the new owners of Cerro Gordo may learn, a tourist attraction is the antithesis of what such places symbolise: the defeat of our dominion and our attempts at civilisation, and the romantic allure of darkness, death and decay.