The wounds were too fresh to be properly visible after Kyle Edmund surrendered a 2-1 lead in the third round of the French Open for the second year in a row, this time going down to Fabio Fognini, but he leaves Paris determined to do his best at Wimbledon, with or without Andy Murray. While the British No 1, who struggled to hide his disappointment in defeat, has handled the increased attention with forbearance in Murray’s enforced absence, he realises expectations will be ramped up to absurd heights when he resumes at Queen’s in a fortnight, then at the All England Club, where reality has so often drowned out hope. “In one way, it’s nice that people want you to be successful,” he said after Fognini had outlasted him 6-3, 4-6, 3-6, 6-4, 6-4 on Court Suzanne-Lenglen in just over three and a half hours on an otherwise perfect summer’s day. “It means I’m going in the right direction, that people maybe expect me to do better. I always do my best. Whatever happens, happens. I hope I have not let anyone down if I don’t do so well. I’m going to try and enjoy [Wimbledon] as much as I can. But it will probably be a bit busier and a new experience for me.” Edmund and Heather Watson, who lost in the women’s doubles, were the last British players in the tournament after Jo Konta’s earlier withdrawal with injury from the mixed, a depressing scenario in Murray’s absence. He has yet to commit to his signed-for comeback at Rosmalen in Holland on Monday week and there is no certainty his slow-healing hip will allow him back on court in the grass season. So, it is over to Edmund. Again. For the third slam in a row he was the last British player in the draw. Last year, it was Kevin Anderson who ruined his tournament at the same stage, a setback he brilliantly reversed at the Australian Open. He would no doubt love a chance to take revenge on Fognini on his home turf. On Saturday, there was a sizeable British contingent cheering him on, but Edmund, briefly troubled by knee and hip problems, struggled with the eccentricity of his Italian opponent’s quirky game. Rarely can two players have tried so hard to win yet contrived so madly to lose. Their total errors, unforced and forced, numbered 199, and, mixed with 68 winners, there was rarely a dull moment, although some were weirder than others. Ultimately, Fognini, the combustible, swaggering polar opposite to the quietly combative Edmund, prevailed in one of the tournament’s strangest contests, to join his compatriot Marco Cecchinato in the fourth round, the first time that has happened here for Italy since 1976. Each took time out on court for injuries. Edmund, after having a 5-1 lead pegged back to 5-4 in the second, when he had his knee and hip treated, returning to break Fognini and take the set. He insisted later the problem did not affect his game. In the third, Fognini reciprocated. During the 2-3 break, he had his left ankle and calf taped as if he were being sent off to a crypt for mummification, yet moved well enough thereafter to extend the match to a fourth set and was buzzing at the end of the fifth. Fognini, whose lassitude sometimes undermines his brooding genius, occasionally had Edmund hanging on the ropes with unreachable backhands down the line, interspersed with the most delicate drop shots. Yet he also disappeared for worryingly long moments, as if none of it mattered, into which vacuum Edmund poured the best of his forehands. But he was not as incisive or controlled as in his first two matches – admittedly against lesser opponents – and he was disappointed with his performance. “It’s tough to digest a five-set match,” he said, rejecting the notion that he is vulnerable in longer contests. “I have won two five-setters in Australia [where he reached the semi-finals]. This time last year I lost a tough five-setter to Anderson, sort of a similar feeling. Did my best, had my chances but just couldn’t get there. “You can’t expect to play Mach 10 all the time. Some parts today I was pretty good and some parts I gave away. That’s why you have to be realistic and deal with what you have. I’m sure the points were close [143-141 to Fognini].” Summing up his clay-court swing, he said: “I have had some good wins recently in the Masters and it wasn’t a bad tournament here, a couple of good wins and a tough loss against a quality player.” Privately, he might have quietly banged his head against a wall for a bit. On Court Philippe-Chatrier, there was more predictable slaughter in the afternoon. Poor Richard Gasquet, once the enfant incredible of the French sporting universe, lost for the 16th time in a row to Rafael Nadal. Briefly, splendidly, unbelievably, he had hope, leading the Spaniard 5-0 in the first set before collapsing in front of his genius. Nadal, in sight of his 11th title here, put aside his lifelong friendship with the Frenchman to win 6-3, 6-2, 6-2 in just under two hours. He next plays the world No 70, Maximilian Marterer, the 22-year-old German left-hander who prepared for the biggest match of his life by beating the last lucky loser left in the draw, Jürgen Zopp, 6-2, 6-1, 6-4.