Australia will depart these shores with six defeats from six after a one-off Twenty20 in which England reproduced the dominance of the whitewashed one-day series. Jos Buttler and Adil Rashid were their tormentors once more. The former’s 30-ball 61 – including England’s fastest half-century in the format from 22 balls – was the rocket-fuelled start to a total of 221 for five, their highest ever at home. Rashid’s subsequent three for 27, including Aaron Finch for 81 when the opener was threatening a fightback, saw the tourists bowled out for 193 with two balls to spare. This was cracking day in leafy south Birmingham. The bars had been open all afternoon, the pitch was a belter, the boundaries short and England had indeed gone for a meaty top six spearheaded by Buttler at the top alongside Jason Roy. Australia won the sixth successive toss on this tour and Finch, captain here, fancied an early look at the pair. What followed was burned on to his retina; a 98-run opening stand from just 8.5 overs, first led by Roy piercing the infield three times in Billy Stanlake’s initial over before Buttler began raining down blows as six fours and five sixes flew from his blade. Kane Richardson won’t forget his part in the opening stanza, having been taken for 23 in his first over (amid figures of none for 59) and then grassing a simple catch at long-on to give Roy a life on 27. Edgbaston, it can be confirmed, still enjoys an Australian in such strife, as shown when Buttler chipped the next ball off Ashton Agar over his head for four. Mitchell Swepson copped some too when a wild throw went for four overthrows. But the leg-spinner did have some joy on debut, getting Buttler in the ninth over and the surprise No 3, Eoin Morgan, in the 12th. With Stanlake inflicting revenge on Roy in between – a searing bouncer was top-edged on 44 – England sat 132 for three with 50 balls to go. Up stepped Alex Hales, batting lower than opener for the first time in his 53 internationals, striking five fours – either deftly guided, slashed or swept – and two sixes, over long-on, in a 24-ball 49 that was ended in the 19th over when slapping a slower ball bouncer straight back to Marcus Stoinis tennis-style. He and Joe Root, 35 from 24, had kept up the momentum with a fourth-wicket stand of 72 from 39 balls but though the England Test captain himself struck 35 in 24, Jonny Bairstow clubbing two sixes – one first ball and another to end the innings – in his quickfire 14, he probably should have been the man for No 5 on this surface. Australia actually clawed things back a touch in the final three overs. Andrew Tye showed his class in the last, with just two runs leaked and Root run out before Bairstow propelled him over long-on. But with such a total on the board, their reply was always going to need a greater mastery of England’s spinners than witnessed in the one-day series. Finch did have some joy but was shorn of the strike first up, looking on as D’Arcy Short chipped Liam Plunkett to short fine-leg, and Glenn Maxwell was bowled by a fine slower-ball cutter from Chris Jordan, to sit 59 for two at the end of the powerplay. From there Morgan turned to his spin twins, with Moeen removing Head, caught on the boundary, and Rashid picking up Alex Carey and Stoinis – the former playing around a leg-break – to sit 72 for five in the ninth. And though Finch took to Moeen thereafter amid a blistering assault, Rashid’s return in the 16th over saw him caught on the rope attempting a seventh six and the game was up.