Like all good stories, the one about Ben the gardener and the mandrake now has a life of its own. It is public property waiting to be embellished or condensed, depending on who tells it. I feel I am entitled to recount it (with embellishments), having arrived at the house in Sicily just days after said Ben and two young students foraged what they thought was chicory and made soup. The students, realising that the flavour was beyond anything even the most ardent lover of bitter leaves could ingest, gave up almost immediately, while Ben ate two bowlfuls (this has been increased to four in some versions of the story). The pair, who had each eaten little more than a mouthful, felt the room spin and white lights speckle and flicker like a dying street lamp in the corner of their eyes. Ben, on the other hand, having eaten so much of the soup made from alkaloid-heavy mandrake leaves, experienced hallucinations, which turned into convulsions, and had to be airlifted to safety – or maybe he just went in a car. The scenes at the hospital could extend the story significantly, but in short, once he came round, the doctors proclaimed – in Sicilian – that he had an extraordinary constitution, since mandrake in such quantities should be deadly. Ben not only survived, but thrived to tell the tale, a warning to future foragers. In her book Vegetable Literacy, Deborah Madison describes solanaceae, or the nightshade family, as a family of two parts: the lethal and the luscious. The soup makers discovered the dark side with their mandrake and onion soup, and psychotropic deadly nightshade (belladonna or death cherries) and, to a certain extent, fresh tobacco leaves, share the same properties. Then there is the other side - the luscious and delicious, the nightshades we covet for our gardens and tables: tomatoes, peppers, aubergines and potatoes, all of which came from the new world as part of the Columbian exchange. In Italy, where sun-loving solanaceae are such an integral part of the landscape and culinary identity, it is extraordinary to think they are relatively new immigrants, that they were treated with suspicion and mistrust, thought to be poisonous – and, in the case of the tomato, an aphrodisiac – before being embraced. It wasn’t until the 17th century that they had all put down deep roots, from which they thrived, enriching land and plates with their warm colours and flavours. These days, like so many edible parts of modern life, tomatoes, pepper and aubergines are not bound by seasonal constraints, we can have them whenever we want, from wherever we want. Peppers, I think, are the best of the off-season lot, as even a Dutch hothouse can cultivate crisp, juicy vigour. Summer, however, is the time for truly luscious peppers. Over the next few months, they will just get better and better, and our meals redder and redder. Although not as exciting as mandrake soup and survival, recipes are stories, embellished or condensed by the person following them. Today’s is short, as it is one of my sauce-takes-as-long-as-pasta-takes-to-boil lunches, a luscious and deeply flavoured one. Melt four to 10 anchovy fillets and a peeled, squashed clove of garlic in plenty of oil over a low flame (you can replace the fish with a sliced onion and a good pinch of salt). Once the anchovies have disintegrated and the garlic is fragrant, add two sliced peppers – one red and one yellow – and a handful of black olives, and let the crisp arcs cook down into rich softness while you bring a pan of water to a boil and cook 400g pasta. To finish, drain, then toss the pasta with the pepper sauce and serve, eating one or two bowls each.