The Awesome Adventures of Captain Spirit is a short game about mundane things that are imbued with significance by the mind of a child. We play as Chris, a lonely boy with an active imagination and a drunk for a father. Dressed up in a face-paint mask and a costume assembled from cardboard and spray-paint, he is immersed in a superhero fantasy that gives him strength, bravery and telekinetic powers; this being a video game, you wonder whether those powers might turn out to be more than an eight-year-old’s fabrication. Chris’s imagination takes him on adventures around his rather sad little house on a sunlit, snowy Saturday morning, while his father slowly passes out in front of the TV. A junkpile in his yard becomes a maze concealing treasure; the water-heater in the dark utility room becomes a monster to overcome; after clearing away his father’s beer cans, he uses them for snowball target practice. Exploring their home, we discover things about Chris and his dad through the artefacts of everyday life: documents and photos stashed in the garage, hidden report cards, toys and old trophies and books on the shelves. The cast is small – just Chris, his dad, and one supporting character, plus the various toys and monsters that Chris invents. There is some awkwardness in the delivery: it is obvious that the actors all recorded their lines in separate booths rather than responding to each others’ performances. Captain Spirit is heavy-handed with its themes, too; after seeing Chris’s father’s copious empty beer cans at breakfast and watching him reach into the cupboard for a bottle of whiskey to watch the game with, I didn’t need the partially painted-over “WINO” graffiti on the side of the house to get the message that he has a drinking problem. But despite this over-earnestness – and partly because of it – Captain Spirit got an emotional raise out of me. Wandering around Chris’s house searching for something to do can be as boring for the player as it would be for him, but there are a couple of emotional gut-punches in these few hours – such as the moment where you decode a map to buried treasure and it turns out to be a little cache of his mother’s photos and drawings. It’s very difficult not to feel something about a story involving a child struggling with the loss of a parent, however clumsy the delivery. But Captain Spirit is only clumsy occasionally; as a whole it is affecting, sweet and memorable. It is a free taster of a forthcoming game from the same developer, Life Is Strange 2, but more than just an advert or a demo, it is its own short story about an everyday tragedy.