Good morning briefers. I’m Martin Farrer and this is what you need to know this fine summer morning. Britain’s election laws need to be reformed urgently after a series of online political campaign scandals threatened to damage democracy, the Electoral Commission has warned. In the wake of the Cambridge Analytica revelations, the electoral watchdog says parliament and the devolved governments must make changes to combat misinformation, misuse of personal data and overseas interference in elections. John Holmes, chair of the commission, says action is needed “to ensure that the tools used to regulate political campaigning online continue to be fit for purpose in a digital age”. His recommendations include a requirement that all digital political campaign material states who paid for it, a law to clarify the ban on overseas campaign funding and bigger fines for anyone who breaks the rules. Sir John’s comments come after the Observer and Guardian reporter who exposed the Cambridge Analytica scandal, Carole Cadwalladr, won the Orwell journalism prize for her investigation. Receiving the award in London, she said there was “a systemic failure ... Our laws do not work and our regulators are unable to regulate”. ‘Where’s Boris?’ – Boris Johnson has come under attack from fellow Tories after he missed the Commons vote that saw MPs overwhelmingly support plans to build a third runway at Heathrow airport. The foreign secretary is a longstanding opponent of the plans, leveraging his opposition to help his London mayoral campaigns and to win the safe west London seat of Uxbridge. But he managed to be in Afghanistan when the vote came last night, drawing derision from many. There were even suggestions that his failure to stand up and be counted on the touchstone issue could end his ambitions to become party leader. Our columnist Rafael Behr says it is final proof that Johnson totally lacks principle. Get shorty – Rafael’s column might equally apply to Johnson’s fellow Brexiter, Nigel Farage, who has been forced to deny reports that he bet against the pound on the night of the referendum. According to Bloomberg, Farage was privy to private polling data that showed that the Leave campaign had won but said on Sky News that he believed the Remain camp had edged it. The “concession” by Farage, himself a City trader, was big news and pushed the pound to the $1.50 mark. When the true outcome emerged, sterling plummeted in value. Traders who bet correctly on the fall are thought to have made millions. Last night a spokesman for Farage said he “had no financial interest in currency movements” on the night. Off road – BMW fears it will be forced to close its factories in the UK, putting 8,000 jobs at risk, if components for Mini and Rolls-Royce cars are snagged up in customs delays after Brexit. The German manufacturer says its logistics would not be able to cope with obstructions to its supply chain. At the same time, the UK car lobby group SMMT says today that investment in the industry is declining because of lack of clarity over the Brexit negotiations. Health failure – The NHS may lead the world in equal access, but a new study has found that it underperforms compared with the health systems of other developed countries in preventing common causes of death. The report, which will fuel further debate about the current state of the NHS, also found that the UK has fewer doctors, nurses, hospital beds and CT and MRI scanners than 18 other comparable countries.  Director’s cut – In a moment of surrealism worthy of one of his films, David Lynch’s recent interview with the Guardian has become the unlikely centrepiece of a Donald Trump rally. The president seized on comments by the Sanders-supporting director that he could be a great president because he had shaken up the establishment. Trump joked that the favourable remarks meant the maverick’s career in Hollywood would be over. Gareth Southgate is facing a dilemma over Harry Kane and has hinted he may rest his captain to give others playing tine in England’s final Group G game against Belgium. Southgate’s opposite number, Roberto Martínez, meanwhile, has refused to rule out making as many as 10 changes in Kaliningrad. An angry Carlos Queiroz lashed out at Fifa and the VAR system after his Iran team’s 1-1 draw with Portugal and elimination from the World Cup while Spain progressed as Group B winners thanks to a last-gasp Iago Aspas goal that salvaged a 2-2 draw with Morocco. In Group A, Uruguay sailed past Russia with an efficient, unfussy display, while Saudi Arabia snatched a 2-1 win over Egypt, after which their coach Héctor Cúper dismissed suggestions Mohamed Salah is set to quit international football. Switzerland’s Granit Xhaka and Xherdan Shaqiri have escaped a ban following their controversial celebrations in the 2-1 World Cup win over Serbia last Friday. It’s the turn of Groups C and D today with Australia and Argentina needing wins against Peru and Nigeria respectively. Follow the buildup with our live blog now. The life of a barrister can appear glamorous and romantic, with clever people using clever words to fight points of law in ancient, august settings. But Sarah Langford, a criminal barrister, writes today about how the reality can be very different – endless train journeys to courts around the country, interminable waiting and the need to be not just the client’s brief but also their psychiatrist, counsellor, social worker and mother combined. Most of all there is a sense of futility at the way the system treats young offenders. Using the case of one client, Dominic, a serial-but-charming teenage offender turned serial-but-embittered adult offender, she describes the “pointless and predictable lurch between prison and court, court and prison” as he was failed by justice. Trevor Bayliss has tipped his assistant, Paul Farbrace, to succeed him as the England head coach when he stands down at the end of the 2019 home summer. Set the primary target of winning next summer’s World Cup, Bayliss is not winding down though and has told his one-day batsmen to learn from Jos Buttler’s icy display of escapology at Old Trafford on Sunday. Not even a convincing two-set win over Stan Wawrinka was enough to persuade Andy Murray he is ready for Wimbledon next week – but it will be a major surprise if he is not there and raging to play. And Sir Michael Stoute, who last week became the all-time leading Royal Ascot trainer, may attempt to extend his latest sequence of big-race wins by running Eqtidaar in the July Cup. Donald Trump’s trade policy might be starting to backfire after Harley-Davidson said it would be moving production to other countries to avoid tariffs on US goods. The president accused the motorbike maker of “waving the white flag” but anxiety about his belligerent policy has spread to international stock markets with Asian shares down again overnight. The FTSE100 is set to open up 0.25%, however, while the pound is up at $1.329 and €1.135. The Guardian leads with “Urgent action needed to defend UK democracy, says watchdog” over calls from the Electoral Commission that reforms are needed in light of Cambridge Analytica and other scandals. The Independent labels the Heathrow expansion “Air Farce One”, whereas the Times goes with: “MPs back £14bn Heathrow expansion”. “Tax and spend will harm Tories,” says the Telegraph, “Trump tariffs drive Harley to build EU bikes outside US,” says the FT. The Mirror has “Bucks Fizz Jay: My mouth cancer nightmare” while the Express splashes with “Exhausted doctors act ‘like drunks’”, with a surgeon’s claims overworked staff are putting patients’ lives at risk. The Mail has more on its passports investigation, saying: “Passports for sale on Facebook”. For more news: www.theguardian.com The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here.