Donald Trump on Monday again issued a call to deprive undocumented immigrants of their right to due process, arguing that people trying to cross the border should be summarily deported without a trial or an appearance before a judge. Trump’s sustained attacks on the American judicial system come amid extraordinary condemnation of his administration’s zero-tolerance enforcement policy at the southern border, which led to more than 2,300 children being separated from their families in recent months. Trump last week was pressured into halting his administration’s practice of separating families, in an abrupt reversal that overruled the views of his hardline advisers. “Hiring many thousands of judges, and going through a long and complicated legal process, is not the way to go – will always be disfunctional [sic]. People must simply be stopped at the Border and told they cannot come into the U.S. illegally,” Trump said via Twitter on Monday. “Children brought back to their country......” He continued in a second tweet: ‘If this is done, illegal immigration will be stopped in it’s [sic] tracks – and at very little, by comparison, cost. This is the only real answer – and we must continue to BUILD THE WALL!” The statement, which is tantamount to a proposal for the suspension of law, compounds an already confusing situation as Republican lawmakers scrambled to build a consensus around immigration legislation, and federal agencies work to reunite migrant families separated under Trump’s policy, with many children now scattered across the US without their parents. The Department of Homeland Security stated over the weekend that it had reunited 522 children with parents so far. The agency also claimed to have a “well coordinated” process for reuniting families, following chaos and confusion last week. The Pentagon is preparing to temporarily house immigrants at two military bases. The House is preparing to vote this week on a broad Republican immigration bill that is expected to fall short amid Democratic opposition and a lack of consensus among GOP lawmakers on how restrictive US immigration laws should be. The legislation attempts to resolve twin crises created by Trump: to provide a pathway to citizenship for young undocumented immigrants, known as Dreamers, who were brought to the US as children; and to end the practice of separating families at the border. The bill would also give Trump $25bn funding towards building his border wall and imposes new restrictions on legal immigration. Congressman Mark Meadows, the chairman of the conservative House Freedom Caucus, said lawmakers continued negotiations on the immigration proposal over the weekend. But asked what he expected would happen when it comes up for a vote on Tuesday night, Meadows told Fox & Friends: “I would think fail right now.”  