I’ve got a dirty little secret: I’ve stopped drinking. I’m not an alcoholic. I don’t have an addictive personality. I’m in robust good health. I enjoy drinking. But after the birth of my second child three years ago, I became a sober mother. It wasn’t an obvious progression: I drank with the usual wanton enthusiasm before I became a mother. I continued drinking moderately throughout both my pregnancies and while breastfeeding my firstborn – sticking to the government advice that served previous generations perfectly well, that one or two drinks, once or twice a week, was OK. Advice that was suddenly changed in 2007 to a dictate of complete abstention on the basis of no scientific rationale at all. When my first child was weaned, my friends brought round a few bottles and we celebrated with a “normal service has been resumed” party. Coping with the sleep deprivation caused by one baby wasn’t that different from coping with a hangover, I reasoned, so coping with both was just more of the same. With one child, this approach worked reasonably well. Without thinking about it, though, I was buying into the pro-drinking mothering zeitgeist, alien to my mother’s generation, but so prevalent in my own. It is typified not only by the slew of entertaining, slummy-mummy blogs (Sippy Cups Are Not for Chardonnay, Mommy Wants Vodka), books both fictional (Why Mummy Drinks) and biographical (Hurrah for Gin) and films (Bad Moms, Bad Moms 2) but by its all-pervasive presence on the internet, too. I never joined the nearly 630,000 members of the Facebook group Moms Who Need Wine, but I didn’t need to sign up to absorb its message. Nor did I have to buy one of the jaunty coffee mugs, bags, T-shirts, cards or towels emblazoned with cheery, sassy messages about how raising children requires mothers – and these products are exclusively targeted at mothers – to maintain a steady state of semi-inebriation: the wine glass engraved “You’re not really drinking alone if your kids are home” or the flowery fridge magnet chuckling “The most expensive part of having kids is all the wine you have to drink.” Does it matter if mother’s ruin has become mother’s little helper? Women do not become fools when they become mothers. We get the knowing nudge of the alcoholic version of the “You’re Worth It” advertising strapline but at the same time, it seems we can’t entirely slough it off. The joke reverberates in our ears long after we’ve shut down the browser, closed the book or switched off the TV. Gabrielle Glaser, author of Her Best Kept Secret: Why Women Drink – and How They Can Regain Control says that wine has become “normalised, expected and then reinforced by popular culture, social media, advertising. The volume and ubiquity of the pro-drinking message has made it infinitely more likely that even mothers who know it’s a caricature, will immediately think of pouring themselves a drink as a release valve once the children are in bed – and then do it.” Perhaps it’s because there’s truth in the joke: lots of mothers I know encourage each other to drink. It’s a shorthand for empathy and sympathy – a euphemism for just taking a break. We smile at the despairing mother whose children are bouncing off the walls and tell her that she deserves a large glass of wine after the kids have gone to bed, and that we would do the same. Or we “jokingly” bring a bottle of wine to the NCT picnic. Or we arrange “prosecco playdates” where the adults bring carrot sticks for the children and wine for each other, to be enjoyed in the kitchen while the children play down the hall. It is a statement of the blindingly obvious to say that we Brits live in an alcohol-dependent culture. We can trace our fondness for drink back to the Anglo-Saxon mead hall – Norman invaders writing in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle remarked on how drunk the English soldiers were – via Chaucer to Shakespeare, when drinking became a demonstration of loyalty to the crown and the church, proving that you weren’t a puritan. Nevertheless, female drinkers have traditionally been criticised for neglecting their roles as wives and mothers. They have been portrayed as sexually promiscuous and lacking in characteristics associated with “femininity”, such as being caring, concerned about appearance and health-conscious. But, says Glaser, times have changed. “The pressure on mothers to drink to prove themselves modern is a relatively new one,” she says. “When I gave birth to my third child, I was given bottles of wine by friends alongside – or even instead of – gifts for the baby. It was generous and kind of my friends, but I couldn’t help being struck by how times had changed. That didn’t happen with my first two children.” I’m not saying the modern mother is a gin-swigging inebriate, forever dropping her baby down the steps of Hogarth’s Gin Lane – but when Kelly Clarkson, a singer and mother of four, recently told People magazine that “Children are challenging. Wine is necessary,” she was the latest in a long line of voices across all layers of popular culture to give currency to the image of the modern mother as one who is knackered, chardonnay-swilling and unrepentant. So entrenched is alcohol in our culture that being a sober mother is nowadays to be fundamentally out of step. The image of a mother with a large glass of wine has become an almost feminist face of motherhood, putting two fingers up at the pressure of being a perfect parent and making it unmistakably clear that we are very much not part of those oft-mocked tribes, the tiger and helicopter mums. I kept quiet about giving up. I didn’t want to be a party pooper It is impossible to track the exact point at which, as Glaser says, times changed, because there is no long-term research on mothers and drinking. But something had already happened by 2009, when a systematic review concluded that an increase in drinking among women was “one of the most important trends in alcohol consumption in the United Kingdom”. By 2012, according to the ONS, a similar proportion of women aged 16-24 years, 25-44 years and 45-64 years were reporting as exceeding the UK government’s daily drinking benchmark (three units for women) on a single day in the previous week. In 2015, a study in the International Journal of Drug Policy found that a significant number of mothers were saying drinking enabled them to “assert their identity” beyond the roles and responsibilities often associated with being a woman in early midlife. Mothers with young children described to researchers the “transformative effects” of “excessive drinking” which, they said, allowed them to return temporarily to a younger, carefree version of themselves. The researchers concluded that women’s drinking in early midlife “revolves around notions of ‘idealised’ femininity but simultaneously represents a way of achieving ‘time out’ from traditional female responsibilities such as caring for others”. This reflects the thoughts of one of my NCT friends, Lucy. “A glass of wine – or to be more honest, half a bottle a night – connects me to other mothers who also struggle with their identities,” she says. “An example is when other mothers call me on the phone and ask: ‘Hello, is this Sophie’s mum?’ After a drink, I no longer feel trapped to be in this world where I’m just someone’s mum, even when that someone is someone I utterly adore.” One of my best friends, Gina, credits alcohol with helping her survive the isolation, anxiety, lack of certainty and responsibility of motherhood. “Raising children is one of the most important and difficult tasks given to human beings,” she says. “Combine that responsibility with the sleep deprivation, anxiety, stress and eradication of virtually all adult life as you know it, and alcohol is a wonderful shortcut: a way to feel calm and warmer.” It also, she notes, connects her to other mums she’s just met – with whom she has no history and perhaps nothing in common other than their children, but on whom she is “dependent for advice, understanding and, in the early months of motherhood, sanity-saving adult company.” So does it matter if mother’s ruin has become mother’s little helper? I think it does: a report in the Lancet earlier this year found that every extra glass of wine we drink over the recommended 12.5 units a week shortens our life by 30 minutes. Drinking, researchers concluded, is as harmful as smoking. The Alcohol Harm Reduction Strategy for England states that there are between 780,000 and 1.3 million children living with an adult abusing alcohol. Two years ago a research project found that British mothers-to-be were among the most likely in the world to drink during pregnancy and harm their unborn baby as a result. The study, conducted by the Canadian Institute of Mental Health Policy and Research, found that four times more children in the UK suffer alcohol-related birth defects than the global average. For the proportion of children with foetal alcohol spectrum disorder (FASD), Britain came seventh out of 195 countries and sixth in Europe. A report commissioned by a crossbench group of MPs and peers – some of whose parents were themselves alcoholics – found that more than one in three deaths or serious injuries suffered by a child through neglect or abuse is linked to parental drinking. The research also found that 41% of those in the problem category were female – previous studies have also found that women are more likely than men to finish a bottle of wine alone – of whom 61% came from the highest ABC1 professional classes. Alcohol has embedded itself into motherhood so deeply it’s difficult to talk about it without sounding sanctimonious But then we have the recent research, published at the end of last year, and reported in the press with predictable headlines such as “Breastfeeding mums rejoice!” claiming that not only can new mothers indulge in a hard-earned glass of wine without harming their baby, they might actually be helping it because “babies who were breastfed by mothers who drank in moderation had more favourable results for personal-social development”. However, the report goes on to say that breastfeeding women who consumed alcohol were more likely to be born in first world countries, be tertiary-educated and have higher household incomes. Most drank at low levels and employed strategies (such as the timing of alcohol use) to minimise alcohol passed on to infants via breast milk. The researchers also noted that as a child’s social development is likely to be greatly influenced by their environment, a child’s social advantage could also be a result of their mother simply heading out for a drink. In this case, surely, for those who choose to abstain, just going to a festive gathering could be good for the baby. Child psychologist Dr David Carey had reservations about the study. “There are many factors which influence social and emotional development, the most important among them being family and school. So it is highly unlikely that maternal alcohol consumption is a significant factor.” I stopped drinking after the birth of my second child simply because I had too much stored-up energy at the end of the day to want to sedate myself with alcohol. Prior to becoming a mother-of-two, I had been a keen runner. I continued to run during both my pregnancies, but with two small children, I barely had time to find my running shoes, much less put them on. Without intense exercise to whisk the wine-calories from my body and the fumes from my head, drinking seemed a far less attractive option than before. My energy levels were still high though and, after the kids were finally down for the night, I craved not oblivion but stimulation. Parents of small children become inured to leaving shards of unfinished conversations scattered in their wake, and I would metaphorically grab my husband by the lapels when he came home from work and demand unbroken adult communication. The craving for alcohol did take a while to disappear: my association of wine with relaxation was deep-rooted. But once I realised how much healthier I felt for not drinking – how much less painful it was to be woken early and often by squalling children if I didn’t have a head full of cotton wool, and how much more energy I had during the day for the child-rearing equivalent of herding cats – I decided the itch was not for scratching. I feel frustrated that a harmless personal decision should put me at odds with mainstream society. Perhaps it’s because women are now expected to ape the drinking habits of men, that non-participants feel peripheral. Whatever the reason, I tend to keep my new-found teetotalism schtum. I often avoid invitations to the pub because I don’t want to be thought of as a party pooper or – the horror! – be mistaken for a tiger/helicopter mum. If I do go, I nurse a tomato juice made up to look like a Bloody Mary. If questioned, I prefer to mutter exaggerated stories about fractious, insomniac children rather than come clean. “It’s very hard for the modern mother to talk about not drinking in the current climate,” says Glaser. “Alcohol has embedded itself into modern motherhood so deeply that unless you have an addiction problem, it’s difficult to talk about it without sounding sanctimonious. The attitude is: ‘If you don’t have a problem with it, why do you have a problem with it?’” But if we don’t talk about it, how do we know if we have a problem? Stefanie Wilder-Taylor, an American author, stand-up comic and mother was at the forefront of the boozy mother wave with her blog, Make Mine a Double: Tales of Twins and Tequila and her book, Naptime Is the New Happy Hour, published in 2008. But a year later, she took her audience by surprise: she outed herself as an alcoholic. Her confession seemed to unstop a dam: there has been a tidal wave of books since by women who have given up drink, confessing to their alcoholism. Wilder-Taylor still writes and blogs, but now she helps both stay-at-home and professional parents – usually mothers in their early 40s – who have crossed that fine line from merry boozing to functional alcoholism, which in her case was when her nightly wine became a compulsion and it was an emergency if there was none in the house. “I wanted to be the best mom I could,” she says, “and I felt like I was failing every day. I was drinking to be kind of present, just not all present.” During one hospital scare with her daughter, she remembers thinking, “This is a really great place for a bar: right here in the ER.” “We’re bombarded with images of women drinking wine together, with stories of wine-infused play dates, with husbands and wives enjoying each other with alcohol at the end of the day,” she says. “But I’ve spoken to so many mothers who say they never drank so much as they did after having children. I talk to women all the time who look completely normal and put-together from the outside but are drinking and driving, and putting their lives and their families’ lives at risk every day because they’re too afraid to tell someone they have a problem.” I struggled writing this article. I examined and cross-examined every sentence, fearful of appearing sanctimonious. But I decided to press “send” on the article, because really, it’s crazy that talking about something that’s actually a perfectly reasonable choice to make, should be so freighted with anxiety and stigma. The fact I’ve felt any sort of pressure to keep quiet about a sensible – and moderate – lifestyle choice says so much about modern motherhood and drinking, that I reckoned, at the very least, it was worth seeing if I could start a conversation about it instead.