The audacity of youth was unfurled in all its swaggering glory. Kylian Mbappé bounded off after scoring the winner in an absorbing game, his first on this stage, a tap-in that was impossible to miss. Then he suddenly stopped and shrugged, as if to say: “What is the fuss all about?” Life moves pretty fast for Mbappé. The whirlwind forward, already the most expensively valued teenager in football, became France’s youngest goalscorer at a major tournament and took it all in that easy stretch of a stride. He broke a record that had stood since the World Cup in 1998 (just a few months before he was born) when David Trezeguet scored against Saudi Arabia. In a moment of sweet symmetry, a grey-suited Trezeguet just happened to be watching on from the stands in Ekaterinburg, a guest of honour for this match. It was riveting, its tightly bound emotions propelling both teams to give everything to reach their stated goal. France found a mix of enough style and substance to seal qualification. Unfortunately for Peru, there was no reward for their positive display. A second defeat ends their hopes of reaching the next round, even if the adventure off the pitch with their army of fervent supporters will go on for the next game at least. At times this felt like the Lima of the Urals, with Peru’s bouncing red and white masses crammed into the seats that had lain empty for Egypt against Uruguay. France needed sangfroid. They needed to master the atmosphere as well as the technical questions of the game all at once. The inclusion of Olivier Giroud, designed to give the team more balance, and to allow others around him to have more freedom to do damage, made an instant impression. Giroud bustled up front, fighting for possession and looking every inch the big man towering over Peru’s defenders. He gave France a target which was perfect for Antoine Griezmann and Mbappé to buzz around – exactly the plan. They put Peru under pressure with a series of chances which all originated from Giroud’s knockdowns and buildup play. “He is our best scorer and he has very specific qualities,” noted Didier Deschamps. “The way he holds the ball up, he was very good and all the players around him linked up very well. As I have said, it’s often that when he is not on the team we appreciate how useful he is.” He was more than useful in engineering a more positive gameplan. It looks like the new way forward for France during this tournament has been cemented. The influential Paul Pogba, whose dominance alongside the work of N’Golo Kanté was another vital part of the new strategy. In the 34th minute Pogba won the ball from Paolo Guerrero in the centre of midfield and played a clever pass for Giroud. The striker’s effort took a looping ricochet off Alberto Rodríguez and the ball spun away, almost in slow motion. Peru’s stranded goalkeeper could only helplessly watch the trajectory as Mbappé arrived to tap into the empty net. “I was very happy,” Mbappé said. “I have always said the World Cup was a dream for any player. I hope to have more moments like this.” When France were at their most fluid Mbappé and Griezmann were able to fire up the afterburners. Mbappé even began to showboat, with a flick here and there, enjoying the opportunity to express himself. Peru had only one clear sight of goal in the first half, Guerrero shooting straight at Hugo Lloris, who was not overly troubled as he won his 100th cap. So Ricardo Gareca bolstered his attack at the break and Peru went for it with heart. France showed discipline to withstand the pressure, defending diligently, and restricting Peru to long shots. The best of them came from Pedro Aquino, who struck with glorious power and swerve only to see his effort crack against the post. The crowd did their utmost to will one of these opportunities in as the emotion swirled around the stadium. But it was not to be. It left Gareca lamenting that they could not offer more tangible reward to the huge number of travelling fans, with an estimated 25,000 making all the noise in Ekaterinburg. “If there is anything that hurts, it is that the fans were so enthusiastic,” he said. “We are pained we have been eliminated and can’t play the last match with any hope of going on. But we gave it our all. We will do everything to try to win the last game so they can at least celebrate one victory at this World Cup.” He is, though, hopeful for a brighter future for Peruvian football. “Now people realise Peru has huge potential. Our intention was to come here and compete at this level and see where we stand. Over time this is going to make us stronger.” France, too, have their own more immediate focus on growing stronger as they progress.