Even before they went gourmet, I was a fan of kebabs. As teenagers, my friends and I would dance into the early hours before hitting a particular kebab shop favoured by my best friend, who was Greek and wise enough to know about these things. We’d buy mouthwatering grilled chicken shawarma dressed with chilli and garlic sauces, which would dribble down our chins. Today’s recipe turns those much-loved kebabs into a light, succulent salad. If you’re vegetarian, swap the chicken for falafel. If you are having a barbecue, this chicken is delicious cooked over coals. Prep 15 minMarinate 2 hrCook 30 minServes 4 For the chicken 2 tsp cumin seeds1 tsp coriander seeds½ tsp peppercorns2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely choppedA small thumb ginger, peeled and finely chopped1 tsp smoked paprika½ tsp ground cinnamon6 boneless chicken thighsFinely grated zest of 1 lemon, juice of ½1 tbsp olive oil4 tbsp Greek yoghurt, drainedSalt For the salad1 head butter lettuceA handful each parsley and mint leaves1 cucumber1 packet radishes (about 200g)Black onion seeds or white sesame seeds (optional)4 pickled green chillies, roughly sliced, to serve (optional) For the dressing½ garlic clove½ tsp flaky sea salt20g tahini1 tsp honey100ml extra-virgin olive oilJuice of 1 lemon Put the cumin and coriander seeds in a small, dry pan and toast over a medium heat for about a minute, until they start to give off their aroma. Transfer to a spice grinder or a pestle and mortar with the peppercorns, and grind together finely. Mix the garlic and ginger into the spices with the paprika and cinnamon. Put the chicken thighs into a large bowl and add the spice mix, the lemon juice and zest, the olive oil and three tablespoons of yoghurt. Season generously with salt and rub the marinade into the chicken with your hands. Marinate in the fridge for at least two hours – ideally overnight. When you are ready to eat, heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas 6. Put the chicken thighs on a foil-lined baking tray and roast for 30 minutes, turning once, until cooked through (you can check they are cooked by slicing into one). Leave to rest for five minutes, then slice them into strips. Meanwhile, make the salad. Core the lettuce, separate the leaves and rip in half. Halve the cucumber lengthways, scoop out the seeds with a teaspoon, then slice diagonally into long half-moons. Top and tail the radishes, finely slice, then put the salad veg in the fridge to keep cool, covered with damp kitchen paper. Last, make the dressing: crush the garlic with the salt. In a mortar or small bowl, work in the tahini and remaining tablespoon of yoghurt. Stir in the honey and whisk in a tablespoon of water, followed by the olive oil and lemon juice. Season to taste. Put the salad ingredients in a large, wide bowl and add half the dressing. Top with the chicken slices and any juices, then drizzle over the rest of the dressing. If you have black onion seeds or white sesame seeds, sprinkle over the top and serve with slices of pickled chillies. This marinade is a keeper. Try adding half a teaspoon of honey and smearing it over a spatchcocked chicken for the barbecue – it makes a feast served with a variety of salads. It’s also great with barbecued lamb, whether a butterflied leg, slow-cooked shoulder or lamb steaks, with grilled courgette, peppers or aubergine. Dress these vegetables with the tahini dressing.