This is a good summer, by which I mean there has already been a perfect balance of blue sky days for eating outside and enough rain to keep the growing courgettes fat and happy. These are days on which I prefer to start cooking early, before the sun turns the kitchen into a furnace But there have been airless days, too, with afternoons so hot I almost dread switching on the oven for the Sunday roast. These are days on which I prefer to start cooking early, before the sun turns the kitchen into a furnace, and for which I need good-natured recipes that appreciate being taken from the oven and left to rest a while. I’m looking for dishes just as good served warm or even cold as they are straight from the oven. With this in mind, I did a lamb roast this week – a boned breast or two, stuffed with spinach, spring onions and feta cheese – that was as pleasing served warm as it was hot. The flavours reminded me of something I had eaten long ago, on holiday in Greece one very hot summer. The next day we carved it very, very thinly and ate it with a salad of lamb’s lettuce and green-shouldered tomatoes with a dressing of olive oil and enough white-wine vinegar to make our lips tingle. A second roast, of crisp-skinned duck and oranges, seemed all the better for being made an hour or so before we ate it. We folded the roast breast and leg meat, torn in fat chunks from its bones, through a bowl of stock-swollen couscous, then used the fat from the duck and juice from the roasted oranges as a dressing. It crossed my mind that this would be good with roast pork, too, or any meat with a generous amount of fat that can become part of the dressing. Whichever meat you choose, the result is a leisurely roast-cum-salad, which this time I folded through with a crisp tangle of sweet green pea shoots. (I could have used watercress or wild rocket crisped up in iced water.) Relaxed food for a great summer. Ask your butcher for breasts of lamb with the bones removed. It will speed up the process and save you an unnecessary half-hour of home butchery. When you add the cooked and drained peas to the roasting tin, turn them over in the pan juices from the roast – it will add much savour. Serves 8-10 spinach 300gmint leaves 15spring onions 6olive oil 2 tbsp, plus a little morefeta 200glamb breasts 2, bones removed, approximately 1 kg each peas 300g (podded weight) Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Remove the stalks from the spinach and wash the leaves thoroughly under cold running water. The leaves still wet, pile them into a deep pan over a moderate heat then cover tightly with a lid. Let the leaves cook for 2 or 3 minutes in their own steam, shaking the pan so they soften evenly. As soon as they are bright green and wilted, remove from the heat and plunge into iced water. Squeeze the leaves to remove the water, then chop them roughly and set them aside in a bowl. Roughly chop the mint leaves, then add them to the spinach, together with a generous seasoning of black pepper. Roughly chop the spring onions, then let them soften in the olive oil in a shallow pan over a medium heat. Add the spring onions to the spinach, crumble in the feta cheese in small lumps, then mix lightly. Lay the breasts of lamb flat on a work surface and spread the spinach filling over them, leaving a small rim of meat around the edges, then roll them up and secure with butcher’s string. Place the rolled breasts in a roasting tin, rub them lightly with olive oil and crumbled sea salt, then roast them for one hour. Remove them from the oven and leave them to rest, covered with foil. Cook the peas in boiling, lightly salted water for a few minutes until tender, then drain them and tip them into the tin around the lamb. Carve the lamb into thick slices and serve. I see no reason why this recipe wouldn’t work perfectly neatly with chicken, but the point of using duck is to harness all the glorious fat that assembles in the roasting tin, spiked with the juices of the warm orange. Serves 4 duck legs 2duck breasts 2banana shallots 2orange 1chicken stock 250mlcouscous 125mlpea shoots 50gparsley leaves a large handfulcoriander leaves a large handful Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Put the pieces of duck in a roasting tin and slash them, just deep enough to go through the skin and fat, every 3 or 4 cm. Peel and halve the shallots lengthways, then add them to the tin, together with the orange cut in half, and leave them to roast in the preheated oven for about an hour. They are ready when the skin is lightly crisp. Remove and set aside. The point of using duck is to harness all the glorious fat that assembles in the roasting tin Bring the stock to the boil. Put the couscous in a large mixing bowl then pour over the boiled stock, cover with a lid and set aside for about 15 minutes until the water has been absorbed by the grains of couscous. Squeeze the roast orange halves over the couscous. Break up the shallots and stir them into the couscous, then check the seasoning, adding salt and black pepper. Tear the duck to pieces – torn pieces look better than chopped – then fold them into the couscous. Wash and shake dry the pea shoots then toss them with the parsley and coriander leaves. Fold the herbs and shoots into the couscous and serve. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater