It has been 74 days, 14 minutes and 23 seconds since the world first learned that someone once bit Beyoncé. However, despite the internet’s best efforts to discover the culprit, the mystery of #WhoBitBeyoncé remains stubbornly unsolved. It’s not just Beyoncé’s biter befuddling us all: we’re less than halfway through the year but already 2018 has raised more questions than it has answered. Here are some of the weirdest unsolved mysteries of the year so far. We know Trump is terrified of sharks, but is the president petrified of water? An incident at the Weird House this week suggests this might be the case. During a Federal Emergency Management Agency (Fema) hurricane preparedness meeting on Wednesday, Trump inexplicably took his water bottle off the table and put the offending object on the floor. A split second later an apparently H2O-phobic Mike Pence did the same. While the other people around the table did not bat an eyelid at this behaviour, the internet was immediately intrigued. What was going on? I am laughing so goddamn hard at this video of Trump inexplicably putting his water bottle on the floor, and Pence immediately doing the same for no reason whatsoever. pic.twitter.com/qEFPzKClYj The most generous explanation is that step one of hurricane preparedness is removing all table-standing water bottles to the safety of the floor, and Trump and Pence were simply attentive students. Another theory is that Trump is playing three-dimensional chess with water bottles and this stunt, which went viral, is a genius move designed to distract us from the real issues. Alternatively, one might consider the idea that nothing Trump does makes sense, and Pence is an obsequious pawn who does anything his master does. SPOTTED in the White House briefing room. A bag of wet socks pic.twitter.com/uyN3O8mrSn No, I’m not talking about Steve Bannon. On 17 May, Saagar Enjeti, a White House correspondent for the Daily Caller, tweeted a photo of a ziplock bag stuffed full of wet socks that, inexplicably, was lying on the floor of the White House briefing room. Five days later, he tweeted another picture of the socks which, it seems, hadn’t been claimed. I contacted Enjeti this week to find out if there had been further developments and he informed me that the socks seem to have gone. One hopes, to a far better place. In May a severed foot inside a hiking shoe washed up on the shores of British Columbia. This was the 14th human foot since 2007 to be discovered on the coastline. Over the years there have been various theories regarding the feet: a serial killer, a mafia calling card, something to do with the new series of Twin Peaks. The mostly likely hypothesis, though, is modern footwear. Most of the feet found are sneakers; their robust but lightweight material protecting a foot from decomposing, while pulling the foot towards shore. But who knows, in the future we may find it was all a grim guerrilla marketing campaign for a new type of Air Max. The first lady recently spent almost a month out of the public eye, sparking fervent rumours about her whereabouts. However, she reappeared this week, as Trump has vociferously pointed out. On Wednesday the president tweeted that that the media: “Reported everything from near death, to facelift, to left the WH (and me) for NY or Virginia, to abuse. All Fake, she is doing really well!” Later on Wednesday Melania Trump sat next to her husband at the Fema hurricane briefing where she did not appear fazed by the bizarre water bottle maneuverings. “She went through a little rough patch but she’s doing great,” Trump announced at the briefing. Of all the bizarre things to have happened in 2018, Melania going missing is probably the least mysterious. Hearing nonstop news about your husband’s affair with porn stars, coupled with having to undergo kidney surgery, certainly constitutes a “rough patch”. So while Melania’s whereabouts for a month may remain a mystery, her motives from disappearing from the public gaze are not. In March, the actor Tiffany Haddish told GQ magazine that she once saw a fellow celebrity bite Beyoncé on the face at a party. The internet immediately dropped everything it was doing and started a crazed search for the mysterious biter. A shortlist of suspects was immediately drawn up and elite task forces created to investigate the issue. Chrissy Teigen told US Weekly that people have “honestly texted me mood boards about this, like actually full CSI, with pictures of actresses connected with red string as to where in the country they were that night.” It was quickly decided that Sanaa Lathan, from Love & Basketball fame, was the culprit. Lathan, however, denied these rumours. The case of #WhoBitBeyonce remains open. .@POTUS @realDonaldTrump is presented with a letter from North Korean Leader Kim Jong Un, Friday, June 1, 2018, by North Korean envoy Kim Yong Chol in the Oval Office at the @WhiteHouse in Washington, D.C., followed by a meeting. (Official @WhiteHouse Photos by Shealah Craighead) pic.twitter.com/6a1PgFXS3v Earlier this month Trump was presented with a letter from North Korea’s Kim Jong-un which came in an extremely large envelope. No one is sure why the envelope was so large, however some believe it was an attempt to make Trump’s hands look small. We’re also not clear what was in the envelope, although White House officials have confirmed that Trump has read its contents. Perhaps we will know more next week: Trump is meeting with Kim in Singapore on 12 June. No doubt he will use the occasion to inform Kim that he too has envelopes in his stationary cupboard, and they are much bigger and more powerful than his. Actually, that wasn’t a mystery at all. It’s obviously Laurel. Now that’s impressive. Car found hanging from the #LeasideBridge in the #DonValley this morning. #ultimateprank #Toronto #Thingsyouseewhilebiking pic.twitter.com/RF1ucxPfCy Last month a burned-out Honda Civic was found dangling from a bridge in Toronto. It was quickly lowered to the ground by the fire department but nobody knows why it was there. A preliminary theory, that it was a prop for a movie shoot, was quickly retracted and the case still isn’t solved. What with dangling cars and severed feet, Canada’s not quite the quiet country it’s often made out to be.