There has been much debate about why the public has started to lose faith in mainstream political parties but the reason behind the rise of populism doesn’t take much working out. The past decade has seen the biggest financial crisis in a century, the biggest slump since the Great Depression and the slowest recovery since the second world war. Living standards have flatlined and public spending has been cut. People are anxious, frustrated and angry. The only real surprise is that they are not angrier. That, though, may only be a matter of time, because rapid technological change is happening at a time when the global economy seems fragile and many people feel they are getting a raw deal. These are perfect conditions for an age of insecurity. So far, the response from mainstream parties has been unimpressive. Those expressing concerns about the hollowing out of industrial communities by globalisation have been lectured about the benefits of free trade. Those who have voiced anxiety about migration have been called racists. Those who wonder how they will make a living when the robots arrive have been branded Luddites. In his new book, Charles Dumas says: “It is vital that the label ‘populism’ does not become a sneer. To be sure, demagogues have readily exploited widespread discontent with quack remedies. But centrist politicians and commentators have shown equally widespread lack of empathy with the legitimate grievances that underlie this neo-Luddism. The way combined globalisation, technology, demographics and financial imbalances are developing could only too easily aggravate neo-Luddism in future, as well as false ethnic and/or regional divisions.” That’s all true, and a quick glance at the report on social mobility published by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development last week helps explain why populists are gaining ground. The OECD found that 25 years ago, the disposable income of the richest 10% of the population across its 34 member countries was seven times that of the poorest 10%. It is now nine times as high. Wealth inequality is even more pronounced, with the top 10% owning half the wealth and the bottom 40% just 3%. What’s more, there is less chance of a child born into a poor family making good than there once was. The OECD found that upward mobility for people with lower educated parents tended to increase for children born between 1955 and 1975 but stagnated for those born thereafter. “Families and communities in many countries seem to be trapped on the bottom rungs of the ladder.” It is possible for children with a disadvantaged background to get up the ladder but it is a long and painful process. In the average OECD country it would take five generations for somebody born into the poorest 10% of the population to achieve average (mean) earnings. Nor, according to the OECD is there a trade-off between inequality and social mobility. Scandinavian countries have not been immune from populism but they are the most equal and they also have the most social mobility. A speech last week from Andy Haldane, chief economist at the Bank of England, helps explain why that is. Using the latest evidence from economic historians, Haldane noted the first Industrial Revolution in the middle of the 18th century marked a turning point. Up until 1750, income per head grew by 0.1% a year on average, but since then average growth has been 1.5% a year. There were technological advances and periods of strong growth pre-1750, but times of rapid expansion were almost exactly matched by episodes of contraction. The big change since 1750 has not been that the upswings have been stronger, it is that downswings have been less frequent and less painful. Growth depends on two things: new ideas and institutions that cushion the impact of recessions. The three previous industrial revolutions all caused technological disruption and led to significant job replacement. They also led to income inequality, because those with the greatest skills were able to stay one step ahead of the machine. Workers did not always benefit fully or immediately from the pick-up in productivity associated with periods of technological change, which were often long as well as difficult for those affected. But institutions developed to ensure that the fruits of growth were shared. These took many forms: Haldane name checks compulsory schooling, the spread of higher education, the development of central banks, the emergence of credit unions and friendly societies, the arrival of trade unions to represent workers, and the creation and expansion of the welfare state during the 20th century. He thinks the coming technological change could be the biggest of the lot, because artificial intelligence means humans will no longer have the cognitive playing field to themselves. “The fourth Industrial Revolution will expand the range of ideas, perhaps more than any of its predecessors. It may also expand the range of workers who suffer its side-effects, perhaps more than so any of its predecessors. In the past, new institutions have emerged to cushion this painful transition, limiting the recessionary hit to societies. Historically, doing so appears to have the key to sustainable growth.” Jobs will be created as well as lost, but even if higher unemployment caused by technological change is avoided there could still be rising wage inequality, a fall in labour’s share of national income and social unrest. Doubtless new institutions will eventually be created to help deal with the fourth Industrial Revolution. In the meantime, it would be a good idea to breathe new life into some of the institutions developed as a response to the first three: progressive taxation, investment in education, cradle-to-grave welfare states, and collective bargaining. Populism and Economics – Charles Dumas, Profile books