Tens of thousands of people will demand an end to cuts to public services and a halt to “ruinous” privatisations at a protest on Saturday to mark the 70th anniversary of the NHS. Politicians, actors, musicians and union leaders will address a rally in central London calling on the government to give the health service more money amid claims it is being “deliberately underfunded”. Nurses, doctors and other health workers will also join the demonstration which is timed to mark the 70th anniversary on 5 July. The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, who will address the demonstration, paid tribute to Clement Attlee’s Labour government, which founded the NHS in 1948. He said it was the first comprehensive health service in the world built on the principle that healthcare should be available to all on the basis of need, not ability to pay, and called it “our proudest achievement”. However, he warned the NHS was under so much strain that it was “on the brink”. “What the Conservatives have done to our NHS, first under David Cameron, and then Theresa May, is appalling,” he said. “Deliberate underfunding of services, and squeezing the pay of our brilliant doctors, nurses and health staff, has pushed our NHS to the brink.” The government has faced criticism that it has failed to adequately fund the NHS since 2010, amid claims it has overseen a decline in the once widely admired public health service and has been privatising it by stealth. Earlier this month, Theresa May promised an extra £20bn in a Brexit dividend, which was met with scepticism as a government spending watchdog challenged the basis of the pledges, which it suggested were ambiguous. Between 2010-11 and 2016-17, health spending increased by an average of 1.2% above inflation and increases are due to continue in real terms at a similar rate until the end of this parliament. This is far below the annual inflation-proof growth rate that the NHS enjoyed before 2010 of almost 4% stretching back to the 1950s. As budgets tighten, NHS organisations have been struggling to live within their means. In the financial year 2015-16, acute trusts recorded a deficit of £2.6bn. This was reduced to £800m last year, though only after a £1.8bn bung from the Department of Health, which shows the deficit remained the same year on year. Read a full Q&A on the NHS winter crisis Corbyn said the funding pledge was “simply not enough to make up for the last eight years of slashed budgets and worsening standards, falling morale and loss of staff” and would “barely keep the NHS at a standstill”. “Every day there are shocking stories of unacceptable waiting times, ambulance delays and patients left on trolleys in corridors, and they’ve spent years selling off and contracting out our NHS bit by bit, leaving the NHS to be sued by private companies, like Virgin,” he said. “Labour will end privatisation because our NHS should be about healthcare for all, not profits for a few.” Research by the Trades Union Congress showed widespread shortages of GPs in England, with 43% fewer doctors than required in Milton Keynes and Luton. “Underfunding has left the NHS on the critical list. There are too few doctors, too few beds and too few healthcare staff,” said its general secretary, Frances O’Grady. “The best medicine for the NHS is the extra funding it needs, but the government is giving it too small a dose to bring it up to full health. “We’re sending a message to the government today that our NHS needs a better deal and it must be publicly owned and provided so that every penny goes to patient care and not to private profits.” The GMB union said the three-year pay deal for NHS workers would lead to a real pay cut of up to £2,500 for some staff. It is the only health union to have rejected the deal. Its national officer, Rachel Harrison, said: “Jeremy Hunt has some cheek imposing a real terms pay cut of thousands of pounds on hard-working NHS staff. “On the NHS’s 70th birthday, the health secretary has soured the mood with his party pooper of a pay offer.” Sam Fairbairn, the national secretary for the People’s Assembly Against Austerity, said: “We’ve had enough lies and spin from this government. In one of the richest countries on the planet no one should have to worry about accessing decent, free, publicly provided healthcare which for 70 years our NHS has done. “But unless we all do something now to hold this government to account our NHS as we know it won’t last another five years, let alone another 70.” A Department of Health spokesman said: “As part of our long-term plan for the NHS we will increase funding by an average 3.4% per year – meaning that by 2023/24 it will receive £20.5bn a year more than it currently does.” Saturday’s protest is being organised by groups including the People’s Assembly, Health Campaigns Together, the TUC and 11 other health trade unions. Former Coronation Street actors Julie Hesmondhalgh and Sally Lindsey will attend, along with the ska legend Rhoda Dakar, who will perform at the rally. The march will assemble at 12pm at Portland Place in central London followed by a procession route to Whitehall.