(World rankings as of Mon 25 June; ups and downs calculated from Mon 28 May) Lethal in the second halves of the first and third Test but on the surface hard to gauge considering the hands France were dealt. Julian Savea’s confirmed move to Toulon (he is out of favour but has 46 Test tries) was another reminder of their greatest battle but in most positions there is remarkable depth and Scott Barrett was superb in the second row. Damian McKenzie is box office but his game management when called upon at No10 remains up and down. Still the team to beat by a distance though. Gerard Meagher Confirmation that they are, without question, the leading lights of the northern hemisphere. Such resilience to overcome the Wallabies in Sydney at the end of a quite breathtaking series and, indeed, season for Ireland. Joe Schmidt managed to rotate his squad to the extent that only Adam Byrne did not feature and still claim Ireland’s first series win in Australia for 39 years. The depth he is striking upon is formidable – particularly in the back-row – and while it feels almost mundane to mention their half-backs, Conor Murray and Johnny Sexton remain so integral. Not so long ago the standout fixture of the coming autumn was New Zealand’s trip to Twickenham, not any more. GM Wales were flatlining while England moved to second in the world rankings, armed with two Six Nations titles, but as Warren Gatland approaches his final year in charge, he has probably never had a stronger squad. Summer victories over South Africa and Argentina in a two-Test series took them to third behind Ireland and New Zealand: still some distance to go, but they look equipped for the faster, more reactive game that Test rugby now demands. Gatland has options in most positions, no longer reliant on a group that has served him for most of the decade with many showing signs of wear and tear. Paul Rees England’s tour of South Africa had virtually everything. Fast starts, altitude sickness, sparkling tries, self-inflicted errors, belated redemption ... at times it felt like a giant game of snakes and ladders. No-one will ever know what would have happened had England prepared differently for the first two Tests at altitude; their 2-1 series defeat was particularly harsh on Jonny May, whose form from start to finish was outstanding. Doubts still remain, however, about their consistent ability to dominate sides up front even when they are comfortably ahead on the scoreboard; perhaps that will change if all their key men can report fit and fresh this autumn. The biggest conundrum remains Danny Cipriani. Even on a wet day in Cape Town unsuited to his creative talents he offered one fleeting moment of genius which could make the difference between England enjoying a successful World Cup or falling just short in Japan. He deserves to start again in November. RK Getting there. The first Test victory in Brisbane was a reminder that they will be some force by next year’s World Cup but discipline became an increasing problem as the series wore on and Kurtley Beale’s try in Melbourne was one of the few times they carved Ireland open. Will Genia was badly missed after his injury in the second Test and while Michael Cheika appears to still be raging, he knows his team are more or less on track. David Pocock fitted back in seamlessly. GM This was South Africa’s most encouraging series for a while. It was not just the outcome: Faf de Klerk and Duane Vermeulen were both outstanding, coach Rassie Erasmus is clearly making a difference and, slowly but surely, the nation is falling back in love with the Springboks. To see Siya Kolisi become the first black African to captain the Boks in a Test match was one of the year’s most uplifting and significant sporting moments. They should approach the Rugby Championship with renewed confidence. Robert Kitson A comfortable victory over an Argentina side that showed little resistance in Resistencia meant a rare away victory over a tier one nation for Scotland, but it did not entirely make up for the previous week’s defeat to the United States. A year ago, Scotland lost in Fiji but went on to impress in the autumn and the Six Nations. They are behind their rivals when it comes to depth, but at full tilt they are getting there. PR Reasons to feel hard done by in all three Tests against the All Blacks at the hands of officials and it is such a shame because in the first two they were competitive to say the least. The best defensive side of the Six Nations showed some of that resolve but still they do not look like one who can go for 80 minutes. If their upward curve can continue however, England will be genuinely concerned and amid all their injury problems, players such as Anthony Belleau have impressed. Fantastic to see Wesley Fofana back, too. GM Fiji lost their final Test of the window, a surprise 27-19 defeat in Lautoka by Tonga – the first time they had lost to them since 2011. But, they were crowned Pacific champions for the fourth straight year the previous week when they beat Georgia 35-17 after defeating Samoa a week earlier and that was enough to lift them above the ailing Argentinian side. Guardian sport Another wretched series prompted the Pumas’ head coach, Daniel Hourcade, to resign. The Pumas were one of the stories of the 2015 World Cup, dumping their 10-man game and attacking from all over the pitch, but after the tournament they introduced a rule that said no one would be considered for selection if they were based outside the country. It has stifled competition for places and with Hourcade continuing to preach an expansive game, they became predictable and forgot what it took to win. PR The United States’ victory over Scotland was the most impressive result this month for an emerging nation. Japan won the first Test against Italy, but given their superior position in the rankings, it was more of a surprise when they lost the following week before comfortably overcoming Georgia. The United States, who are in England’s World Cup group, defeated Russia, who will open next year’s World Cup against Japan, 62-13 a week before the Russians beat fading Canada by 23 points. PR