For 30 years, the novelist Anthony Burgess published more than 400 essays and book reviews in the Observer on everything under the sun, from cigars and airport fiction to cinema and Wagner. As a one-man cultural revolution, Burgess was as refreshing and down-to-earth as a pint of Pennine bitter. He raised common sense to heights of genius and curiosity to a fever pitch. Below, we republish one of his most typical and entertaining pieces, on “A movie that changed my life”, Fritz Lang’s Metropolis. We do this to launch the 2018 Observer/Anthony Burgess prize for arts journalism. This unique award, now in its seventh year, has become a landmark in contemporary British cultural commentary. Once again, the Observer and our co-sponsor, the International Anthony Burgess Foundation, are on the lookout for a young writer who can follow Burgess’s inspiration, filing newspaper copy that’s never less than generous, entertaining, well informed, witty and wise. The competition starts here. Robert McCrum Has any movie ever changed anybody’s life? The art or craft of the cinema has had, like any other mode of expression, the chance to modify the ways we think, feel, see, hear, even believe, but it has missed it, muffed it, failed. Books are different; so is music. Spend an evening reading the sixth book of Milton’s Paradise Lost, or listening to Mahler’s Resurrection Symphony, and you can feel your attitude to life being changed. This is probably because you are placed in contact with a powerful sensibility, allied to a towering intellect, that is unified and knows what it believes. But movies are not individual works; they are the products of a collective, and, as such, they bristle with compromise. Reputable scriptwriters weep to find their best scenes discarded. Great directors howl with rage at brutal cuts. The film is a commercial form, and it cannot permit genius to rage untrammelled, for the general public does not care much for genius. Originality is dangerous, so is the naked truth. We have had movies that approached greatness – like Orson Welles’s Citizen Kane – but always had to yield to what the box office would permit. I speak, of course, of Hollywood, the world centre, as it once was, of commercial cinema. Hollywood produced very efficient artefacts, but it was short on courage – which, anyway, would always be damped by the censors. The situation in Europe has been different, though the American philosophy of film, along with American finance, has finally prevailed. Things were different when Buñuel and Dalí concocted Un Chien Andalou and Jean Cocteau produced Le Sang d’un Poète on a shoestring. And, as long ago as 1927, before Fritz Lang emigrated to the United States, it was possible to approach greatness with the film Metropolis. If any movie got near to changing my life, it was this. It cost a lot of money to make and nearly ruined the German organisation, Ufa, that financed it. But the expense was justified. I still look at it on videocassette and, in 1975, I had the chance to improvise music for it on the piano at a cinema club showing in Iowa City. My father had done the same thing professionally (that is, for enough money to buy a couple of beers) at the film’s first showing in Manchester, England. I remember that occasion. It is, as they say, etched on my brain. I was nine years old, and the publicity of stills and handouts affected me powerfully before viewing it in the sixpenny stalls. The movie itself was a revelation. In 1927, my generation drew its childish myths from two sources – the far past and the far future. The far past was really for the palaeontologists – the lost world of the brontosaurus, the tyrannosaurus, and the pterodactyl. This was explored in boy’s magazines, in a novel by A Conan Doyle, even in a crude film based on the latter’s The Lost World. Some of the acting would be booed even on an old-time barnstorming circuit. But realism is not wanted here The imaginary future was the other side of our mythical coin. We had been given the future long before, in HG Wells’s The Time Machine and When the Sleeper Wakes, and our boy’s magazines presented a cruder version of it, with spaceships, robots, skyscrapers and even the End of the World. If we British kids had been given the money for a trip to New York, we would have seen the skyline of the future, but we were stuck in dull suburbia, feeding on sub-literary trash and the trash of the cinema. But Metropolis was not trash. The novel on which the movie was based was written by Fritz Lang’s wife, Thea von Harbou. One could buy it in Woolworths for five cents. It’s a pretty melodramatic story. Sometime in the future there is a great city, ruled by one man, a kind of super-capitalist named Joh Fredersen. The community is divided into the workers and the consumers. The consumers live in great luxury, while the workers dwell underground and shuffle to work at the blast of the whistle. A girl named Maria (played by Brigitte Helm) appears one day in the gorgeous gardens of the Club of the Sons – the sons, that is, of the ruling leisured class. She brings a group of miserable-looking children who gape in wonder at the peacocks and the flowers, and she looks Freder, the son of Fredersen, in the eye, saying, “These are your brothers and sisters”. She and her charges are bundled off, but young Fredersen has a moment of intense revelation. Metropolis is founded on injustice, he realises, and he rushes to his father’s office to tell him this. His father is not pleased, and he sets a spy to follow him around to see that he does not get into socialist mischief. But the young man descends to the grim world of the workers, where he sees vast machines that appear to him to be incarnations of the god Moloch, swallowing human fodder alive. The technology is, by our standards, pretty primitive. It unloads a lot of steam, but the steam is appropriate to this vision of hell. In the medieval quarter of Metropolis lives an inventor named Rotwang. He was once a contestant of Fredersen’s for the hand of Hel, a beautiful young woman who died giving birth to Freder. He has created a robot, all metal body and metallic brain, and this he proudly shows to Fredersen. The two men hate each other but are bound together in a kind of hostile symbiosis: inventive brain and autocratic power are joined in mutual need. But Fredersen’s visit to Rotwang concerns a matter of pure politics. Rotwang’s cellar leads to the old catacombs, where Fredersen suspects subversive meetings are taking place. The two men descend into a region of old bones and, hidden in the shadows, they observe such a meeting. Joh Fredersen tells Rotwang that the workers must by confirmed in their servitude, with no nonsense about human feeling (which might mean strikes and machine-smashing) and that the robot must be given Maria’s face and form and programmed to preach obedience to the Master of Metropolis. So Maria is captured and, in an impressive but implausible Frankenstein sequence, we see the metal robot take on the appearance of flesh and the face of Maria. Then she tells the workers to smash the machines. This was never in the program. A robot can, apparently, go mad. It is a melodramatic plot, and the implausibilities stick out like sore thumbs. Some of the acting would be booed even on an old-time barnstorming circuit. But realism is not wanted here: Fritz Lang is working in the German tradition of Expressionismus. The aim of that movement was to thud home a thesis, usually political, with every possible device – symbolism, song, choral chant, stylised movement, decor – and a total abandonment of such traditional dramatic properties as character. The film is, for all its faults, one of our few cinematic classics, and this is because it provides icons. The visual exaggerations are metaphors that stick in the mind. Lang first saw the towers of Metropolis when he approached the New York skyline from the sea, but his own imagined city borrows only the Babel aspect – “Let us build a tower that will reach the sky”. His pasteboard architecture chills because of its beauty: the Paternoster Tower has, in its structure as well as its name, a biblical resonance, a cathedral-like quality which announces a new religion. The worship of power and money is seen in New York not in an architectural philosophy: the skyscrapers are not bound together in an urban plan, they are each a monument to individual thrust, and, in New York, individualism is rampant. But in Lang’s Metropolis individualism is the property of one man only, the Master. We are in a totalitarian state, and the architecture is totalitarian. Lang’s vision is, of course, prophetic, but the prophecy has never been fulfilled. Hitler came to power seven years after the film was completed, but his tyranny took a form different from Joh Fredersen’s. Fredersen’s power is at least sane in the American manner. It is based on money and is totally American. There is nothing militaristic or racial in it. Film is a visual medium, and, if the task of literature is to stud the brain with quotations, cinema’s job is to cram it with images which transcend story line and feed the need for myth. There are very few films which have done this. We are told by the French post-structuralists that the writer doesn’t write: the writer is written, is controlled by the language he uses. And so Lang was controlled by the limitations of black and white, by mocked-up urban landscapes which never pretended to be real, and probably by the strange ambiguous beauty of Brigitte Helm. The film was never meant to be propaganda. Lang admits that he was primarily fascinated by machines, above all perhaps by the huge machine which is the film-making complex. When I say, though with many reservations, that Metropolis is a movie that changed my life I perhaps really mean that it changed my childhood. “In the lost childhood of Judas,” wrote George Russell, “Christ was betrayed.” Perhaps our adult lives are nothing more than sophisticated replays of our extreme youth. The myths which nourish our childhood are implanted for ever. I can never free myself from Metropolis. This is an edited extract from Anthony Burgess: The Ink Trade: Selected Journalism 1961-1993, edited by Will Carr, published 31 May 2018 by Carcanet Press. • The Observer/Burgess prize is open to all authors for a previously unpublished 800-word review of new work in the arts. To enter, visit anthonyburgess.org/prize. The closing date for entries is 30 November 2018. The prize is presented by the International Anthony Burgess Foundation and the Observer. The winner will receive a prize of £3,000, and two runners-up will each receive £500