At least three three Rohingya refugees have died in Cox’s Bazar after extreme monsoon rains hit the refugee camps causing lethal mudslides. A 3-year-old Rohingya boy died and his mother was injured when the mud walls of their house in Kutupalong settlement collapsed while they were sleeping. Two Rohingya refugees were killed in Balukhali camp. Mohammad Ali, 20, died after he was crushed by an uprooted tree on Tuesday morning, while a Rohingya woman died after she was crushed in her shack when the rain triggered a landslide. Over the weekend the Bangladeshi region received more than a third of the rainfall it typically receives during the entire monsoon period, damaging thousands of tents and leaving several refugees homeless. After his shack at the bottom of a hill in Balukhali camp was destroyed on Monday, Jafor Alom was living under a makeshift tarpaulin, along with his wife and three children. “It’s only the beginning of the monsoon,” said Alom. “I cannot understand how we will live in this tent-like place for next two or three months when it is likely to rain heavily again. It’s a very bad timing with the Eid [Eid al-Fitr] being a few days away. We are in dire miseries. We cannot celebrate the biggest [Muslim] festival this time at all.” Rohingya refugee Jamal Hossain said that he has been homeless since a landslide destroyed his house in Balukhali camp on Monday. Having arrived in Cox’s Bazar from Myanmar last September when most land had been taken, his family had been no choice but to erect their tent on a hill. “With my four children and wife now I have taken shelter in a relative’s hut in a neighbouring camp. I don’t know where and how I will build my next shack,” said Hossain. “I have no money to build a new shack. I also don’t know where I will get land. I am really anxious after turning homeless this way.” Noor Hossain, a local Rohingya reporter, told the Guardian at least 500 refugees had been injured after their shacks collapsed in the heavy rain. Over the past few months there has been mounting apprehension about the impact the rains would have on the makeshift camps, which are home to almost a million refugees. There have been 37 landslides so far and agencies are scrambling to move those families in vulnerable areas before there are more casualties. In the Kutapalong settlement, 22 families, totalling 81 people, have been relocated in the past few days. Bangladesh’s refugee relief and rehabilitation commissioner, Mohammad Abul Kalam, said that 30,000 of the 55,000 vulnerable refugees had been relocated and that monsoon preparations in the past weeks had already prevented a much bigger death toll. Caroline Gluck, a UNHCR spokeswoman on the ground in Cox’s Bazar, said that almost nonstop rain for the past few days had been challenging for the refugees and humanitarian agencies. “Before the rains, we have all been working flat out to make the settlements as safe as possible – stabilising slopes, reinforcing pathways, building bridges, and providing stronger, waterproof shelters for refugees,” said Gluck. However, she said more flat land was “urgently needed” to relocate families who were in danger from the impact of the rains. “Our work has helped to prevent many accidents in the settlements, but we really don’t know what will happen in the future if there is massive and sustained rainfall.” she said. “Our fear is more extreme weather will cause further damage, destruction and potential loss of life.” More than 700,000 Rohingya refugees live in Cox’s Bazar, having fled neighbouring Myanmar over the last year following a campaign of violence – described by the UN as having “all the hallmarks of genocide” – which saw tens of thousands killed, houses razed to the ground and women sexually abused. Most of the temporary housing in the camps in Cox’s Bazar is brittle, made from bamboo and tarpaulin, and many of the tents erected on steep inclines are vulnerable to mudslides.