The second Triple Crown winner of the last four decades was greeted as rapturously as the first when Justify crossed the line at Belmont Park on Saturday night, and for the second time in four seasons, American racing will spend the next few months enjoying the glow that only a Triple Crown winner can bring. This is despite the strong likelihood that the remainder of Justify’s career on the track will now amount to less than five minutes of actual racing time. American Pharoah had only two starts after winning the Belmont in 2015: a narrow defeat in the Travers Stakes at Saratoga in late August, and a storming six‑and‑a‑half‑length win the Breeders’ Cup Classic on his way to the stud farm in November. An identical programme would make sense for Justify, who has surely earned a break after six races in four months, but the Haskell Invitational at Monmouth in late July – which is, like the Travers, restricted to three‑year‑olds – has also been floated a possible target. Saratoga, in upstate New York, is a three-hour drive from both Boston and New York City, but when American Pharoah turned up for the Travers the crowd was a 50,000 sell‑out and no fewer than 15,000 turned up the day before, just to see him exercise on the track. Another interesting point is that attendances were up throughout its seven-week meeting, which shows how a Triple Crown winner can advertise racing in general simply by reminding people that it is there. Justify has already done the same and is now such a valuable stallion prospect that risk-reward considerations will inevitably apply when it comes to choosing a path towards his next career. When a horse has just become only the 13th Triple Crown winner in US racing history, there is, in truth, only so much still left for him to achieve. Since a four‑year‑old career seems highly unlikely, a Grade One win in an all-aged race is the one obvious gap on his record that is begging to be filled. If Justify could retire undefeated after taking the Breeders’ Cup Classic at Churchill Downs in November, the Coolmore Stud will feel that it has secured a $75m bargain if reports of a sale of Justify’s breeding rights before the Preakness Stakes prove to be correct. Those reports were denied by WinStar Farm, one of the co-owners of Justify as well as one of Kentucky’s most famous stud farms, which would also be a feasible destination for the son of Scat Daddy when the time comes. Coolmore, though, could shuttle Justify between its operations in the northern and southern hemispheres, as it has done with American Pharoah. As a result, it is in a position to make an offer that WinStar and Justify’s other owners could find it very difficult to refuse, even if it has not done so already. In Britain, where the Triple Crown requires a horse to win over a mile in May and a mile‑and‑three-quarters in September with the Derby in between, we have not enjoyed the boost of a winner since 1970 and the prospect seems more remote than ever after Saxon Warrior’s defeat at Epsom eight days ago. In the States, American Pharoah’s first crop of foals will go to the sales this autumn and appear on the track next year, and with Justify now preparing to join him at stud, there should be yearlings by Triple Crown winners on offer at major auctions for many years to come. That in turn will act as a reminder to all concerned that while the chance of owning a Triple Crown winner remains vanishingly small, it is still a dream that will occasionally come true. Brighton 2.00 Livvys Dream 2.30 More Than Likely 3.00 Medici Oro 3.30 Regicide 4.00 Tawaafoq 4.30 New Rich 5.00 Following Breeze Worcester 2.15 Hurricane Rita 2.45 Powerful Symbol 3.15 Robin The Raven 3.45 Andapa 4.15 Bright Tomorrow 4.45 Dory 5.15 Mr Mafia Windsor 5.50 Rock Of Estonia 6.20 Dunkerron 6.50 Flying Sparkle 7.20 Another Eclipse 7.50 Just Right 8.20 Come On Come On (nb) 8.50 How Far Pontefract 6.40 Freed From Desire 7.10 Becky The Thatcher 7.40 Roundhay Park 8.10 Contango (nap) 8.40 Swissal 9.10 Foxtrot Knight Tips by Greg Wood.