Otherworldly and endearing, Celeste follows a pixel-art character up a mountain, encouraging you through its fiendish, treacherous areas with affirmations and optimism. Tough, but perfectly balanced. We said: “A tough game with an uplifting message: don’t let the voice inside your head tell you that you can’t do things.” Read the full review A much-celebrated and enduringly mysterious dark fantasy game is given a new lick of paint, which further highlights its brilliance. Dark Souls requires courage and perseverance – it’s a world where all manner of hideous things are trying to end you – but the rewards are immense. We said: “If a new kind of adventure appeals, one in which quick fingers matter less than brains and human cunning, there’s still nothing like Dark Souls.” Read the full review A game that explores the dynamics of a 25-year-old woman falling in love, and the creative and personal compromises of young adulthood. Playing with touch on a phone screen gives it a sense of intimacy and connection with the player. We said: “A simple story of young love, under which deeper themes silently pass like shadowy whales. Florence’s most immediate delights are found in the execution, which is tender, assured, understated and never trite.” Read the full review Old, tired god Kratos goes on a journey with his young son to scatter the ashes of his departed wife, fighting a pantheon of Norse gods and mythical creatures along the way. This adventure is absorbing, violent and visually spectacular, but it’s the touching story that comes as a real surprise. We said: “God of War is a standard-setter both technologically and narratively. It is a game that, until recently, would have been impossible.” Read the full review Clever, pacy, nostalgic and as bingeable as Saturday-morning cartoons, Iconoclasts has fun exploratory puzzles, screen-filling bosses to shoot at, and interesting gadgets that put a new spin on play every few hours. We said: “It successfully recreates the atmosphere and sense of adventure of the 90s 2D action-adventures that inspired it, and occasionally betters them.” Read the full review This lunch-break-friendly and charmingly chunky game, in which mechs battle aliens to save humanity, strips away the stuffiness and overcomplexity of the strategy game genre without sacrificing what makes it satisfying. We said: “Even chess seems flabby and obtuse next to the masterful elegance of Into the Breach’s micro-battles.” Read the full review Set sail for a far-off land, set up camp, and hunt the local wildlife. Epic face-offs against majestic and aggressive fantasy beasts in their beautiful habitats make the heart race – and a lively player population means there’s always someone around to help you out. We said: “A game that seems intimidating at first quickly becomes one of the more rewarding gaming experiences of recent years” Read the full review Animated in the style of Studio Ghibli, Ni no Kuni 2 is a colourful Japanese fantasy game about a cat-eared boy-king trying to build his kingdom. Beautiful and charming. We said: “Puts forward an irresistible case for your attention ... As video games are once again weathering ignorance-fuelled attacks that paint them as universally gun-centric, violent and nihilistic, Ni no Kuni is a timely counterpoint.” Read the full review Cleaving to the formula of computer role-playing classics such as Planescape Torment, this is a huge game to sink your teeth into, featuring 50-plus hours of story, turn-based strategy battles, pirates and a great script. We said: “Sailing frees you from the need to follow a set path, and most encounters in this ridiculously gigantic world are expertly written.” Read the full review Driven to desperation by grief, a young man implores mysterious gods and slays colossi in the hope of resurrecting someone he loves. An extraordinarily well-done remaster of a 13-year-old game that has proved to be a masterpiece. We said: “What’s most impactful about Shadow of the Colossus is its sense of scale: the immensity not only of its dramatic ruins and the sad, beautiful colossi, but of the task at hand, and its themes of death, faith, longing and the destructive selfishness of grief.” Read the full review The final chapter in a long-running gangster saga is known and loved for melding the melodramatic with the ridiculous. Walk in the shoes of ageing yakuza Kazuma Kiryu in a virtual Tokyo that hums with danger and energy. We said: “Yakuza 6 may not be subtle, but few players will be left dry-eyed as the curtain on this tale is finally drawn.” Read the full review