On a leafy street outside a private university in Medellín, Colombia’s second city, José Botero is plastering cars with bumper stickers. “Vote for Duque,” he shouts to the approval of passing drivers, who honk their horns. “He’s Colombia’s only choice!” Botero is campaigning for Iván Duque, the frontrunner in a bitter presidential race that will conclude on Sunday in a runoff between two candidates from the extremes of the political spectrum. Duque, a conservative from the Democratic Centre party, and Gustavo Petro, a former mayor of Bogotá – and onetime urban guerrilla – are both campaigning on anti-establishment platforms and picked up enough of the vote in last month’s first round to eliminate a handful of moderate candidates. Hanging in the balance in Sunday’s vote is a fragile peace with the former rebels of the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (Farc) – a deal which Duque opposes and Petro supports. Botero’s mother was still pregnant with him when his father was kidnapped and murdered by the Farc – and like many Colombians, he was disgusted by the peace agreement. The deal, which won the outgoing president Juan Manuel Santos a Nobel peace prize, formally ended a war that left 220,000 dead and 7 million displaced. But its terms – including guaranteed seats in congress for Farc leaders and promises of softer sentencing – proved too much for voters who narrowly rejected the agreement in a referendum in late 2016. The deal was amended and later ratified in congress, but many still want it revised. Duque – who has promised to amend key parts of the deal – promises them that opportunity. “No one is against peace,” said Botero, echoing one of Duque’s talking points. “But we won’t see it with the deal that Santos signed.” Pedro Piedrahita Bustamante, a political science professor at the University of Medellín, said Duque’s camp has exploited divisions opened by the peace process. “Colombians are culturally accustomed to war,” he said. “Justice is seen as an eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth.” Duque, a fresh-faced but prematurely grey 41-year-old, spent much of his adult life in Washington DC working at the Inter-American Development Bank, before he was hand-picked for a senate seat in 2014 by former president Álvaro Uribe. Like his mentor, he is a social conservative: tough on drugs and crime and opposed to gay marriage. Much of Duque’s voter base was gifted to him by Uribe, who left office in 2010, but remains a major player in Colombian politics. Uribe’s tenure was dogged by scandal. A state intelligence agency was shut down after he used it to spy on the opposition, journalists and members of the supreme court. His military campaign against the rebels was marked by grave human rights abuses: thousands of civilians were murdered in order to falsely inflate combat statistics. But he commands huge support in his hometown Medellín and the surrounding Antioquia province, which voted overwhelmingly against the peace deal. Conflict Colombia has experienced one of the longest internal conflicts in history. It started in the 1960s following a turbulent period known as 'la violencia'. On the one hand, the Colombian government fought to maintain order and stability, seeking to protect the interests of its citizens and the legitimacy of the state. On the other, there were guerilla groups – like Farc and ELN – who said they were fighting for the poor and social justice. And then paramilitary groups emerged, claiming they were reacting to the threats from the guerillas while taking justice into their own hands. Impact More than seven million people were uprooted from their homes and driven to cities fearing for their lives. At least two hundred thousand people lost their lives. Numerous human rights violations were committed. Hundreds of people were forcibly recruited and taken far into the Colombian jungle to fight. More than 8,000 cases of child recruitment were recorded. Overall, there have been more than eight million victims, due to the conflict. One out of every five Colombians has been directly affected. Peace process After talks lasting more than four years, a peace treaty was signed with Farc in November 2016 effectively bringing the conflict to an end. Key to the agreement are deals on rural development, political participation, illicit drugs and reparations for victims. Farc has given up all of their weapons (verified by the UN) and transitioned into a political party with a voice in the political process. With less money tied up in defence, the country's spending priorities should now be switching to education, health, infrastructure, the economy and the environment. But some are yet to experience 'peace'. Scars are deep. Reconciliation, reintegration and access to opportunities take time. President Juan Manuel Santos is due to stand down in 2018 and some election campaigning has stoked concerns over the peace deal. “Like him or hate him, Uribe has been a force in every major election since 2002 when he first came to power,” Piedrahita said. “And here in Antioquia he is the king.” Uribe is constitutionally barred from re-election, and although both men have vehemently denied that the former president would have any say in government if his protege is elected, many see Duque as his puppet. Before Duque announced his candidacy, many Uribe supporters had already pledged their vote to the former president’s cause. Billboards appeared on rural highways, emblazoned with the words “whoever Uribe says”. “Uribe is the best president Colombia has ever had,” said Johnny Andrés Copete, a civil servant who moonlights as a community organiser for Democratic Centre. “But Duque is the future now – there’s no division here.” In Medellín, support for Duque is practically universal. Cars are plastered with his campaign’s bumper stickers; billboards loom over the city showing him with his arms out, as though inviting a hug. José Rodríguez, one of the city’s countless taxi drivers, admitted he had never heard of Duque until a year ago. “But we trust Uribe here – if he could ever run again, I’d vote for him.” Nowadays, the hot-tempered former president presents an image of an affable, grandfatherly figure – but that view is far from universal. Luz Marina Galeano remembers Uribe’s tenure well. She leads a group of women who lost loved ones in one of Medellín’s poorest slums when Uribe ordered a military crackdown on Farc’s urban militias. As army Black Hawk helicopters whirled overhead, more than 1,000 soldiers flooded the streets of the Comuna 13 district, rooting out suspected rebels and their supporters. When the troops withdraw, paramilitaries filled the vacuum, continuing a terror campaign against civilians. “We victims remember the war because we lived it,” said Galeano. Galeano’s husband was accused by paramilitaries of working with the guerrillas, and was last seen being dragged from a bus in 2008. His remains are thought to lie with hundreds of others in a landfill site overlooking the city. “A vote for Duque is the same as voting for Uribe – and it means more war,” she said. Uribe has attempted to undermine several investigations into his involvement in paramilitary massacres, and with Duque at the helm opponents worry the former president could avoid any legal reckoning. A key witness in one investigation recently turned up dead. Steven Levitsky, professor of government at Harvard University and co-author of How Democracies Die, worries that should Duque win, Colombia risks backsliding towards authoritarianism. “There’s certainly cause for concern,” he said. “If you look back at the Uribe presidency, the human rights record was terrible. You saw various attempts to concentrate power and various efforts – some successful – to violate civil liberties.” The question many are asking is whether Duque – who in his rhetoric is more moderate than Uribe – will be able to distance himself from his mentor. “The more distance that appears between the two, the safer Colombian democracy is,” said Levitsky, adding that the leader in modern history to have successfully ruled via a puppet leader is Vladimir Putin. “It may seem that Duque is a political nobody without much political experience or talent, so it looks from the vantage point of today that Uribe should have a pretty easy time of controlling him.” But for Duque’s supporters, he remains the only option regardless of what academics say. His market-friendly approach differs from Petro, who rails against multinational corporations. Petro’s hesitancy in distancing himself from neighbouring Venezuela’s late president Hugo Chávez also opened him up to criticism. More than a million Venezuelans have fled to Colombia to escape their country’s political and economic crisis. Some voters, stoked by bellicose rhetoric, worry that Petro could lead Colombia into similar chaos. “I’m voting for Duque for the salvation of my country,” said Camila Rodríguez, a student in Medellín voting for the first time in her life. “If Petro wins, the Farc won’t answer for their crimes and we risk becoming like Venezuela.”       