Lewis Hamilton has always been careful to ensure he does not publicly target records in Formula One but enjoys acknowledging them once they are in his grasp. Recently it is the markers that have belonged to Michael Schumacher that the British driver has claimed. Hamilton’s focus at the Canadian Grand Prix is on the long game of the world championship but in advancing that cause it may well be once again at Schumacher’s expense in the history books. Having overtaken the German in pole positions last season with his 69th at Monza, he did so again with his 41st pole-to-win conversion in Barcelona this season. Hamilton downplayed his chances this weekend in Montreal but the Circuit Gilles Villeneuve has been such a happy hunting ground it is hard to rule out more records falling. Hamilton took his first grand prix win in Montreal in 2007 for McLaren, which he described as a “moment when a dream became a reality”. It was the first of many memorable moments in Canada. He won twice more for McLaren in 2010 and 2012, and followed it with victory for Mercedes in the past three races. His single lap record is equally as impressive. He has six pole positions here, including the last three in a row. A seventh would surpass Schumacher and a seventh win would equal the German’s tally in Canada. Hamilton has acknowledged that the precision attack of his driving comes to its fore on the power-hungry circuit that rewards a driver who really feels the car beneath him. “There are certain circuits that will suit you more than others,” he said. “This has always been one of those circuits for me. I’ve always been very aggressive on kerbing and being close up to the wall. This is a place where you really need to utilise that confidence. It’s just always been a great racing circuit. It’s not the hardest of circuits but it’s been one that I have loved.” Hamilton leads his title rival, Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel, by 14 points in the world championship and on any other weekend would be firm favourite. But all is not equal in Montreal. Mercedes were due to bring an engine upgrade to the race but have delayed it until the next round in France because of a “quality issue”. Ferrari, Renault and Honda, however, will be bringing their new power units as planned and Hamilton has cautioned that his team will be on the back foot with an engine that has already taken part in six meetings. “If the others are bringing upgrades and have fresh engines, we won’t be in a position to fight,” he said. “It is a power circuit. There is power loss over the life of an engine. All I am hoping for is reliability. If I am on the seventh race, with a power difficult circuit, I just want to see it through.” His hero Ayrton Senna was a master at downplaying expectations only to overcome them, in the process enhancing his reputation and Hamilton will have learned as much from this as he did from the Brazilian’s brilliance on track. After damage limitation in Monaco he has suggested that dropping points to Vettel would not be disastrous in the title fight. Practice on Friday did not reveal a clear picture. Max Verstappen topped the time sheets once the track had rubbered-in in FP2, ahead of Kimi Raikkonen’s Ferrari and Daniel Ricciardo in third. Hamilton in fourth did not use the softest rubber and was in front of Vettel, who did not enjoy a clear run on the hypersofts in fifth. Just how much Ferrari can bring, especially on Montreal’s long straights, will be key. If they prove to have the extra horses and Hamilton can still match them it would be hugely significant for his title challenge and the new records will be richly deserved. The engine upgrades will be of intense interest then and not only at the front of the grid. Honda’s new power unit for the Toro Rosso will be under great scrutiny from the senior Red Bull squad. Red Bull are in the final year of their contract with Renault and opened talks with Honda last month. The team principal, Christian Horner, has said a decision is about a month away, making this a crucial point to assess the engines, with Horner saying he had great interest in their relative performances in Montreal. Red Bull’s race pace has been relatively strong this season but they have been stymied by starting on the back foot, down on power in qualifying and that is one advance they are looking for here this weekend. They have been with Renault since 2007 and have taken four world championships since then but this race may also herald the first step in a new direction for the team.