Petra Kvitova pauses and the memories come flashing back. Not the horrendous moment she was attacked in her home in December 2016, an incident that left her requiring four hours of career-saving surgery to her dominant left hand. Instead, a good one, the moment she won Wimbledon for the second time, in 2014, when she blitzed Eugenie Bouchard in one of the best performances in a women’s final in recent memory. Eighteen months on from the worst moment of her life the 28-year-old is back at Wimbledon, healthy and fit, and in perhaps the best form of her career. The Czech, who also won Wimbledon in 2011, has won five titles in 2018, two on hard courts, two on clay and one on grass, in Birmingham this month. She will start her campaign against the Belarusian Aliaksandra Sasnovich as the tournament favourite, too, despite being seeded eighth, a pressure she could probably do without. After all she has been through in the past year and a half, were she to win the title for a third time it would surely be the most satisfying one yet. “It would be great,” Kvitova says, after a pause. “The 2014 Wimbledon when I won, the emotions just came to me. I know how that feels and it would be great to feel it again, I will not lie, probably more special after what happened. Hopefully, one day I can do it again.” If she maintains the form she has shown this year, that day could well come sooner rather than later. Out of the darkness of her attack, when she opened the door to a man posing as a utility worker, somehow she has emerged stronger, and perhaps, better. As she looked back on the past year in a quiet moment this week during the Nature Valley International in Eastbourne, Kvitova did not suggest that the incident had helped her, but it may have changed her in ways that, somehow, have brought a benefit to her tennis. “Probably, I am more mature than I was before,” she says. “Even though I think I was mature before, I am more mature as a person. I am not really counting as a player, life is just showing [itself] on the court. “I do really enjoy the time just being around. For example, today was a beautiful day for tennis, so I know that and I really appreciate that I do have the time to play. “It’s helped me to enjoy small things in life and to probably be less nervous, but on the other side I do know that sometimes I put too much pressure on myself because I want to do well and then I am like, OK, I hurt so, so much to just be here and I am too nervous again. So I do feel both sides of it.” After a poor start to the year in Australia where she lost in the first round to Andrea Petkovic, Kvitova found her form in St Petersburg, where she won the title. She followed up by winning her next Tour event, in Doha, where she beat four top-10 players. A victory in Prague was followed by an even better one in Madrid and though she lost in round three at Roland Garros, she then took the title in Birmingham for the second year in a row. It is a year she could surely never have expected. “Last year in Birmingham was a big surprise for everyone, for me as well,” she says. “The rest of the season was so-so, up and down, but I was so happy to play anyway, so I didn’t really care about what was happening, I took everything as a bonus, every match I played. “This season has been going pretty well, not great at the Australian Open but otherwise I am pretty impressed and surprised as well. It started in the off-season when it was really hard, probably the best off-season and preparation I have ever had. I stayed healthy the whole month and a half, practised pretty hard. That is paying off and when you have some matches you get some confidence as well.” At 28, Kvitova should have a good few more chances of adding to two grand slam titles. She says she enjoys her tennis more now than before even if there are days when she still gets frustrated. “With the results I’ve had, I should enjoy it and be happy, right?” And when the stressful moments come, she is better equipped to deal with them. “Sometimes I am more up and [able to] see it from the outside,” she says. Last year, when she won in Birmingham in her second event back after the attack it was a massive surprise. This year, her victory was confirmation that she will be a huge threat at Wimbledon if the cards fall her way. Her late withdrawal from Eastbourne after winning her opening match was a precaution rather than a scare and, if anything, a few days off are likely to be beneficial. “I do feel good,” she says. “Winning Birmingham was great. I had nice five matches, especially the final, I’m pretty happy with the big fight, probably I needed it as well, going into Wimbledon, so that’s good.”