An independent panel advising the World Health Organization has stopped short of recommending taxing sugary drinks to reduce obesity after failing to reach a consensus. Some countries, such as Mexico, France and Britain, are already taxing sugary drinks and the WHO made a non-binding recommendation in October 2016 that governments should impose a 20% tax. While the industry called this “discriminatory” and “unproven”, activists had hoped for a strong endorsement from the panel, which includes heads of states and health ministers. The panel on Friday called on governments to increase efforts to fight an epidemic of non-communicable diseases (NCDs) in low- and middle-income countries, which account for 71% of all deaths globally, or 41 million deaths a year. WHO’s director-general, Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, established the WHO Independent High-Level Commission on Noncommunicable Diseases last year to provide advice on how to reduce premature deaths from such diseases by a third by 2030. To achieve progress, “governments should work with: food and non-alcoholic beverage companies in areas such as reformulation, labelling, and regulating marketing”, said its report, which goes to a United Nations summit in September. The commission made six recommendations in its report, including for government heads to take responsibility for disease reduction and to increase regulation. It did not mention taxes specifically. The panel said its 21 members represented “rich and diverse views”, but that some views were “conflicting”. As a result, it said recommendations around sugar taxes and the accountability of the private sector could not be reflected in the report, despite broad support from many commissioners. A WHO spokesman insisted it still supported taxing sugary drinks. He said: “This is a report by an independent commission, not WHO. WHO stands by its evidence-based guidance, including on the benefits of using fiscal policies to reduce exposure to harmful products, including sugar-sweetened beverages.” Ghebreyesus added: “WHO’s position cannot change because of this report. What WHO said some years ago holds, because consumption of sugar is associated with obesity and at the same time, taxing sugar was shown to reduce consumption in many countries.”  NCDs are what health experts call illnesses such as cancer, diabetes, heart conditions, obesity and breathing problems that are not caused by infections and cannot be passed from person to person. Between them, they kill 41 million people a year worldwide. The view of the commission, set up to advise the WHO on how to tackle some of the world’s most preventable killer diseases, is at odds with the WHO’s previously strong support for sugar taxes. In 2016, it enthusiastically endorsed sugary drink taxes as a way of driving down sales, reducing their consumption and saving lives. Countries should consider introducing a tax on sugary drinks and set it at 20%, the WHO said. “If governments tax products like sugary drinks, they can reduce suffering and save lives. They can also cut healthcare costs and increase revenues to increase in health services,” Dr Douglas Bettcher, the director of the WHO’s department for the prevention of non-communicable diseases, said at the time. But the commission’s report, released on Friday in Geneva and called Time to Deliver, explains that it does not include a sugar tax among its recommendations to reduce NCDs – aimed at governments and heads of state worldwide – because its members disagreed about it. In a message from its five co-chairs they admit: “There was broad agreement in most areas, but some views were conflicting and could not be resolved. As such, some recommendations, such as reducing sugar consumption through effective taxation on sugar-sweetened beverages and the accountability of the private sector, could not be reflected in this report, despite broad support from many [of the 21] commissioners.” Anti-obesity campaigners reacted with dismay to the WHO commission’s stance. Graham MacGregor, the chair of Action on Sugar, a London-based health charity, who is also a professor of cardiovascular medicine at Queen Mary University of London, said: “While the report makes a recommendation for governments to employ their regulatory and legislative powers to protect their populations, especially among children, the WHO has completely ignored any mention of a sugar tax on sugary drinks, despite a call by them for a 20% tax in 2016, which is completely scandalous and a very worrying U-turn. “They should also be recommending a 20% tax on all sweet and chocolate confectionery, the highest contributors of sugar in the British diet, and not pander to corporate lobbying.” The Children’s Food Campaign, a London-based alliance of health, education and children’s organisations, called the failure to support a sugary drinks tax as “a startling omission”. It said: “There is a startling omission in relation to the turbo-charging power of fiscal measures such as the UK’s soft drinks levy or sugary drinks tax which, according to Public Health England, has already achieved an 11% reduction in sugar levels in that category since 2015, compared to a pitiful 2% average reduction in sugar through the government’s voluntary targets for the private sector. “This report appears to be rather sugar-shy when it comes to the bold recommendations the WHO director-general has called for.” It dismissed the commission’s recommendations as “vague and lacklustre” and out of step with the growing crackdown worldwide on sugar and junk food. In an evidence review it published in 2014 the WHO had also specifically endorsed a tax on sugary drinks, given their association with avoidable mortality from diabetes, stroke, heart attacks and cancer. “Particular attention has been paid to taxing sugar-sweetened beverages as evidence suggests that such taxes could substantially reduce consumption and may contribute to a reduction in overweight and obesity”, it concluded. The commission’s five co-chairs were the presidents of Finland, Sri Lanka and Uruguay, a Russian health minister and former minister in Pakistan’s government. The 21 commissioners included presidents, ex-presidents, current and former government ministers, academics, doctors and health experts from across the globe. They included Michael Bloomberg, the billionaire former mayor of New York in 2001-13, who is now the WHO’s global ambassador for NCDs and injuries.