British diplomats and football officials have lavished praise on the organisation of the World Cup in Russia, before England’s first game against Tunisia in Volgograd on Monday evening. “The warmth of the welcome here has been absolutely outstanding. All the fans have commented on that and Volgograd seems delighted to welcome everybody,” said Lindsay Skoll, the deputy British ambassador to Russia. The Foreign Office has been strongly critical of Russian authorities in the wake of the poisoning of Sergei Skripal in Salisbury and British officials are boycotting the tournament. But Skoll, speaking at a wreath-laying ceremony at a memorial here, the scene of one of the most brutal battles of the Second World War when it was known as Stalingrad, spoke warmly about the city. “The enduring nature of the relationship between the UK and Volgograd outweighs any political ups and downs in our relationship,” she said, reminding those present of the shared history of fighting the Nazis. “It’s really important to stand shoulder to shoulder with the people of Volgograd,” said Greg Clarke, chairman of the FA, who attended the wreath-laying ceremony. “In Moscow and in Volgograd we’ve been met with nothing but smiles and efficiency, and they’re organising an excellent World Cup so far.” The positive words reflects a World Cup that, for all the political controversy and fears of violence, has so far provided a positive experience for most of the fans who have travelled. The numbers of England supporters is unusually low for a major tournament, with concerns about a repeat of the violent scenes from Marseille two years ago a major factor in keeping many away. Kevin Miles, of the Football Supporters Federation, said he believed the turnout in Russia was the smallest number of England fans to travel to a major tournament for 20 or 30 years. Those who have been arriving here over the past two days have almost uniformly spoken about the warm and positive reaction they have received. Russian security services have ordered radical fan groups to ensure there is no violence at the tournament, with authorities keen that the World Cup not be marred by violent scenes. “We know there are problems here, but they’re being swept under the carpet for a month at least, and it’s been fantastic,” said Nick Goldman, 41, from Leeds. He said this World Cup was logistically trickier than Brazil or South Africa due to the high cost of internal flights, but the tournament had been enjoyable. “I was getting emails from people saying ‘Don’t go’, but I was pretty sure there wouldn’t be any trouble,” he said. Volgograd, which hosts four group-stage games, is dominated by the bloody history of the Second World War, and the stadium is overlooked by a vast monument on a hill that was one of the battle’s bloodiest spots. It was here that the ceremony took place on Monday morning. “It means a lot to us,” England fan Billy Grant told a Russian journalist who asked for his impressions of the war memorial. “I’m into football, you’re into football. But when you’re at an event like this you realise there’s more that than football.”