The far right in the UK is mobilising itself around protests over the imprisonment of the former English Defence League leader Tommy Robinson, a group of MPs, union leaders and political activists have said. In a letter to the Guardian, they say a violent 15,000-strong far-right protest in support of Robinson in central London on 9 June raised concerns for those who value diversity. “The racist right are using Robinson to reorganise,” the letter says. It says Nazi salutes and Islamophobia were central features of the protest. At one point demonstrators chased police through the streets of Whitehall. “This is the first serious attempt since the collapse of the English Defence League (EDL) to develop a racist street movement and give it a political form. It is supported internationally by notorious figures including from the US and the Dutch Islamophobic right,” the letter says. Robinson, whose real name is Stephen Yaxley-Lennon, was jailed last month for 13 months after broadcasting an hour-long video via Facebook from outside Leeds crown court. In the video he made comments that risked causing the collapse of a trial taking place at the court. He was arrested, charged, pleaded guilty to contempt of court and was sentenced within five hours. His imprisonment is being presented by his supporters as an act of state censorship and a threat to free speech. Five police officers were injured during the demonstration in London after protesters hurled bottles, metal barriers and other objects at police lines. Scotland Yard said a 46-year-old man was charged on suspicion of carrying a knuckleduster; a 50-year-old man was released under investigation for alleged explosives offences after being found with a flare; six people were arrested and bailed on suspicion of public order offences and one was arrested for alleged possession of cannabis and breach of the peace. The letter has more than 50 signatories, including the shadow home secretary, Diane Abbott, the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, the Labour MP David Lammy, the former children’s laureate Michael Rosen and the leaders of every major trade union. It says: “It is absolutely vital that all who oppose this come together in a united mass movement powerful enough to drive these new developments on the far right back. Donald Trump has played a major role in galvanising the racist right. We will take to the streets for the Together Against Trump demonstration coinciding with his visit on 13 July. And when Robinson’s supporters take to the streets again on 14 July, we will protest against them too. “Wherever the far right’s support grows, so does racism and violence. Let’s come together to defend our multicultural society from those who spread hatred and division.”