Stamps. We take them very seriously in Britain. They are key cultural signifiers. And it is surely culturally significant that the Royal Mail has resisted Brexiter calls to issue a set to mark “Liberation Day” – 29 March 2019, when the proud British cast off the yoke of EU servitude and strike out for ... well somewhere or other – and, later this month, is issuing a set of Dad’s Army stamps instead. Someone at Royal Mail has a very good grasp of history and a sharp satirical sense. The Dad’s Army stamps ostensibly mark the 50th anniversary of the BBC series that once attracted 18 million viewers and still plays perennially on Saturday evenings to a band of obsessives who must be able to recite the 80 episodes backwards. The 2016 film based on the show was a dud, but the original series is a much-loved institution and has become an unlikely symbol of Brexit. Leave naysayers, such as Ryanair boss Michael O’Leary, cite the sitcom to attack government policy. “It’s like Dad’s Army going off to war,” he said in November 2016. “It’ll be all right. Just keep plodding along.” Remainers emphasise the relevance of the messages on the new stamps, all catchphrases from the series: “You stupid boy!”; “Don’t panic! Don’t panic!”; “We’re doomed. Doomed!” Brexiters who think the negotiations are going badly because the government is too feeble and half-hearted have also found Dad’s Army a useful metaphor. Last year, the Brexit-crazed Daily Express rounded on an initiative in which, it claimed, “a Dad’s Army of unpaid border guards would man hundreds of vulnerable points of entry to the UK and would, in effect, be the first line of defence against terrorists, people smugglers and organised crime gangs”. “Risky” and “farcical” were among the kinder adjectives it applied to the scheme. Poor Gavin Williamson, the wildly overpromoted young defence secretary in May’s beleaguered government, is now nicknamed “Private Pike”, after the dim, scarf-wearing mummy’s boy in Capt Mainwaring’s hapless platoon. Dad’s Army is a useful stick for both Brexiters and remainers to beat the government, because it is a precise image of Britain’s current predicament. We stand alone, now cut off from Europe, a little island filled with people trying to muddle through in an increasingly hostile world. “Who do you think you are kidding, Mr Juncker/Putin/Trump/Xi Jinping?” Capt May, Sgt Hammond and Cpl Davis invent elaborate plans that invariably see May humiliated, Hammond bemused and Davis deposited into a lake, while Andrew Adonis intones “We’re doomed, doomed!” from the sidelines and all manner of Pte Walker-like spivs seek to make a dishonest buck out of the country’s collective misfortune. No wonder we are still hooked on Dad’s Army 50 years after it was first broadcast. We are reliving it.