In the cut-and-thrust of spring and summer, it can feel that all the vegetables have turned up to the party at once. So the question is not so much which one to eat, but how to hang a few together so they make sense on the same plate. In this simple pilau, the fennel softens and melts into the background, joining the onion and garlic to form a deep base flavour, while the asparagus, peas, broad beans and herbs take a front seat, to keep things light, fresh and sweet. In my experience, our supermarkets make decent garam masalas (although I prefer homemade, or the Bart or Steenbergs brands). Whichever you use, just make sure it’s fresh and doesn’t taste like sawdust. Feel free to add more peas and skip the broad beans if you don’t have the stamina to peel them. Prep 10 minSoak 20 minCook 30 minServes 4 350g basmati rice750ml vegetable stock3 tbsp rapeseed oil 2 red onions, peeled and finely sliced4 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed2 green finger chillies, very finely sliced1 medium fennel bulb (about 250g), trimmed and thinly sliced250g asparagus, woody ends trimmed and cut into 4cm-long pieces100g frozen petit pois, defrosted 100g broad beans, podded and peeled1½ tsp ground cumin1½ tsp garam masala¾ tsp salt1 big handful mint leaves, chopped1 big handful dill, chopped1 lemon, cut into wedges, to serve Wash the rice in cold water until it runs clear, then leave to soak for 20 minutes. Put the rice in a large saucepan for which you have a lid and pour over the stock. Cover the pan, bring to a boil, boil for two minutes, then turn down the heat to a whisper and leave to cook for 10-12 minutes. Turn off the heat and leave the rice, still covered, to steam through until needed. Meanwhile, heat the oil in a large, lidded pan on a medium flame. Once hot, add the onions and cook for six to eight minutes, until translucent and softening, but not yet coloured. Add the garlic and chillies, cook for another two minutes, then stir in the fennel and a couple of tablespoons of water, and cover the pan. Leave to cook for eight minutes, until soft, then add the asparagus, peas, broad beans, cumin, garam masala and salt. Stir, cover again, cook for three to five minutes more, then take off the heat. Fold the herbs and rice into the vegetable mixture – you might need to break up any clumps of rice delicately with your hands – then transfer to a serving dish and serve with wedges of lemon on the side.