US rapper Riff Raff has been accused of the sexual harassment of a 17-year-old girl, following a further recent accusation of rape, both of which he has described as “lies”. On 31 May, an Australian woman wrote a Facebook post detailing an alleged rape in 2013 by Riff Raff, real name Horst Simco. She said that after being invited backstage by the rapper, she was given a “party shot” that she believed was vodka, but was told afterwards was codeine-based syrup. “I don’t remember anything from that point,” she wrote. “I woke up as Riff Raff was pulling out of me and getting in to the shower. I crawled – truly, on all fours – out of the hotel room.” In the wake of the accusations, the booking agency Audiopaxx cancelled Riff Raff’s Australia and New Zealand tour, saying the company “takes these matters seriously and does not condone any of this alleged behaviour”. Another woman has now come forward to the website Jezebel, outlining an incident in 2015 where she alleged Riff Raff tried to coerce her into having sex on his tour bus, by forcing her on to a bed and trying to kiss her. The site said the woman was 17 at the time, under the age of consent in Wisconsin, where the incident took place. The rapper has responded to the accusations on social media, posting an image to Instagram with the caption: “Haters pop up with lies … bitch ass internet trolls on the attack.” On Twitter he posted a screengrab of a text message that reads “anyone going after anyone already looks sketch. Haters go after people. Ballers go after paper.” Riff Raff, who has worked with Katy Perry, Diplo and Action Bronson, is a cult figure in the US rap scene for his outlandish DayGlo aesthetic. He was partly the inspiration for James Franco’s rapper character in the 2012 Harmony Korine film Spring Breakers, with Riff Raff saying in 2013 that he intended to sue the film-maker for $10m for using his likeness. The lawsuit never transpired, however, and he later reconciled with Franco, who starred in the video for his track Only in America. He had intended to fly female fans out to the Australia tour as a competition prize, but, in now-deleted tweets and Instagram posts, he detailed concerns from his legal team. He shared a text message from his female manager that read: “They can’t fly out girls ‘for legal reasons since it 2018 and all the fame hungry / clout chasing that’s going on it would make too good of a legal story if girls flew out and said anything happened’ #2018.” Riff Raff replied “what the f, lol that’s so annoying”, with his manager replying: “Yea it sucks things are the way they are like, can we go back to the 80s or what!”