The Wimbledon draw fell kindly enough for Andy Murray on Friday morning when he learned his opponent in the first round will be the Frenchman Benoît Paire, the last player the two-time champion beat at the All England Club before limping away a year ago. However, the former world No 1, unseeded, has yet to confirm whether or not he will continue his comeback from injury next week. The draw put Murray in the same quarter as Rafael Nadal. Others in his section include the fifth seed, Juan Martín del Potro, the rising Canadian teenager Denis Shapovalov, Jack Sock, David Goffin, Diego Schwartzman, Fabio Fognini and the Italian who came from nowhere at Roland Garros, Marco Cecchinato. Kyle Edmund, Murray’s successor as the British No 1, opens against Australia’s Alex Bolt, with Novak Djokovic a possible third-round opponent. Johanna Konta faces Russia’s Natalia Vikhlyantseva. Serena Williams, who has been seeded 25th following her return from maternity leave, plays Arantxa Rus of the Netherlands while the defending champion, Garbiñe Muguruza, meets Britain’s Naomi Broady. Roger Federer will begin his bid for a record-extending ninth Wimbledon title against the Serb Dusan Lajovic but the most eye-catching match of the men’s first round is between the sixth seed, Grigor Dimitrov, and the three-time grand slam champion Stan Wawrinka. Murray won his fourth-round match against Paire last year, 7-6 (1), 6-4, 6-4, then hobbled away from the championships after five painful sets against the American Sam Querrey, which brought his season to a close. Rivals, locker-room friends, fans, family and all of tennis would welcome Murray on his return to his favourite workplace after the year-long exile he endured while resting his body and damaged hip, which required surgery in January. But he would not be the same player who has delivered countless memorable moments since he arrived at Wimbledon as a teenager in 2005. He would love to win a third title but he maintains he has “zero expectations”. It would be remarkable if we saw again, here or ever, the five-hour marathons and the grinding exchanges that drained those watching as much as those participating. There will be the miracle saves and breathtaking winners from nowhere but the points will be shorter, the rallies quick and clinical. The movement will be more clipped and careful, too, as he eases his right hip back into full working order. Radio silence enveloped Murray’s tight-knit camp on Friday but a hint of his intentions emerged accidentally on Thursday night when Wimbledon listed him among the Saturday afternoon interviewees. Murray, who turned 31 last month and is ranked 156 in the world after 11 months away from the Tour, has played three comeback matches in nine days. He agonised Wednesday night and all of Thursday about his capacity to compete in best-of-five-set matches at the highest level over the next fortnight. Nevertheless, the morning after James Ward was losing in the last qualifying match at Roehampton, bringing the total of British failures there, men and women, to 15 from 15, Murray’s reappearance would be a timely boost. The fact Murray has taken so long to make up his mind reminds us what a perfectionist he is – albeit an indecisive one. Murray said he is not concerned about injuring his hip again but he does not want to embarrass himself on the big stage. He knows time is not on his side. He may have two or three Wimbledon tournaments left in him. If he is still playing beyond the 2020 Olympics, it would be at least mildly surprising. The on-rush of the end is a prospect that has consumed him since he lost to Querrey last July. He was so desperate to get back on court after that, he waited until after the draw was made at the US Open in September before pulling out, and did the same in Brisbane and at the Australian Open in January. Murray was nervous when he lost to Nick Kyrgios at Queen’s last week, yet he might have won their long three-setter. It was encouraging and uplifting. He learned little from beating a struggling Stan Wawrinka at Eastbourne on Monday, then began to doubt himself after losing in two shorter sets to Edmund, who replaced him as the British No 1 in his absence. He has moved well enough during a total of five hours and 35 minutes of competitive tennis on his return, and has hit the ball with conviction off the ground, although fatigue dulled the precision of his serve in his two longer matches, against Kyrgios and Edmund. Murray, unseeded at a slam for the first time since he lost to Marcos Baghdatis in the fourth round at Wimbledon in 2005, always had a one-in-four chance of drawing a seeded player. Paire, who took a set off him in Monte Carlo two years ago in their only other meeting, was as ideal an opponent as he could have hoped for. In other stories from the men’s draw, Cameron Norrie will play Aljaz Bedene, who spent six years trying to qualify for Great Britain’s Davis Cup team before returning to Slovenia. Liam Broady will take on the Canadian world No 32, Milos Raonic.