One of the core group of Conservative rebels seeking a meaningful vote on the final Brexit deal, has accused Theresa May of being forced to backtrack on a pledge she gave to the rebels to avert defeat on Tuesday. Stephen Hammond said he trusted the prime minister but she had been badly advised, in an intervention that indicated the depth of bad feeling between the two camps. “Other people in the government may have either advised her badly or tried to force a statement on the prime minister,” he said. “I am convinced the prime minister intends to honour her word, and what I think has happened is that some people may have got involved in the process late in the day – people who weren’t at the meeting, people who hadn’t been involved earlier in the negotiations – and I think hijacked the process.” Speaking on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme as Dominic Grieve, the leading rebel, returned to London hoping to reopen negotiations, Hammond said the amendment published on Thursday night was “inconsistent’ with the pledge May had made on Tuesday afternoon. At an 11th hour meeting in the prime minister’s office in the Commons held while debate continued in the chamber, the rebels believed they had secured agreement on the controversial final element of the amendment. They wanted to find a way to answer the criticism that parliament could not bind the government, while still allowing a substantive vote. Grieve, who negotiated what the rebels thought was a compromise with the senior Tory troubleshooter Oliver Letwin, left for BBC1’s Question Time in Waleson Thursday afternoon convinced the deal was done. But senior pro-Brexit sources were soon making it clear on social media that negotiations were continuing. When the amendment was finally published shortly after 5pm, the meaningful vote the rebels thought they had won had been watered down, so that in the event of a deal not being reached by January 2019 the government would make a statement about its plans and the Commons would be invited to vote on a “neutral motion” to take note of the statement. Such a motion could not be amended. Hammond, who had been at the meeting with May in her Commons office on Tuesday afternoon, said it was “rather inconsistent” with the pledge that had been given. Some rebels were pointing fingers at David Davis, the Brexit secretary, for seeking to make the vote a confidence issue, but the counter-narrative from the Brexiters was that nothing had been promised beyond a conversation. They argue that a small group of rebels should not be allowed to hold the government hostage and impose its will on the shape of Brexit. However, in the Lords on Monday, the original Hailsham amendment giving parliament the power to dictate terms to the government is back on the order paper, and peers are talking of “mobilising for the biggest vote ever”. It passed with a majority of nearly 100 last time, and if it is passed again, there will have to be another vote in the Commons on Wednesday. Brexiters believe the numbers are there to defeat the amendment. They say there are enough concessions in the amendment to persuade some of the rebels to back it, and that there may also be Labour MPs prepared to defy the party whip and vote for it.