Gareth Southgate has become the first major casualty of England’s World Cup campaign after dislocating his right shoulder while running near the team’s base on the Gulf of Finland. The England manager suffered the injury while jogging in the beach resort of Repino on Wednesday, a scheduled day off for his squad which most had used to visit family and friends in St Petersburg. Southgate was treated in a nearby hospital, with the assistance of the England team doctor, Rob Chakraverty, and said he would have to temper any fist-pumping celebrations over the remainder of the tournament. “I might not be celebrating any goals as athletically in future,” he said. “The doc has made it clear that punching the air is not an option. We have got such a great support team and they were there very quickly. They were supposed to be relaxing because we let the players have a bit of time off and I am causing them work. We are lucky we have a top-class medical team around us, so it was fine. I had brilliant help from them, and I am just sorry I managed to ruin their day off.” Southgate, his right arm in a sling, was back at the team’s training base in Repino on Wednesday evening in time to hold a scheduled meeting with his squad before dinner, looking towards Sunday’s second Group G fixture, against Panama. “It is better this is me than one of the players,” he added. “They were a bit surprised in the team meeting and were asking: ‘What have you been doing?’ As always, they were probably quite amused. It is good that we have had a quiet day today so I had prepared the meeting before and we are on to preparations for Panama. I am just a bit gutted because I was on for my record 10k time.” The manager joins Dele Alli in the treatment room – Marcus Rashford has now recovered from a knock to his knee suffered back at St George’s Park prior to departure – with the Tottenham midfielder having suffered a minor thigh strain during Monday’s opening victory over Tunisia. That injury is not serious and, while Alli may miss a few days’ training and is likely to be rested in Nizhny Novgorod on Sunday, he should be back in contention for the game against Belgium. Southgate, on the other hand, may have to be more restrained for the remainder of England’s participation in the tournament.