King Sisyphus cleverly cheated death but was punished with eternal labour: pushing a boulder up a mountain just to see it roll down again. Theresa May might have empathised as she approached yet another EU summit this week. Her seemingly endless task is to deliver an orderly departure from the European Union, with no overall majority in Parliament and in the teeth of opposition from some who still delude themselves that the referendum vote can be ignored. The PM is winning considerable support in the country for her determined perseverance. Unpicking four decades of EU law and regulation so closely entwined with our own statute was always going to be complicated. The arithmetic of this parliament makes it doubly so. The main opposition party might have offered much the same prescription for leaving the Single Market and the Customs Union when it was seeking votes at last year’s general election, but Labour has played all the slippery games of opposition ever since. Governments expect to have to navigate around the traps and obstacles laid for them from the other side of the house. It is harder to see how anyone on the government side can think it is in the national interest to send Mrs May to negotiate the best future relationship with the EU with anything less than a united team behind her. Securing the passage of the European Union withdrawal act after hundreds of hours of parliamentary debate was a moment of huge significance: it provides for the end of the supremacy of EU law in the UK and allows a smooth transition by transposing existing EU law into our own domestic statute. Over the past couple of weeks, most Conservative backbench MPs who have had particular concerns about our exit from the EU have recognised the need to compromise and support this central element of the government’s programme: allowing the prime minister to go off to Brussels with a solid – if not resounding – vote of confidence from the House of Commons. This was built on as the government settled 50 years of dithering over airport capacity in the south-east, securing a majority of 296 for a new runway at Heathrow: supported by more Labour MPs than voted with their leadership to oppose it. This too is a ringing endorsement of our commitment to a future as a global trading nation. So, backbench MPs on the government side have seen the importance of unity in the national interest. Even an increasing number of Labour members have been prepared to recognise that we are dealing with issues that are far bigger than party politics. It is all the more remarkable, therefore, that it has been so difficult to maintain discipline around the cabinet table. Our system of government has been built on a long tradition of collective responsibility – lively debate behind closed doors followed by ministers coalescing around the agreed position. As we move into the final stages of our efforts to agree a close cooperative relationship with the EU after Brexit, it has never been more important for ministers to observe the cardinal rule of cabinet government. The danger of disunity at the top is not just that it makes the prime minister’s job more difficult in negotiations with Brussels, and therefore puts at risk the good Brexit deal that is in reach, but it also gives an impression of division to the country. Electorates these days are volatile, but one thing is certain: they do not vote for divided parties. They rejected decisively the divided Tory party in 1997. If we were to let Labour in again, it would be a disaster for this country. It’s not just backbench Conservative MPs who expect ministers to pull together behind May: the great swathe of the electorate which either voted Leave, or voted Remain but recognises that a united team will achieve a better trading relationship for the future than a divided one, expects it too. • Graham Brady is chairman of the 1922 committee