Crew onboard the stranded MS Aquarius are desperately trying to keep hundreds of migrants calm while treating injuries incurred during their treacherous Mediterranean crossing amid a fiery political standoff between Italy and Malta, which both rejected the ship from docking in their ports. Spain’s new prime minister, Pedro Sánchez, has given permission for the vessel to dock in Valencia, and said his country will welcome those on board, but the Aquarius said it had received no instructions yet to head to Spain. Onboard the vessel are 629 people, including 123 unaccompanied minors, 11 babies and seven pregnant woman. The ship is operated by the French-German charity SOS Méditerranée and has been undertaking risky year-round, search-and-rescue missions in waters north of Libya since 2015. Victoria Russell, a spokeswoman for Doctors Without Borders (MSF), which has staff working on the boat, said the situation was under control but could change at any moment. “None of the people on board have any idea about this whole diplomatic standoff that is unfolding around them, but they are starting to ask questions: why has the ship stopped?” she said. “It is challenging for the staff onboard as they don’t want to make people over-anxious. There’s also a risk of crowd control, with people getting increasingly anxious. We could see physical and psychological deterioration: we know that they were in Libya and exposed to alarming levels of violence and exploitation, so can very reasonably assume they’re suffering torment from that too.” The ship has capacity for only 550 people, even though in the past crew have rescued more than 1,000. There is enough food and medicine to last four to five days. More than 15 people onboard have serious chemical fuel burns requiring regular care, due to oil spills from the cheaply made rubber boats they travelled in from Libya. There are also a number of cases that require orthopaedic surgery. Some of the passengers had to be resuscitated after almost drowning during a challenging overnight rescue operation on Saturday. “They have sea water on their lungs … they’re stable right now, but it could change at any moment, and they would need assistance that we can’t provide on the boat,” said Russell. The ship, which had been on its way to Sicily, was left stranded after both Italy and Malta refused to allow it to dock. Matteo Salvini, Italy’s new hardline interior minister and leader of the far-right League, said the ship could not dock at any Italian ports and should be taken in by Malta instead. Italy claimed that Malta should accept the Aquarius because Malta was the safest, closest port to the ship. Malta said Italy coordinated the rescues and that it has had nothing to do with it. On Monday, he reiterated his point by posting a picture of himself on social media alongside the hashtag #chiudiamoiporti (#close the ports). Maltese Premier Joseph Muscat accused Italy of violating international norms governing sea rescues and said its stance risked “creating a dangerous situation for all those involved.” This is not the first time the operation has faced disruption. The Guardian was onboard the vessel in late June 2017, when the Italian government threatened to close its ports after more than 12,000 people arrived on the country’s southern shores within the space of a week. The Aquarius rescued 1,032 in one day, which at the time set a new record for the ship. Among the passengers were a dozen or so women, some heavily pregnant or with wounds from oil burns, and two children, the youngest a three-month-old girl. Many of the migrants were suffering from scabies and had to be separated from others on board. One man had a severe mental illness. The women, mostly from Nigeria, spoke about being raped in war-torn Libya, where they had been domestic workers. Many had never even heard of Italy or seen the ocean before, but most said they would rather die in the Mediterranean than stay in Libya. Aquarius usually has a crew of about 12, including a doctor, two nurses and a midwife. Soon after the migrants arrive onboard, they are treated by medics and given fresh clothes and rehydration food. “The problem is the hygiene and medical treatment,” said Anton Shakouri, a rescue worker who has worked on the ship. “Because you can never know what has happened to people [before they are rescued]. SOS and MSF crew provide 24/7 medical assistance onboard but even this has its limits. As long as people keep calm and listen to the crew everything can be handled, but people get sick and tired.”