I’m having a hard time sleeping. Just last night I was up for three hours, awake in a panic about someone trying to take my daughter from me. The terror wasn’t real for me, of course. My seven-year-old – my child who doesn’t like it when I leave for overnight business trips – was asleep in her bedroom, doing just fine. Over the course of six weeks, the US government took 2,000 children and separated them from their parents. Children who are confused, in a new country, and without their families. There is no greater shame in this country right now than what is being done to these children – some just infants literally torn from their mother’s breast. The Trump administration is defending the policy as biblical, as if there could be anything godly about traumatizing and torturing children. I’m glad to see that people have been in the street – last week there were protests across the country. We can’t stop protesting until these families are reunited. Sleep should not come easily to any of us until it happens. Thanks to the New York attorney general, Barbara Underwood, Trump and his family are being sued over their foundation’s violation of state charity laws. Reminder that the people currently justifying tearing children away from their parents spend the last twenty years insisting "every child deserves a mother and a father." Sarah Sanders is repeating over and over again that it's the law to separate immigrant children and from their parents. Fact check: It's not the law. The Trump administration is making the decision to do this and does not have to do it. I forced a bot to watch over 1,000 hours of Olive Garden commercials and then asked it to write an Olive Garden commercial of its own. Here is the first page. pic.twitter.com/CKiDQTmLeH ICE has a mandate to round up as many brown people as they can using whatever excuse they can find. https://t.co/rXsjAfPP2E Anna Merlan on the price of coming forward about sexual harassment, Meghan McCarron on the chef Gabrielle Hamilton’s much-criticized move to take over the Spotted Pig after accusations of rampant harassment, and Molly Hennessy-Fiske with a story about the inside of the “prison-like” shelters immigrant children are being kept in. If you’re not cursing, you’re not paying attention. A widely lauded cartoonist at the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette was fired for creating work critical of Trump and the usual “free speech” warriors are nowhere to be found. On a scale of one to 10 I’m at an eight – but only because I’m so very tired. Somehow this slow-motion basset hound had me laughing out loud for a good five minutes.