Donald Trump has disinvited the Philadelphia Eagles, the 2018 Super Bowl winners, from a planned White House celebration, escalating his clash with American athletes over protests during the national anthem. The football team was “unable to come to the White House” on Tuesday, he said in a statement released late Monday night, adding: “They disagree with their President because he insists that they proudly stand for the National Anthem, hand on heart, in honor of the great men and women of our military and the people of our country.” Trump’s announcement came after some players had already said they planned to shun the White House visit. Three of those players – safety Malcolm Jenkins, defensive end Chris Long and receiver Torrey Smith – are part of a group that publicly supported Colin Kaepernick, the NFL player who kneeled during the national anthem to protest racial inequality. Trump’s statement continued: “The Eagles wanted to send a smaller delegation, but the 1,000 fans planning to attend the event deserve better.” The president said the fans were still invited to the White House “to be part of a different type of ceremony – one that will honor our great country, pay tribute to the heroes who fight to protect it, and loudly and proudly play the National Anthem.” Pennsylvania lawmakers were quick to seize on the turn of events, and invited the players to tour the Capitol instead. “I’m proud of what the @Eagles accomplished this year. I’m skipping this political stunt at the White House and just invited the Eagles to Congress. @Eagles How about a tour of the Capitol?,” Pennsylvania senator Bob Casey, a Democrat, said on Twitter. Congressman Brendan Boyle, a Democrat from Philadelphia, promised coffee from Wawa, a beloved Pennsylvania-based convenience store chain, for the football champions. “The @Eagles are still welcome to visit the US Capitol. I will have @Wawa coffee waiting,” he wrote on Twitter. Trump’s announcement came two weeks after NFL owners issued controversial guidelines saying teams would be fined if their players did not show appropriate “respect” for the national anthem. The policy sparked immediate backlash, though Trump celebrated the rules as a victory, saying if someone fails to stand for the anthem, “maybe you shouldn’t be in the country”. Last year, Trump rescinded an invitation for the NBA-champion Golden State Warriors to visit the White House, ending a tradition that dated back several decades. The leveland Cavaliers star forward LeBron James famously called the president a “bum” at the time, tweeting: “Going to White House was a great honor until you showed up!” The president previously criticized the protests – meant to raise awareness about racism and police brutality in America – by saying: “Wouldn’t you love to see one of these NFL owners, when somebody disrespects our flag, to say, ‘Get that son of a bitch off the field right now.’”