The leading Conservative pro-Europe rebel Dominic Grieve has tabled an 11th-hour compromise amendment to the EU withdrawal bill, calling on the government to back his bid to prevent a “no-deal” Brexit in order to avoid defeat in the Commons. Grieve’s compromise amendment would give parliament more control over the outcome should MPs vote down Theresa May’s final Brexit deal. The government has offered its own amendment, where the only promised outcome is a statement to parliament within 28 days. The former attorney general met the chief whip, Julian Smith, and gave his amendment to the clerks late on Monday, less than 24 hours before the crucial vote in the Commons. The amendment would give ministers until the end of November to get agreement on the final Brexit deal. If they miss the deadline, ministers would have to put forward a motion in the Commons setting out their proposed next steps – and win approval from MPs for the plan. If there is no final Brexit deal by mid-February 2019, parliament would take control of the next steps. MPs who back the plan believe it is crucial insurance against a “no-deal” Brexit. A customs union is an agreement by a group of countries, such as the EU, to all apply the same tariffs on imported goods from the rest of the world and, typically, eliminate them entirely for trade within the group. By doing this, they can help avoid the need for costly and time-consuming customs checks during trade between members of the union. Asian shipping containers arriving at Felixstowe or Rotterdam, for example, need only pass through customs once before their contents head to markets all over Europe. Lorries passing between Dover and Calais avoid delay entirely. Customs are not the only checks that count – imports are also scrutinised for conformity with trading standards regulations and security and immigration purposes – but they do play an important role in determining how much friction there is at the border. A strict customs regime at Dover or between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland would lead to delays that will be costly for business and disruptive for travellers. Just-in-time supply chains in industries such as car making could suffer. An Irish peace process built around the principle of entirely unfettered travel between north and south could be jeopardised. Grieve suggested he would back the Lords amendment, which has a much more expansive role for parliament, if the government did not back his compromise. “I’ve tabled this evening a fresh amendment … I hope very much the government will look at that, because I think it provides a solution which would satisfy everybody,” he told BBC Newsnight on Monday night. “If it’s not accepted, I will have to consider very carefully tomorrow – I might well vote against the government. I’ve made that quite clear.” Jonathan Djanogly, a Conservative MP who rebelled on the issue in December, said earlier on Monday that there were “serious issues to be debated and the government line that the rebels have been silenced or placated is simply not true”. The “meaningful vote” amendment is now the only potential government defeat, after remainers and Brexiters struck a compromise deal overnight over the customs union. Downing Street sources said they would back an alternative amendment on the proposal for “a customs arrangement”, tabled by backbenchers Nicky Morgan, a remainer, and Jacob Rees-Mogg, a leading Brexiter. The key battle over whether MPs will back a motion to keep the UK in “a customs union”, which many pro-EU Tory MPs and Labour back, will now take place over amendments to two trade bills, which return to the Commons in July. On Monday night, the prime minister told Tory MPs at a meeting of the backbench 1922 Committee, attended by ministers including the chancellor, Philip Hammond, and the Brexit secretary, David Davis, that defeats over the Brexit bill would undermine her negotiating position with Brussels. “We must think about the message parliament will send to the European Union this week. I am trying to negotiate the best deal for Britain,” she told the packed room. “I am confident I can get a deal that allows us to strike our own trade deals while having a border with the EU which is as frictionless as possible. But if the Lords amendments are allowed to stand, that negotiating position will be undermined.” The House of Lords sent a total 15 amendments to the EU withdrawal bill back to MPs, one of which the government has accepted while offering compromises on three others.