A healthy, resilient plant gets all its strength from what its feet sit in. A healthy root system has the tools to take on slugs, rain, wind and whatever else summer is going to throw at us. There are, in very basic terms, two types of soil that garden plants like: fungally or bacterially dominated. Perennials, shrubs, fruit bushes and trees like fungally dominated soils. Annuals, including most vegetables and nearly all grasses, like bacterially dominated soils. It’s quite easy to please either gang by feeding the soil to promote either more fungi or more bacteria. Compost, particularly homemade stuff, is perfect for this. It can be used to inoculate beneficial microbes and life into your soil. With a little tinkering, you can maintain or alter the soil food web (how the soil feeds itself and all that lives in it) for an area or groups of plants. For instance, aged brown organic material supports fungi, while fresh green organic matter supports bacteria. For annual vegetables in particular – the hungry sort such as pumpkins, courgettes, potatoes and brassicas – mulching with grass clippings straw, spent hops, seaweed or alfalfa meal (often sold as horse feed and makes a great cheap feed) will feed bacteria. Mulching around vegetable and annual seedlings may just encourage the slugs in, but once your plants are strong enough, mulch is an excellent way to keep down weeds, lock in moisture and feed young plants. You can speed up the breakdown process of mulch and provide more nutrients by promoting tiny microbes, called protozoa. These eat bacteria and fungi primarily for their carbon; their nutrient-rich waste is the perfect plant food. As much as 80% of the nitrogen a plant needs comes from the waste produced by bacteria and fungi-eating protozoa. You can encourage more of this good stuff by making a protozoa soup. Protozoa need moisture to live, travel and reproduce, thus you will need fresh grass clippings, straw (organic or pesticide-free) or alfalfa meal, a big bucket or barrel and dechlorinated water. Rainwater is fine. Add big arms full of clippings to your water butt, leave for three or four days and then water this over your spread mulch. You will have an even better soup if you can add an aquarium pump to the water to bubble it. If you can’t do this, stir regularly in one direction to create a vortex and oxygenate the water. It may sound a little far-fetched, but if you take a hand lens to the water and see mad things dashing about, they are the protozoa. Once on your mulch or compost, they will do their magic.