A teenager has been arrested on suspicion of murder after a man was stabbed to death near a tube station in north London. Edmond Jonuzi, 35, was found with serious injures on Green Lanes near Turnpike Lane station on the evening of Saturday 9 June. He was pronounced dead at the scene. Jonuzi, also known as Edmond Preci, is believed to have been stabbed in the area of Ducketts Common to the south of the station. Scotland Yard said a 19-year-old, whom officers did not name, was detained in relation to the incident at about 4pm on Monday in Tottenhall Road, in nearby Wood Green. He was taken to a north London police station and officers are continuing to make inquiries. Appealing for witnesses two days after the killing, Metropolitan police DI Garry Moncrieff said: “It would appear that an altercation occurred between two groups of males in the Ducketts Common area at around 9.45pm on Saturday evening. Edmond was stabbed during that altercation. “This was a busy area, very near to Turnpike Lane tube station. There will be people who saw or heard something suspicious that could help us find whoever killed Edmond. “I am appealing for any witnesses or anyone with information to call the incident room at Hendon and share their accounts and that information with police.” The murder investigation launched following Jonuzi’s stabbing was Scotland Yard’s 74th of the year so far. If that rate was to continue, the capital is on track to suffer nearly 170 murders in 2018; a level of violence not seen for about a decade. The crisis led some to make unfavourable comparisons with New York City, though a deeper analysis of the data suggested that London’s murder rate was far from the worst in the UK and was not greater than the US city over a sustained period. In April, the violence prompted the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, to tell BBC Radio 4’s Today programme that Scotland Yard would increasingly focus on stopping and searching people suspected of carrying weapons, as well as making “more arrests as a consequence of this intelligence-led stop and search going up and, hopefully, our city becoming safer”.