One of the fun parts of being a disgustologist – as researchers who study the emotion of disgust sometimes call themselves – must be coming up with revolting scenarios. Repulsive enough to test a theory, but not quite so stomach-turning as to repel the people who have volunteered to take the test. In a recent study led by Prof Val Curtis, director of the environmental health group at the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, the vignettes were admirably imaginative. People were asked to rate their levels of disgust at more than 70 scenarios. These included imagining a hairless old cat rubbing up against one’s leg, stepping on a slug in bare feet, shaking hands with someone with “scabby fingers”, finding out a friend eats roadkill, finding out another attempted to have sex with a piece of fruit, and seeing “pus come from a genital sore”. And, my personal favourite, for warped imagination alone: learning your neighbour defecates in his back garden. The findings, published this week in the Royal Society’s Philosophical Transactions B journal, reveal six categories of disgust: poor hygiene, animals that are vectors of disease (such as rats or cockroaches), sexual behaviours, atypical appearance, lesions and visible signs of infection, and food that shows signs of decay. “The fact we’ve found there is an architecture of disgust that has six components to it tells us something about the way in which emotions work,” says Curtis. “It tells us that emotions are for doing particular behaviours. The emotion of disgust is about doing certain things that avoid disease – they’re about not eating spoiled food, not sticking your fingers in somebody’s weeping sore, not having sex with somebody you know is having sex with lots of other people, not picking up cockroaches and kissing them. It confirms the hypothesis that disgust really is about avoiding infection.” Sensitivity to disgust changes with age. “Very young children don’t have a strong sense of disgust,” says Curtis. “It really only kicks in when they’re about two, which is when they become independent of their parents. It ramps up over the years until you are about 30 or 40, and then it starts to drop.” They also found that women tend to be more easily disgusted than men. “We’re all evolved and we’ve all gained advantages, in terms of reproduction, by avoiding things that might have made us sick,” says Curtis. “In our evolutionary past, it tended to be mothers who looked after the children, so it really paid for them to be extra squeamish because they had to not get sick themselves. They also had to keep young, dependent children safe. Having an extra disgust towards food, for example, or if there was a sick person around who was going to make your child sick, you would perceive that a little more carefully.” When it comes to disgust around sexual behaviours, such as promiscuity, “women are particularly vulnerable to [sexually transmitted] infections. And it might reduce their ability to reproduce, and ability to bring up children, whereas men have so many more chances to reproduce than women do.” Men are also rewarded for risky behaviours, Curtis points out, which may be perceived as bravery or strength by the woman who may be keen for them to father her children. “I’m massively exaggerating, of course.” The emotion of disgust has further extensions, she says. “If I said to you: ‘You’re disgusting, you’re wearing a dirty old shirt,’ you would feel embarrassed, and, tomorrow, you wouldn’t come in wearing it. So, I can use disgust to make you behave in ways that will preserve my health. But I can also say to you: ‘You stole my purse, that’s really disgusting,’ and that will make you ashamed, so that helps make the world better.” Disgust, she says, helps teach people good manners, “so they don’t inflict their bodily emanations on other people, but it also helps to teach you how to be moral”. Disgust can be effectively used in public health campaigns. Other scientists say our disgust response can be indicative of things far broader than only wanting to avoid illness. In new research, yet to be published, researchers found that individuals who were highly sensitive to feeling disgust were also more cautious in areas not related to pathogens and infection. “We like to think of it as potentially existential risk, dangerous situations where one needs to be careful,” says Simone Schnall, reader in experimental social psychology at Cambridge University and director of the Body, Mind and Behaviour Laboratory, and one of the authors of the study. “We find individual difference [in] disgust sensitivity more broadly correlates with risk perception.” In recreational risk, such as skydiving or whitewater rafting, people who are high on disgust sensitivity also perceive greater risk in those activities than people who are low. They found it was the same for financial risk, such as gambling or making a potentially fraught investment. “Even more remote is social risk – such as voicing your opinion that goes against everyone else’s, or speaking with your superiors on an unpopular topic. Basically, putting yourself in social situations that could be perceived as uncomfortable, people who are high on disgust sensitivity find that to be more risky.” Is disgust learned or genetic? Schnall says it is not clear. “My hunch would be that there may be a genetic component, or some sort of preparedness which comes about very early in life. Would it be genetic as such? That’s hard to tell. It could be that it’s easier for some people to pick up these cues of illness and danger relative to others. There would have to be some sort of learning involved, some association: I touched this and it made me sick.” The word “disgust” to describe the feeling we would recognise today arrived, in English at least, in the mid-18th century, says Richard Firth-Godbehere, a historian of emotions. “It was taken up quite quickly because there seemed to be a gap in our language to describe this sensation. The earliest proper research was by Charles Darwin, who had wonderful photos and descriptions about disgust. He had pictures of people pulling this gape face. He noted that people, wherever he went in the world, would pull the same face if something disgusting happened.” Darwin, of course, thought it had evolutionary origins. “Freud had some strange ideas about disgust,” Firth-Godbehere adds. “He talked about the idea that the reason humans walked upright is because we wanted to keep our heads away from our genitals, and animals are closer to the ground because they’re more revolting than we are.” The American psychologist Paul Rozin has spent his career researching disgust and one of his theories is that disgust is a response to “anything that reminds us that we are animals”. There are instances where our disgust response is inappropriate, says Curtis. In the past it made sense to avoid people who were very thin, or looked ill, or had lesions or missing limbs, because it could be indicative of infectious and deadly diseases, such as leprosy. Now, those diseases are rare, and, in developed countries, never seen, but people who do not conform – described by Curtis in the study as of “atypical appearance” – can still elicit revulsion, which is clearly terrible and dehumanising. “I think it’s important we understand that, because we can unconsciously stigmatise and avoid people [who have terrible spots, for instance] and think unconsciously that they might give us a disease. We need to become aware that it happens so we can fight it.” Our attitudes to what is considered disgusting, particularly morally, can and does change, though. “There is a cultural element to it,” says Firth-Godbehere. The first version of the Disgust Scale, devised by Rozin and others, asked people if they thought that homosexuality was immoral. “That was [later] removed. That is an example of perception changing. There are certain things that seem to be almost universal, such as [aversion to] faeces, but something I am interested in is eating insects. A quarter of the world do it, it’s a great source of protein, and we could learn [to eat them].” Some revolting ideas may be overcome; some are just too huge. It will never not be exceedingly disgusting to deposit human manure in the garden, especially if it also means stepping barefoot on a slug.