As amusingly unfiltered as ever, Allen embraces the sunny disposition of Afro bashment and British rap, and pairs it with delicate, bruised and often dolorous songs about her divorce – an affecting combination. What we said: “As Allen would doubtless point out, she never claimed to be perfect. What she is, No Shame strongly suggests, is ready and able to tough it out.” Read the full review. Anderson’s reflections on Hurricane Sandy, which devastated her New York apartment, are paired with stirring, elegiac playing by the Kronos string quartet in a 30-part saga of man v nature. What we said: “Landfall manages to eke some joy and inspiration from this grim tragedy.” Read the full review. By pairing Candi Staton-style southern soul with symphonic Americana, Andrews bridges two classic American songwriting modes with her vibrato-rich voice. What we said: “May Your Kindness Remain confirms Andrews’ rise. It’s a brilliant record, proof that old forms can still be timeless.” Read the full review. A sharp left turn from the swaggering, sexy indie-rock of album AM, this is all-crooning cocktail-lounge psychedelia. There are hints of Serge Gainsbourg, Dion, Pulp, Scott Walker and others, but with its extremely droll lyric sheet, this is very much their own vision. It could well become one of their most keenly loved albums. What we said: “If you give yourself up to rolling around in the psyche of one of our very greatest songwriters like an olive in a martini, then it’s a riveting and immersive listen.” Read the full review. There are shades of Porter Ricks and classic Aphex Twin on this deep dive into ambient techno, with lots of murky static and mournful chords – but there’s still room for rave melody on Clear and Slow Fade. What we said: “The old bodily pleasure is here, but it’s approached in altogether sterner, more serious ways.” Read the full review. Bridges’ rich, keening yet nimble vocals remain the anchor for his smooth neo-soul, further assisted by warm, bassy production. Bet Ain’t Worth the Hand might be the year’s best breakup song and If It Feels Good (Then It Must Be) takes Bruno Mars to Venus. What we said: “It leaves you with a greater sense of who he is: loved-up and striving for a level of ambition that feels within reach.” Read the full review. With a hit the size of Havana, former girlband singer Cabello could have got away with an album of filler – but thanks to her variously earnest and coquettish tones she skilfully hops around a series of strong pop songs ranging from reggaeton to power balladry. What we said: “Everything the album does, it does really well.” Read the full review. Once spoken of in some quarters as a novelty act, the former stripper and reality TV star showed how accomplished and emotionally rich her rap tracks could be – from withering club bangers to raw, delicate R&B. What we said: “Thanks to her killer punchlines, emotional range and just being a total force of nature, she has absolutely earned her ‘real-life fairytale’.” Read the full review. Her first solo album in five years and perhaps her best yet – still humming with her southern gothic strangeness, but also with her knack for spirited melody as she writes a kind of autobiography in song. What we said: “Hell-On finds Case asserting the facts of her life with daring candour and wit.” Read the full review. The Bolivian-American electronic producer weaves a stunning tapestry of rhythm, nodding to colonial influence while keeping everything rooted in a digital era. What we said: “As with all of her work, it contains a universe of history and philosophical thought.” Read the full review. The Malian singer delivers a clear-eyed, heartfelt set powered by soft electronic beats and her distinctive tumbling guitar lines, also making room for acoustic ballads. What we said: “It may be aimed at the international crossover market, but even at its most commercial this is an album that succeeds.” Read the full review. The one-time Fiery Furnaces frontwoman makes her most accessible record yet: a warm but slightly eerie synthpop album, on which an observational Friedberger seems to teeter on the edge of a crackup. What we said: “It’s held together by sharp, tunefully lovely songwriting, and the likes of Make Me a Song and Everything are copper-bottomed, classy, euphoric electropop.” Read the full review. One of the only Cornish-language pop albums to make it to market, Gwenno – once of girl group the Pipettes – creates an imaginary city populated with Cornish luminaries, as a way to brilliantly reflect on Brexit, mythology and utopianism. And cheese. What we said: “Purposeful and direct, but deliciously blurry. Reminiscent of Broadcast in their creation of a psychedelia that simultaneously looks backwards and forwards.” Read the full review. The Leeds psych-rockers step up a gear with a big, LCD Soundsystem-esque LP that pairs pugnacious motorik rhythms with strident vocals. It sounds predictably epic while played when driving. What we said: “Microshift manages to be their most accessible work and their most intense – the sound of an already powerful band gaining not just clarity but focus.” Read the full review. Paired with drummer Jack DeJohnette and double bassist Gary Peacock, this is a live session from 1998, recorded just after Jarrett’s recovery from chronic fatigue syndrome. It showcases his core style of sentimental, wandering melodic lines, often with a pacy groove beneath. What we said: “The content and the backstory of this powerful release catapult it to the forefront of Jarrett’s voluminous catalogue.” Read the full review. Originally released in 2016, this Korean musician got a deserved full UK release for her album of ambient composition for traditional instruments like the piri, yanggeum and saenghwang, giving them an affecting, imploring voice. What we said: “An intriguing instrumental set that mixes minimalism and melody with bursts of furious energy and experimentation.” Read the full review. The Bingley rockers had a long road back after their singer Becca McIntyre suffered a bad knee injury, but they roared on their return – grungy scuzz mixed with glittery pop smarts on album two. What we said: “Marmozets have made their great leap forward.” Read the full review. Their triplet-time flow has been much imitated but, despite the absolute focus on cars, girls and money, the rap trio are no one-trick pony – there’s also laid-back hip-hop and pop-funk, all of it with indelible hooks. What we said: “For such a gargantuan album, it’s surprisingly light on its feet, skipping nimbly between musical styles.” Read the full review. Deep house heaven from the veteran Chicago-born producer, with Balearic piano and guitar motifs sitting on top of warm grooves – and, occasionally, his own boyish, beautifully naive singing. What we said: “At 57, house music’s great survivor still has much to give.” Read the full review. A staggeringly well-written series of songs, rooted in country by Musgraves’ southern accent and licks of pedal steel, but which dip into disco-pop and more. After just a couple of listens, each one feels like a standard that’s been around for decades. What we said: “Regardless of genre, you’ll be hard pushed to find a better collection of pop songs this year. Read the full review. The guitar’n’drums duo release their strongest record yet, full of ultra-tight fills and distorted riffs poured into joyous bursts of ramalama punk, topped with Dean Spunt’s yearning vocals. What we said: “No Age are one of those rare bands who can be all things to all punks ... and they are in the form of their lives.” Read the full review. A typically cutting-edge set from Daniel Lopatin, full of harpsichords, mournful songcraft, trap drums and more, all flanked by digital noise and sorted into strange, visionary arrangements. What we said: “The more time you spend with Age Of, the more Lopatin’s instrumentations reveal depth.” Read the full review. The prolific New York indie-punks keep up their quality control on a superb album that broadens out into funk and literate, Pavement-like balladry around their usual smart, high-tempo songs. What we said: “Wide Awake! cements Parquet Courts’ position as one of US indie’s more intriguing outliers.” Read the full review. Having scrapped two previous albums, the American songwriter arrives at a hard-won destination: a place where R&B, soul, Karen Carpenter and Janet Jackson cohere in politically minded, perfectly written adult pop. What we said: “You can trace its musical roots, but The Future and the Past never feels self-consciously retro, never sounds like pastiche.” Read the full review. The first project to be released from Kanye West’s burst of 2018 activity, Pusha T delivers perfectly weighted drug raps over West’s thrillingly raw production, unafraid of beef and with devastatingly clear diction. What we said: “Each track is an elocution lesson, his bars enunciated with the almost pedantic menace of a bad cop explaining what he plans to do to you.” Read the full review. Subtle rumbles of laptop-derived ambience sit at the back of the mix of this folk album, which sees Roberts’ naive, gorgeously accented Scottish voice joined by piano and dulcitone. What we said: “So many intricate ideas here, so beautifully done.” Read the full review. The sweaty, sarky south London five-piece’s debut album encompassed Fall-like grot, Mission of Burma-style post-punk anger and big-budget Britpop anthems. What we said: “Their lyrics are delivered by supremely charismatic frontman Charlie Steen, pitching his delivery between Bullingdon and borstal.” Read the full review. At a time when many electronic producers are content with vague moodiness or outright nostalgia, Sophie has delivered an utterly fresh sound, in which vulcanised robotic drum programming meets the chaos of hardcore and J-pop. What we said: Sophie has crafted a genuinely original sound and uses it to visit extremes of terror, sadness and pleasure. Read the full review. The English indie stalwarts turn in an unexpected classic: a confidently melodic set that hops from power-pop to scuzzy mosh pits anthems to smooth soft-rock. What we said: “The high-quality songwriting on their fourth album means their church will surely broaden beyond the indie faithful.” Read the full review. Idiosyncratic, impressionistic dream-pop with rickety synths, saxophones and samples floating around vocalist Alice Merida Richards’ deadpan, slightly beaten-down lyrics. What we said: “What at first sounds girlish, naive and open-hearted is revealed to be rather jaded and wary.” Read the full review. Still admirably resistant to genre, the Scottish trio straddle art-rock, soul, industrial and hip-hop – the likes of Lord and In My View have their gospel fervour surrounded by anxious electronics. What we said: “Fascinating and forbidding in equal measure, and it’s also very timely: twisted and broken-sounding pop music for a twisted and broken era.” Read the full review.