Fuck it. One would like to think these words were uttered when Ed Smith’s first selection meeting was debating the decision to yank Jos Buttler back from his thundering spell at the Indian Premier League and drop him into the Test side to face Pakistan. But, in fact, they are scrawled in felt pen on the end of the 27-year-old’s bat handle, offering a little reminder to the scribe – one lauded by Smith for his “unique gifts” during the big reveal – that when it comes to performing out in the middle, there is little point overthinking things. This personal mantra, akin to “swing thought” in golf, perhaps, has actually sat atop his Kookaburra cudgels for a while now. It was first explained during an interview in 2015 as the end result of what had been a maddening time spent searching for batsmanship’s silver bullet. It nevertheless shot to prominence on Sunday morning when picked up by the Sky cameras during the rocket-fuelled second half of his unbeaten 80 – a violent assault on the Pakistan bowlers that provided a double espresso for the Headingley crowd and the lead of 189 runs from which this three-day innings victory was secured. “That’s why he’s in the side, to try and take games away from oppositions as he did,” said Root, savouring his first win as England captain in nine Tests. “It would have been nice to get a second cup of coffee and watch another hour of him but that was the nature of the surface. I thought that innings was worth 120 or 130 [on that pitch]. We all know how talented he is and what he is capable of, so hopefully we’ll see a lot more of it.” Root was right to highlight a Headingley strip that was a bowler’s friend, with only one other batsmen making a half-century – Pakistan’s Shadab Khan – and a series of English starts that were all cut off bar that by Buttler. Had he not run out of partners at the end, a maiden Test century (rather than Root’s quasi-one) would surely have followed. Resuming his overnight 34 from 67 balls, what followed was the Buttler witnessed often enough in white-ball cricket but only fleetingly in whites. Those gimlet eyes, those rubbery wrists, the ability to manipulate deliveries seemingly at will. Though the second of his sixes off Faheem Ashraf soared into the adjoining rugby ground and forced a change of ball, in many ways it was scarcely a surprise from this uber-talent. But what most impressed is that, while the afterburners were ignited in true Buttler style in the later stages of his innings, the previous night he had been so stoic in defence. Against the second new ball, and with his sights set solely on reaching the close, he nudged 15 runs and struck no boundaries from the final 46 balls faced in the session. Admittedly he was dropped on four by Hasan Ali, trying to flick the leg-spinner Shadab through midwicket early on. But the response, not least after Jonny Bairstow’s demise and the tail began, proved he can knuckle down according to the situation. He is not just in his element on a flat-track against a white ball. With this following up the similarly watchful 67 compiled amid the ruins of Lord’s, he has produced a significant dual riposte to those who, on his recall, chuntered about a lack of first-class cricket that stretched back to last September and a six-week lead-up spent pummelling hapless IPL bowlers while wearing the natty blue pyjamas of Rajasthan Royals. “It is great to be back, a great opportunity and I wanted to make the most of it,” said Buttler as he picked up the man-of-the-match award. “I did enjoy being able to slog a few out there but it is all about trying to play situations. I am lucky, I guess, for someone to take a punt on me and say ‘There is a Test player in there somewhere’, despite not playing county cricket.” Quite where England go with Buttler in Test cricket will be fascinating to see. While he was due to bat at No 6 here until the nightwatchman was deployed, when Stokes returns he will drop down No 7. Specialist batsmen in this slot are not a new concept but they tend to be fleeting, with promotions following when they work out. That is unless the second half of the equation – Bairstow keeping wicket and batting at No 5 – is rethought and England decide to hand over the gloves. But with two months before their next Test, India at Edgbaston on 1 August, there is plenty of time to ponder such matters.