Going into the last round of World Cup group fixtures, here’s how the qualifying situation stands in each of the eight groups. Eighteen nations are in contention for the 10 places left up for grabs in the last 16 – and in Group F potentially any of the four teams could still qualify. Already qualified for second round: Russia, Uruguay, France, Croatia, England, Belgium Group A Russia and Uruguay have both qualified. A draw on Monday and Russia top the group on goal difference. Uruguay need to win to take the group. Eliminated: Saudi Arabia, Egypt To come: Saudi Arabia v Egypt, Uruguay v Russia Group B A draw will be enough to guarantee Portugal progress, though Iran can qualify for the second round for the first time if they can beat Portugal. Spain are almost certain to progress unless Iran beat Portugal and Spain lose to Morocco by a wider margin. Eliminated: Morocco To come: Iran v Portugal, Spain v Morocco Group C France have qualified. Denmark, who play the French, need a point to join them. If Denmark lose, Australia could pip them on goal difference or goals scored if they beat Peru. Australia must win to stand a chance, but surely fear that France and Denmark will play out a tepid draw like the Disgrace of Gijón. Eliminated: Peru To come: Australia v Peru, Denmark v France Group D Croatia are through. Argentina, Iceland or Nigeria could all join them in the next round. A draw against Argentina will be enough for Nigeria, provided that Iceland don’t beat Croatia. Iceland need Argentina and Nigeria to draw, and then if they can beat Croatia by two goals or more they can just about edge out Nigeria. Argentina need to win, and hope Iceland don’t beat Croatia. If Iceland and Argentina both win, it would come down to goal difference between the pair. Get the abacus out. Eliminated: None To come: Iceland v Croatia, Nigeria v Argentina Group E Brazil, Switzerland and Serbia are in contention for the two places. Switzerland know they need only a point against Costa Rica to progress. Serbia need victory against Brazil to be sure of going through – a result which would potentially send the Seleção home early if Switzerland also get a positive result. Eliminated: Costa Rica To come: Serbia v Brazil, Switzerland v Costa Rica Group F Germany’s sensational last-minute winner against Sweden has made this one of the most complex group situations – Mexico and South Korea could join either of those teams in the last 16. Mexico are in the box-seat with six points - a point against Sweden and they are through. Sweden need a better result against Mexico than the result Germany get against South Korea to progress. South Korea can still edge through if they beat Germany and Mexico beat Sweden, and there’s at least a two-goal margin in there somewhere. There’s also a bizarre edge case in this group, where if South Korea beat Germany 1-0, and Mexico beat Sweden 1-0, the rules state that Sweden and Germany will only be separated by their disciplinary records – not by the fact that Germany beat Sweden. Eliminated: None To come: South Korea v Germany, Mexico v Sweden Group G England and Belgium are locked together at the top of the group, both guaranteed to progress. Their final match will determine who tops the group. As they have identical records so far, if their final match is drawn, the team with the better disciplinary record (currently England with two yellow cards as opposed to Belgium’s three) will top the group. If they end up with identical disciplinary records, lots will be drawn to decide who finishes first – which could be key to potentially avoiding a route that includes facing Germany or Brazil in the quarter-finals. Eliminated: Tunisia, Panama To come: England v Belgium, Panama v Tunisia Group H Japan will progress if they get at least a draw against eliminated Poland. Colombia and Senegal face each other. A draw in that game will be enough for Senegal to progress. A draw might also be enough for Colombia to progress, but they would be relying on Poland beating Japan at the same time. Eliminated: Poland To come: Japan v Poland, Senegal v Colombia