A committee of MPs has warned that parliament may not have enough time to approve the UK’s exit from the European Union by March 2019 as Theresa May heads to Brussels for the latest round of the slow-moving divorce talks. The cross-party Brexit committee said that “even under the most optimistic outcome” of a divorce deal being agreed in October there was not necessarily enough time for ratification by the article 50 deadline, particularly if MPs seek to amend the final deal. Hilary Benn, the committee chairman, is due to make a statement to the Commons later this morning outlining the concerns. Speaking as the report was published, Benn warned that “time is not on our side”, citing the fact that future customs arrangements and other crucial elements had not yet been signed off by cabinet or agreed with the EU. He added: “While the cabinet continues to run down the clock as it tries to agree on a plan, it would be unconscionable if the House of Commons was not provided with the time and opportunity both for the fullest debate and to enable a clear expression of its opinion on the most significant decision our country has faced in a generation.” May travelled to Brussels for a summit on Thursday with her fellow EU leaders, at which they are expected to criticise the lack of clarity from the UK government on its Brexit choices. There is no expectation of significant progress in the latest talks but a growing number of officials now believe it will not be possible to reach a final agreement in October either. That would delay a deal until the December summit, making the parliamentary timetable even tighter. The Brexit committee concluded that the Commons would need at least five days to debate a government motion seeking approval for the final deal and consider amendments put down by MPs – and rejected statements made by ministers that if the MPs and peers were not to sign off on their proposed exit deal that the UK would automatically crash out of the EU on a ‘no deal’ scenario in March 2019. Instead the MPs said that ministers should “provide for a second parliamentary vote” in such circumstances to allow for the government to negotiate further with the 27 other countries in the European Union – and, if necessary, seek a “limited extension” to Article 50 to allow negotiations to conclude. If there was no prospect of reaching a satisfactory agreement and ministers were determined on leaving the UK on a “no deal” scenario, the committee said the Commons should also have the chance to “express its view clearly and advise the government on how to proceed”. The report added: “The country would expect more than MPs simply ‘took note’ of the situation.” Once viewed as a crucial staging post on the way to Britain’s departure, the agenda of the June European council meeting will instead be dominated by migration and plans for eurozone reform. May will be allowed a few minutes to deliver a Brexit update at the start of a working dinner on Thursday evening. She will use a series of bilateral meetings, beginning on the fringes of the European council, to sound out other EU leaders – who Downing Street hopes may be less doctrinaire about potential solutions than Michel Barnier and the European commission. The prime minister is due to return to London on Thursday night, leaving the EU27 to discuss their approach to Brexit without her on Friday morning.