It was statement day for England Women and they batted accordingly, returning to the joyous style that has defined the side under the coach Mark Robinson to reach a total of 331 for six, dominated by a pair of superlative hundreds from Tammy Beaumont and Sarah Taylor. The winning margin of 69 runs was comprehensive at the end of the entertaining encounter but when Lizelle Lee exploded to deliver a century of her own it was certainly game on. All it took, however, was Katherine Brunt to break the 142-run opening stand to prompt a run of consistent wickets to guarantee England victory. With England needing a win to balance the ledger at one game apiece and avoid a third-straight series defeat, South Africa sent them in under cloudy skies in an effort to bring on another collapse. Instead, Heather Knight’s side produced their best performance with the blade since their triumphant World Cup campaign. Taylor’s genius is far from a secret but this 118 was its fullest expression, packed with exuberant hoicks, upmarket footwork and outlandish standing reverse sweeps that only she dares to attempt with such regularity. It took the 29-year-old 93 balls to complete the century on her home ground, leaving only five women who have made more ODI hundreds. Less noticeable but no less important to the squeeze she and Beaumont created were the raft of shots through the fielding circle where hard running routinely turned ones into twos to quickly build their 156‑run stand. They defied the perception that middle overs of ODIs are when you wait for the fun to start again. On this day, the fun bit came early. When Beaumont saluted in the 36th over, arriving at the mark with three consecutive boundaries to pass through the 90s faster than Guru Josh, it was the first time an England player had done so since the group stages of the World Cup. It was also a timely reminder of what Beaumont has achieved playing for Robinson. When he took over in 2016 the right-hander was out of the side having made a paltry 207 in 23 matches. Her performance on Tuesday made it four centuries in 29 matches under his stewardship at an average of 49. That only three women have reached three figures four times in ODIs quicker than Beaumont says it all. Earlier her new partner at the top, Amy Jones, was impressive again until falling for 29, but it was her highest score in this country and laid a base with Beaumont of 71 to allow Taylor to come in with the opposition already under pressure. When the stand came to an end, Knight (24) and Danni Wyatt (20) did their bit with cameos at the death. Only Nat Sciver (6), elevated to No4, failed to get going. Statement made. Under the lights, Lee smashed 62 in 27 balls to double South Africa’s score in the space of seven overs to 142 without loss. But with wickets falling, Lee was snaffled wonderfully by Wyatt at point to put the locals at ease. After an early struggle, Sophie Ecclestone fought back well to finish with three wickets. The three-game ODI series will be decided at Canterbury on Friday.