If you’re not familiar with the TV series Hannibal, it is – for the most part – a deeply twisted yet blackly funny reimagining of the Hannibal Lecter tales, only with a much younger and suaver Hannibal (Mads Mikkelsen). He is still indulging his fondness for murder and cannibalism, but not living life on the run because he generally manages to pin his crimes on other people. Or he just eats them. It all takes place in a weird hyper-homicidal world in which the characters from Thomas Harris’s series of Hannibal books – killers, cops, tabloid hacks and freaks – exist at the same time. The show’s secondary character is Will Graham (Hugh Dancy) from Red Dragon, who can visualise murders after they have happened simply by looking at the scene. He serves as sparring partner, sidekick, patient and general ball of wool to the Hannibal cat. Harris nerds love the series, as it foregrounds characters from the books who are so obscure that they were only briefly mentioned in passing, such as serial killer Garret “The Minnesota Shrike” Hobbs, who mounts his victims on deer antlers. Which seems unkind to both the people and the deer. (Sadly, the Clarice Starling and Buffalo Bill characters couldn’t make it to the party due to a usage rights issue.) However, addicts will tell you that what really sets Hannibal apart is the killing, of which there is plenty. The manner of deaths in the series is, appropriately, completely bonkers – whoever came up with them clearly watched the Saw films and thought: “This just isn’t grisly enough.” As well as antler mountings, we see human bodies used as mushroom-patch fertiliser; backs flayed of flesh and turned into ghastly angel wings; a totem pole made of human body parts; and a corn silo full of naked men, all glued together. At one point, a cello is used as a murder weapon. Once we arrive at the halfway point of the second series, though – by which time, the spinning of narrative plates has reached a frenzy – things get silly. Sadly, it is partly Eddie Izzard’s fault. He plays Abel Gideon, a surgeon and an is-he-or-isn’t-he? serial killer. Izzard is the weak link: he’s simply too adorable to pull off a psycho. He runs marathons and tells jokes in French! He looks great in heels! It’s fun for a while, but his relentless Hopkins shtick (Anthony, not Katie) culminates at the point at which grand guignol spills over into outright farce, when he allows Lecter to – how to put this? – cut off his limbs and serve them to him over dinner. At one point, he eats his own leg. Oh, Eddie! It is an absurd development, even by Hannibal’s standards; one that almost compels a viewer to throw their glass of Chianti at the TV. Of course, it’s a nod to the climax of Hannibal the film, in which Ray Liotta’s slimy agent Paul Krendler eats some of his own brain. But then the film Hannibal – and Hannibal Rising for that matter – were always a bit on the duff side anyway. In summary, human-limb totem poles and death by mushroom: fine. Eddie Izzard eating his own leg: TOO SILLY.