My family has been picnicking in England since 1972, when they arrived here after being expelled from Uganda by Idi Amin. They bought a campervan, a job lot of flares and enough Tupperware to last a lifetime. Mostly we’d eat spiced vegetables in some form, herbed rice and salad, with chutneys to accompany. Here, 46 years later, I’ve combined all of those elements for, in my eyes, the perfect picnic meal. Prep 20 minCook 50 minRest 10 minServes 4 For the rice 1 red onion, peeled ½ large cauliflower (about 600g)350g baby aubergines (ie, about 4 slim ones) 300g vine tomatoes, halved Rapeseed oil 1 tsp salt3 garlic cloves, unpeeled 250g basmati and wild rice (I like Tilda)400g tin chickpeas 15g fresh coriander leaves, finely chopped For the tamarind dressing 1 tbsp tamarind paste1 ½ tbsp date syrup 1 tbsp rapeseed oil ¼ tsp ground red chilli ½ tsp ground cuminSalt For the ‘yoghurt’ dressing100ml non-dairy yoghurtSalt Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas 4 and line two large oven trays with foil. Chop the onion from above into wedges, separate into “petals”, then arrange on one half of one tray. Break down the cauliflower into bite-sized pieces and put these on the other half of the tray. Cut the aubergines lengthways into quarters, and put them on one half of the second tray; lay the tomatoes on the other half. Whisk four tablespoons of oil with a teaspoon of salt, pour this over all the vegetables, then toss with your hands to coat all the surfaces and get into the nooks and crannies. Bash the garlic cloves with the back of a knife and put on the aubergine tray, then roast the onion and cauliflower for 20-25 minutes and the aubergine, tomatoes and garlic for 30 minutes. Meanwhile, wash the rice in a sieve under the cold tap until the water runs clear, then tip into a large saucepan. Drain the chickpeas, add to the rice, then cover with plenty of cold water and bring to a boil. Turn down the heat and leave to simmer for 18 minutes, or until tender. Drain into a sieve, then cover with a clean tea towel and leave for 10 minutes. Now make the dressings. In a small bowl, mix the tamarind paste, date syrup and oil with a tablespoon of water. Add the chilli, cumin and a quarter-teaspoon of salt, and mix again. Put the yoghurt in a second small bowl. Squeeze the flesh from the roast garlic on to a board and finely chop, then stir into the yoghurt with a quarter-teaspoon of salt. To bring the salad together, in a bowl mix the rice and chickpeas with the baked vegetables, toss with the tamarind dressing and transfer to a portable container. Serve drizzled with the yoghurt dressing and scattered with coriander.