“I’m off to catch chlamydia from a koala and Patti Lupone!” As creator of the iconic Hedwig and the Angry Inch, and the real-sex-on-screen indie classic Shortbus, this opener from John Cameron Mitchell ranks somewhere in the middle in terms of shock value. Hedwig and the Angry Inch came to life as a queer nightclub act in late-90s New York, and has since become the film and Broadway hit that defines Mitchell’s career – so it’s not surprising that he’ll return to it for his first Australian tour, opening this week at Adelaide Cabaret festival (at which Lupone will also headline). Rather than reprising the role, Mitchell will be performing a cabaret – part-confessional, part-greatest hits. And Hedwig is his greatest hit. In the cult classic show, the character of Hedwig tells the story of his life. Born a boy in East Berlin, he meets a US soldier who convinces him to dress in drag and then change sex, in order to be married. Hedwig’s botched gender reassignment surgery results in an eponymous “angry inch” which acts as a metaphoric rudder, guiding her journey through an America that wasn’t quite ready for her. To Mitchell, the longevity of Hedwig speaks to what the character has come to represent. “Perhaps we’re all forced into certain places we don’t want – everyone can relate to that,” Cameron says. “... A boy is forced into an uncomfortable gender reassignment that he never wanted, and then at a certain point, as we all do, says, ‘What do we do with what we’re given?’ And then the woman becomes Hedwig.” Drag can function in different ways, he says: “To some, it’s armour, to some it’s accessory, and to some it’s a tool ... In telling the story of heartbreak, Hedwig kind of smashes the drag, rips it off and then walks into the world naked, as if to say, ‘This is me.’ “The real test comes when we drop that and we see what’s underneath, including the scars, including the complexity of what [we’ve] been through ... There’s an understanding that perhaps she can let go of the bitterness, let go of the victimhood, maybe even let go of the drag. Let go of the pronouns, let go of whatever.” Much has changed since Mitchell debuted Hedwig and the Angry Inch in 1998. Back then, the Meatpacking District in which the show premiered still packed meat, and its old cobblestone streets were walked by transgender sex workers. Today, it’s yet another New York neighbourhood with a storied past that’s been sacrificed to gentrification. Queer culture, meanwhile, has shifted dramatically – it’s more visible, more celebrated, and in many ways more complicated. The internet groans daily, sometimes literally, beneath the sheer volume of discourse on LGBTIQA identity politics, leading to a call-out culture that often expresses itself along generational lines, in which queer people even target each other for expressing views now deemed outdated, ignorant, or lacking in intersectionality. In this context, Hedwig could be read by younger millennial queers as positively scandalous: a cisgender gay man telling the story of a trans woman who is not trans by choice, but through coercion. If Mitchell were to make Hedwig today, would he be able to get away with it? “I don’t know …” Mitchell ponders the question, but doesn’t answer it; instead, he speaks to a shift in the way queer people relate to each other. “In the US, people have turned their energies to each other because they can’t do much about who is on top of the power structure.” That inward response to powerlessness sits in stark contrast with the earlier punk aspects of queer culture, which Mitchell came up through. “I accuse, therefore I am. That’s the internet,” Mitchell says; he describes the way queer people sometimes interact with each other as a sort of “oppression olympics” in which “outrage becomes proof of existence”. Our “grievances are real and our intentions are good,” but we are “looking for flaws, instead of looking for things in common”. Traditionally, the concept of “queerness” explored an understanding of gender and power through the prism of the outsider. That’s precisely where Hedwig sits and, for the most part, refuses to budge from: her victimhood becomes a huge part of her identity. Queerness rose to wider usage in the 1980s, at the same time that punk was born – and has always been, Cameron says, “a good umbrella term for people who look at the world through a prism of the flexibility of gender, and the understanding that gender and power are connected”. But, he says, it is “changing quickly”. Take Caitlyn Jenner, for example. In the time when Hedwig was originally performed, the public transition of a Republican millionaire and former Olympian, broadcast on reality TV, would have been harder to believe than, well, the story of a coerced-trans punk rocker from East Berlin on a revenge tour through middle America. “Certainly, Caitlyn Jenner has little in common with me, in terms of being queer,” Mitchell notes dryly. “But she is still in that umbrella. There’s room for variety, but acceptance also makes way for mediocrity and extremism, to be honest.” In an era in which marriage equality has brought greater acceptance for many, while a culture war rages against safe schools and bathroom access, does the LGBTIQA experience have space for both the more outwardly respectable and the radical? “That’s weirdly one of our goals: there’s an acceptance of it all – age-wise, sexuality-wise, gender-wise, what you do with your body, whether you leave your body alone, whether you manipulate it to make it feel closer to what you feel like. It’s all about intention and self-discovery and self-realisation.” There are other lessons to be learned from Hedwig’s journey, and not just for a contemporary queer community. “There are energies that we might call male and female within all of us. When you don’t exercise them they tend to die, like a mouse in a wall, and they smell up the place. “You have to use all of these energies, or we all know the costs.” • John Cameron Mitchell appears at Adelaide Cabaret festival on Friday 22 June, before shows in Canberra, Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane