I’ve said this before, but we should eat more weeds. Perhaps it’s tiresome, but I am not giving up – because wild things are good for our health. Plus, your garden has plenty. Dandelions, for instance, are a rich source of potassium and a good source of other minerals and vitamins, including iron, magnesium, calcium and vitamins A, B and C. Your average lettuce leaf can’t compete with that. The plant is a diuretic, hence the French name, pissenlit, from pisse-en-lit, wet the bed. Coupled with the potassium, this makes it a powerful yet gentle medicine where a diuretic may be needed. It’s also a valuable liver and kidney tonic, so great for a hangover, as well as good for all sorts of skin problems, from acne to eczema. The bitter nature of the leaves means they are great for aiding digestion. You will need to see a herbalist if you want a concentrated extract, but for a general boost to your wellbeing just eat the plant regularly. The simplest way to do this is to eat the young, tender leaves, which are less bitter than the older ones. They taste much like endive, so use a sweet vinegar to dress them – raspberry or the like – to counterbalance the bitter notes. I understand that, for some, being asked to eat a weed is challenging. If this is the case, meet Taraxacum pseudoroseum. It’s a dandelion – the prettiest one you may ever see. Instead of searing yellow flowers, T. pseudoroseum has pink ones – millennial pink, at that. The bicoloured flowers are pink around the edge and melt into pale lemon-yellow centres. It’s really rather lovely. Unlike its more common cousin, it’s well-behaved and rarely self-seeds. It flowers from April to July and all parts of it are edible. You can buy seed to sow now from chilternseeds.co.uk, or young plants from growildnursery.co.uk in Scotland (although they are currently sold out) or farmyardnurseries.co.uk in Wales. Don’t start harvesting leaves until it has become established – and make sure you label the plant, otherwise someone may weed it out. If you get the dandelion bug, try T. rubifolium, which has the darkest red leaves you can imagine and the typical bright yellow flower. It’s an arresting colour combination, but it really only works when the plant is dressed with gravel: the red leaves can get lost on a background of soil. They would look quite something in your salad bowl. You can get seed from plant-world-seeds.com or Chiltern Seeds.