Swiss footballers Granit Xhaka and Xherdan Shaqiri have risked inflaming political tensions in the Balkans after they used an Albanian nationalist symbol to celebrate their goals against Serbia in a 2-1 Group E victory in Kaliningrad. The pair, who both have ethnic Albanian heritage but grew up in Switzerland, turned Friday night’s match around after Serbia had taken the lead through Aleksandar Mitrovic early in the first half. Both put their open hands together with their thumbs locked and fingers outstretched to make what looks like the double-headed eagle displayed on Albania’s national flag. The thumbs represent the heads of the two eagles, while the fingers look like the feathers. The gesture is likely to inflame tensions among Serbian nationalists and ethnic Albanians. Shaqiri was born in Kosovo, the former Serbian province that declared independence in 2008. Serbia does not recognise Kosovo’s independence and relations between the two countries remain tense. Xhaka’s parents are originally from Kosovo and they are of Albanian heritage. The Arsenal midfielder’s father was imprisoned in the former Yugoslavia for campaigning in favour of Kosovan independence. Shaqiri, who plays for Stoke City, said after the match that “it’s just emotion” when he was questioned about the way he celebrated his late winner. Shaqiri and Xhaka both celebrating the winner with the Albanian eagle in front of the Serbian fans. pic.twitter.com/8KBezkMUpx “I think in football you have always emotions,” he said. “You can see what I did and I think it’s just emotion. I’m very happy to score this goal. It’s not more. I think we don’t have to speak about this now.” Switzerland’s coach, Vladimir Petkovic, added: “You should never mix politics and football. It’s clear that emotions show up and that’s how things happen. I think we all together need to steer away from politics in football and we should focus on this sport as a beautiful game and something that brings people together.” The buildup to the match had seen exchanges between Serbian players and Shaqiri who wears boots with the Kosovo flag displayed on one heel and the Swiss one on the other. Mitrovic asked: “If he loves Kosovo so much and decides to flaunt the flag, why did he refuse a chance to play for their team?” Made Albanians proud. Both refugees because of Serbia but they kept their faith and traditions! #Xhaka #Shaqiri #Albania pic.twitter.com/iSkkO7JbVX But afterwards, the Serbian boss Mladen Krstajic would not be drawn into the controversy. “I don’t have any comment,” he said. “I don’t deal with these things. I am a man of sports and this is what I am going to stay. I have no comment.” The win puts Switzerland into second place in Group E with four points, the same as Brazil, who beat Costa Rica 2-0 earlier in the day. The Swiss will advance to the round of 16 if they beat Costa Rica on Wednesday in Nizhny Novgorod. Serbia will face Brazil in Moscow at the same time.