Bouncing back to win a Test series from 1-0 down in the southern hemisphere is not a frequent occurrence. The British & Irish Lions came close to engineering a miraculous comeback in New Zealand last year but, otherwise, visiting sides who are unsuccessful initially rarely recover. Not since the 1997 Lions tour have South Africa been beaten in a best-of-three series on home soil. Such historical context is worth keeping in mind as England seek to improve on their 42-39 first Test defeat at Ellis Park last week. Once again they will be playing at altitude; once again they have prepared at sea level rather than on the Highveld. At 1,400m up, Bloemfontein is 350m below Johannesburg but it remains an alien environment for most visiting European teams. Last time England played here in 2007 they lost 58-10 and it needed a supreme individual effort by a young Jonny Wilkinson to steer them to a 27-22 win in 2000. With the Springboks head coach, Rassie Erasmus, back in the same city where he spent more than a decade as a player and coach, Eddie Jones’s squad will have to dig monumentally deep at the end of a long season to avoid going 2-0 down with one to play. It will be as much a mental as a physical challenge, the memory of a glorious first 20 minutes at Ellis Park having been clouded by the subsequent failure to protect a 24-3 lead. This week has involved much chat about honesty sessions and lessons learned but the same nagging old question keeps resurfacing: are England an excellent side simply struggling for consistency or a team in danger of being overtaken by too many of their rivals a year out from the World Cup? In that respect the result this weekend is slightly less relevant than the performance. If the visitors go down having shown up well for 60 minutes, South Africa will have fully deserved their victory and Jones will have some grounds for optimism. Should the Boks, alternatively, cruise past 30 points again, win comfortably and go on to secure a 3-0 series margin it will be hard for anyone at the Rugby Football Union to claim the Twickenham rose garden is blooming. This is a significant weekend, then, for England’s captain, Owen Farrell, and several of the squad. As Jones rightly observed this week, good teams drive themselves rather than being spoon fed by the management. “By the time we get to the World Cup, I want to team to be owned by the players,” the head coach said. “It’s a player-driven game. I can’t go out at Ellis Park and tell them what to do after 20 minutes. I can’t tell them to slow the game down, to do the fundamentals well.” Nor is it always possible to sprinkle instantaneous magic dust over young players. “I’d love to be winning all the time but any team that’s had success goes through these testing periods.” The hope must be that Farrell’s captaincy also benefits in the longer term, with Jones even suggesting the growth of an international rugby leader is not dissimilar to the ascent of man from the earliest homo sapiens. “That’s how captains start, on all fours, then they gradually get upright,” the head coach said. “Owen is not a fully fledged captain yet, but he will move towards that.” It is a debatable metaphor, not least because Farrell does not have a billion years in which to complete his personal evolution, but Saracens’ recovery from a seven-game losing sequence to lift the Premiership title this year has taught him something about patience. “The last thing we should do now is panic,” Farrell said before the squad transferred from their beachside base near Durban back up to altitude. “We had a good training session on Wednesday when we felt like we were more in control in what we were doing and we have to carry on with that this weekend.” One of the theories circulating within the England camp, after four successive Test defeats, is they are simply trying too hard. Farrell, though, also concedes their decision-making around the breakdown needs to improve markedly. “The main thing is to be decisive. We can’t half do one thing and half do another, otherwise you get caught somewhere else. It’s about trusting your instincts. There are a lot of good players here and the first thing that pops into your head is usually the right thing. If we are decisive we will be able to set our defence quicker.” While stopping the buzzing Faf de Klerk and neutralising the threat of the free-running Willie le Roux will clearly be fundamental, so too will reducing the inflated penalty count that has killed England lately. Maro Itoje, a serial offender at Ellis Park, is nevertheless adamant the series can be turned around. “Keep the faith,” said Itoje, part of the Lions squad who roared back to draw 1-1 with the All Blacks last summer. “We came out here with the ambition to win the series and we have two more Tests to go so our aim is still intact. I feel we have a very good scrum and lineout and if we implement our game that forward battle is one we are capable of winning. I’ve got 100% belief in our group, where we’re trying to go and what we’re trying to achieve. As long as we stay together we’re going to be a very, very, very good team. I’ve been in other environments where we’ve lost a run of games and that experience has made us stronger in the long run.” Fair enough but, ultimately, Tests are about the here and now. The vast majority of England’s starting XV are World Cup probables while the Springboks team would be drastically short of experience without their durable prop Tendai Mtawarira. The ever-popular “Beast” is thrilled to be winning his 100th cap – “When I was in Zimbabwe as a young boy I never thought in my wildest dreams I would be on this platform” – and should also jog out from the tunnel quicker than his opposite number Mako Vunipola did on the occasion of his 50th Test last weekend. England, who could fall to sixth in the world rankings if they lose heavily, will have their work cut out to swerve a fifth successive Test defeat.