The chasm between the UK and the European Union on key Brexit issues poses a genuine threat to the success of the negotiations, Michel Barnier has said, as EU27 leaders made a joint statement warning of a no-deal scenario. The EU’s chief negotiator, arriving at a summit in Brussels, told reporters: “On Brexit we have made progress, but huge and serious divergence remains, particularly on Ireland and Northern Ireland. “After Brexit, we want an EU-UK ambitious partnership on trade as well as security. But we have to base this partnership on our values and principles, respecting also the UK red lines. “That means for us integrity of the single market, indivisibility of the four freedoms, autonomy and the decision-making of the EU, and the protection and respect of the fundamental rights of EU citizens.” Shortly after Barnier’s comments, the EU27 leaders signed off on a joint statement warning in grave terms about the need to prepare for a no-deal scenario. They expressed serious concerns about the lack of progress on avoiding a hard border on the island of Ireland, and demanded an intensification of talks. Spain insisted on the insertion of a warning that the UK also had to come to an agreement on the future of Gibraltar after Brexit if the rock is to be covered by the terms of the transition period, in which the UK will stay in the single market and customs union until December 2020. The leaders said: “The European council expresses its concern that no substantial progress has yet been achieved on agreeing a backstop solution for Ireland/Northern Ireland. “It recalls the commitments undertaken by the UK in this respect in December 2017 and March 2018, and insists on the need for intensified efforts so that the withdrawal agreement, including its provisions on transition, can be concluded as soon as possible in order to come into effect on the date of withdrawal”. It added: “The European council renews its call upon member states, union institutions and all stakeholders to step up their work on preparedness at all levels and for all outcomes”. The leaders also repeated their offer to reconsider their own proposal of a limited free trade agreement, in which customs and single market checks would act as a burden for both sides economies, if “the UK positions were to evolve”. Joseph Muscat, the Maltese prime minister, noted that it had taken just a minute to coalesce around the statement on Brexit, compared to ten hours of discussions on migration the previous evening. Theresa May has promised to publish a white paper on her vision for the future trading relationship after a cabinet meeting on Friday. The prime minister is believed to be in favour of retaining single market access for goods despite the UK’s insistence that it will not respect the principle of free movement of people. Earlier this week, Spain’s foreign minister, Josep Borrell, said his country, France and Germany would not accept such a proposal. Barnier told reporters in Brussels: “Now we are waiting for the UK white paper and I hope it will contain workable and realistic proposals but let me mention once again that the time is very short. We want a deal and are working for a deal but the time is short and I’m ready to invite the UK and the delegation to come back and present next Monday.” May warned EU leaders at a dinner in Brussels on Thursday evening that they needed to give Barnier more flexibility to go beyond the current levels of cooperation the bloc has with non-members. The prime minister suggested that European lives would be put at risk if the EU failed to rethink its resistance to deep cooperation, including access to the bloc’s security databases. Dalia Grybauskaitė, the president of Lithuania, said it was clear that a “hard landing” was on the table but that even if the talks broke down she was confident the UK would continue to be a close security partner. Grybauskaitė said it was “in nobody’s interests” to have no deal, but that the UK was not leaving Nato, the west’s major military alliance.