One of Australia’s most accomplished television journalists, Liz Jackson, has died aged 67. A giant of ABC current affairs, Jackson died in her sleep while on holiday in Greece with her partner, Martin Butler. Jackson’s elegant presence, authoritative voice and dogged reporting won acclaim for decades before she retired in 2013. Her reporting on world affairs and politics were recognised by an astonishing nine Walkleys including the Gold in 2006, as well as four Logie awards. Jackson’s last Walkley, the 2017 documentary award, was for the story of her own struggle with Parkinson’s disease, with which she was diagnosed in 2014. In A Sense of Self, she bravely fronted the cameras to reveal her own physical and mental decline. The last story Liz Jackson filed https://t.co/BarcPXQLnf “We are profoundly saddened by the death of Liz Jackson, our wonderful friend and colleague and one of Australia’s finest journalists,” the ABC said. Its managing director, Michelle Guthrie, said: “Liz Jackson was one of the greats of the ABC, an incredible journalist who inspired all around her and who Australians turned to with complete trust. “Her work has informed and shaped this country. Her enormous talent, fearless integrity and unflinching courage will serve as a beacon for many generations of journalists and storytellers to come.” In 1993 she won a Walkley for Somalia, Dying for Relief, which focused on the famine-struck country torn apart by rival armed militias and fast descending into a failed state. Almost two decades later Four Corners won another Walkley for Who Killed Mr Ward? — the story of an Indigenous man who died after being held for three hours in the overheated back of a prison security van. The ABC’s director of news, Gaven Morris, was one of many peers who paid tribute to Jackson on Twitter. All of us at @abcnews are devastated by the death of Liz Jackson. An all-time great of Australian journalism, Liz will always be an inspiration to all of her colleagues and respected by everyone who knew her work. Liz died peacefully in her sleep during a holiday in Greece. “You could not be around Liz without being fired by her passion and in awe of her courage,” Morris said. “She had extraordinary talent as a storyteller, accompanied by a deep humility. “Last year I was deeply moved and honoured to be at the Walkley awards when Liz received the documentary award. As she came onto the stage with Martin, and every person in the room rose in a standing ovation, she was visibly taken aback by the love and respect. “Liz leaves a momentous legacy. We will never forget her.” Jackson got her start at the ABC in Radio National in 1986 after graduating from the University of Melbourne and studying law in London. She worked on Four Corners from 1993 to 2013, with a year as presenter of Media Watch in 2005. “We are deeply saddened by the loss of our loving partner, Mum and Granny Liz Jackson,” her family said. “She is deeply loved. We are overwhelmed with grief at her loss. “Liz was an inspiration to many and a legendary figure at the ABC, committing her life to public interest journalism. We are enormously proud of her work. So shocked and sad that Liz Jackson has died. A brave woman. A wonderful journalist. A lovely person. A great mother to Rose and Joe, and a loving, lifelong partner to Martin. They don’t come any better. #vale “Liz was also the most wonderful Mum and Granny, to us she will always be our best friend, confidant, storyteller, chef and with a mean forehand. “Liz has struggled in recent years with Parkinson’s Disease. She died peacefully in her sleep whilst on holiday in Greece with Martin by her side on 27 June 2018. “We will provide information for those who wish to commemorate Liz’s life in the coming days. For now we would like to request some privacy as we deal with our devastating grief.” New South Wales Labor said Jackson had been a lion of Australian journalism whose fearless pursuit of the powerful had inspired a generation of journalists. Jackson and Butler’s daughter, Rose Jackson, is assistant general secretary of NSW Labor. She is survived by Butler, children Rose and Joe, and grandchildren Charlotte and Oscar.