The unquestionable genius of Jos Buttler came to the rescue for England as his nerveless century secured a nailbiting, one-wicket victory over Australia and with it a first 5-0 whitewash over their historic rivals in any format. How Eoin Morgan needed his star wicketkeeper on a sun-soaked Sunday in Manchester on which his powerhouse batting line-up offered the latest reminder that – for all their talent – a collective meltdown is still not out of the equation. Chasing a target of only 206 following Moeen Ali’s career-best four for 46, England stumbled to 114 for eight in the 30th over. But Buttler’s unbeaten 110 from 122 balls, a patient 20 from Adil Rashid and the tail-gunner, Jake Ball, surviving 10 balls ensured the celebrations at the end of a one-sided series were not tinged with a pang of regret. “It was just pure elation,” replied the champagne-soaked Buttler when asked how it felt hitting the winning runs, a punch through the covers for four with nine balls to spare. “We didn’t really have the right to win the game so it was a great feeling.” Tim Paine, Australia’s captain, added: “Right now he has to be the best white-ball wicketkeeper batsman in the world. MS Dhoni is pretty good but [Buttler] is at the peak of his powers. He’s someone for our batsmen to watch and we have done.” Paine admitted “it stings a lot” to be on the receiving end of the scoreline, not least having seen the 6ft 8in Billy Stanlake nearly salvage something from a miserable series when his three quickfire strikes left England reeling on 66 for five during a 16-over mini-session before the interval (in light of Australia’s earlier collapse to 205 all out in 34.4 overs). Though Jason Roy had been bowled by Ashton Agar when trying to launch his third ball into the pavilion, it was Stanlake’s pace that did the true damage, forcing Jonny Bairstow to chop on, sneaking an edge to slip off Joe Root and then lighting up Morgan’s stumps. With Alex Hales tamely edging Kane Richardson behind for 20 – the No3’s eyes lighting up at a wide one amid a breather for Stanlake – the only cheers around Old Trafford during this harrowing mini-session were courtesy of England’s goal-fest in Novgorod. Things scarcely improved after the resumption, Moeen squirting to point on 16 off Marcus Stoinis and Richardson removing Sam Curran, on debut, and Liam Plunkett in successive deliveries – the latter chasing a wide one à la Hales – to see England still 92 runs short in the 30th over with two wickets remaining. Buttler, 47 not out at this stage, just needed a partner and found one in Rashid, with the pair shaving off 81 runs and seeing off the threat of Stanlake. But when the junior man was caught in the deep, it brought Ball to the crease for the tense finale. Rather than pinch a single off the final ball of the over, Buttler instead decided to launch his first six to bring up his sixth one-day century and cut the target down to five. Then followed a game of cat and mouse, with Ball seeing out a maiden and five more balls in the next over, before his illustrious team-mate delivered the coup de grâce. How on earth did England nearly let this one slide, though? Australia’s innings, after Paine enjoyed a fifth successive victory at the toss, had been pretty inept itself as, from 60 for no loss in the sixth over, they crumbled to 100 for five by the 15th when Paine was run out by a spectacular pick up, roll and throw from Buttler. It was the wicketkeeper’s second piece of sharp work in the collapse too, having already stumped Shaun Marsh off Moeen while the No 4’s hind leg was hovering behind him in the air like a dog enjoying a good stretch. Moeen, on a pitch offering grip, had made his presence felt from the moment he was thrown the ball in the seventh over, cleaning up Aaron Finch’s stumps for 20 with a quicker ball and then profiting from a clothed sweep to short fine-leg by Stoinis two balls later. When the recalled Plunkett persuaded Travis Head to chip to midwicket for 56 and Buttler’s two alert interventions sent Marsh and Paine packing – the latter ending the series with 36 runs from five innings for the lowest series aggregate by an Australian captain in a five-match series – the tourists were in tatters. All the while Curran was perhaps wondering if his debut would see just two costly new ball overs sent down. But in the 25th over he returned from the James Anderson End – named after the man who presented his cap – to strike twice and, at 20 years and 21 days, become England’s youngest ODI wicket-taker. Alex Carey, the man putting pressure on Paine for the wicketkeeper spot, had led a mini-revival of 59 runs in 10 overs with D’Arcy Short up to this point but edged tamely behind. Two balls later Curran was beaming again, with Agar shouldering arms to a straight one and the stumps duly demolished behind him. From there the Australian innings went down the gurgler, with Richardson the second man run out and Moeen and Rashid claiming the last two wickets to finish with 12 apiece for the series. They now share the English spin record over five matches and their vice-like grip over the tourists has been deeply impressive.