Apple has admitted that its MacBook and MacBook Pro laptop keyboards made since 2015 are susceptible to becoming stuck or breaking, and is promising to repair them for free. Following a litany of user complaints across support forums, specialist media, class action lawsuits and 31,000-strong online petitions, Apple said it had determined that a “small percentage of the keyboards” were affected by the issues. The keys can feel sticky and letters or characters can fail to appear when the key is pressed, or keys can repeat unexpectedly. The problems stem from a new design of Apple’s keyboard, introduced with the MacBook in 2015. It uses a V-shaped “butterfly” switch mechanism under the keys. This made the keyboard 40% thinner, with a smaller amount of key travel, compared to the more traditional X-shaped, scissor-switch mechanism used in other keyboards. Keys were found to be prone to becoming stuck when small amounts of dust and debris collected under them, leading to inoperable keyboards and irate users. A second iteration of the keyboard was launched in 2016, which also appears to be affected. “Apple or an Apple authorised service provider will service eligible MacBook and MacBook Pro keyboards, free of charge,” the company said in a new support document. “The type of service will be determined after the keyboard is examined and may involve the replacement of one or more keys or the whole keyboard.” The 12in MacBook made from early 2015 and the 13in and 15in MacBook Pros made from 2016 are covered by the repair programme up to four years from when they were purchased. Apple also said that consumers who had already paid for a repair could request a refund of the charges, which could have cost hundreds of pounds. This is the second time in 12 months that Apple has relented on support issues to attempt to appease customers and maintain brand loyalty. In December, it admitted to slowing down iPhones with ageing batteries and reduced the cost of its battery replacement programme. Market watchers welcomed the news in appeasing customers of Apple’s computer line. But Patrick Moorhead, the head of Moor Insights & Strategy, said the issues simply illustrate just how loyal users were to Apple’s brand and platform. He said on Twitter: “Apple Keyboardgate demonstrating. Just how loyal and forgiving Mac users are. Seeing so many ‘thank you’s’ versus ‘you screwed up again and I’m moving to another platform’.”