It’s quite an achievement to spend £20bn and leave nobody satisfied. The NHS in England is not celebrating: this is not feast after famine. The Tory right is indignant about unspecified tax rises to pay for it, or – total anathema – spendthrift borrowing for current spending. Austerity is not over, Theresa May says firmly, so all the other starved departments will see no easing of the eight-year tourniquet that is cutting off the lifeblood of public services: schools, further education, police, prisons, transport and councils. Only Boris Johnson says: “Fantastic news for NHS funding!” But the illusion of his bogus Brexit bus money is over. No corner of the NHS – none of the bodies representing its trusts, nor any serious NHS economists or thinktanks – responded to the prime minister’s announcement with anything but despondency. After token words of gratitude for her embrace of the NHS’s founding values, the chorus says this is far too little. This can’t deliver her hyperbolic promises of “profound transformation”. Britain will not be world-leading, with patients “never left waiting” for A&E and cancer treatment so “everyone gets the right care … at the right time”. Nor will there be “true parity of care” for patients with mental-health problems. Politically, will it fly? Hearing this enormous-sounding sum, for a while voters may hope that it heralds the end of the crisis in the health service, and wait to feel its effects. In the end they will make their decision based on what they see in GP surgeries and local hospitals, as well as the fly-on-the-wall documentaries of overflowing A&Es and vital operations cancelled. But it looks unlikely that this apparent 3.4% uplift in the annual budget will make those things improve any time soon – or at all. Phenomenal diligence and resilience from NHS staff may stop things getting worse, so next winter’s crisis may be no worse than the last. The NHS Providers chief executive, Chris Hopson, was tactful when he said: “There will still be difficult choices to make about priorities.” Yes, with yawning gaps in care. Spending on the NHS has fallen as a share of GDP, causing 4 million people to be on the waiting list for the first time. Many of the rising number of over-65s arriving in A&E are there because of a lack of social care, leaving a million people with no care at home. Where will the new money go? To start with, it’s only 3%: crafty accounting has cunningly omitted funds for public health, training of staff and capital spending – such as the gigantic backlog of repairs. Just about every health economist, including those at the Institute for Fiscal Studies, warned that the NHS needs 4% just to stand still. How the health service fares will depend on social care funding – but May delayed that decision until next year’s spending review. Here’s how the money will vanish before our eyes. A service parched dry will absorb every new penny just to stay on its feet. Anita Charlesworth, director of research and economics at the Health Foundation, spells it out: £2bn will be sucked into debts sitting within most trusts; £1.3bn will go into still unpaid pay rises next April, after all these pay-frozen years; £1bn is urgently needed for the maintenance backlog, with scanners and equipment falling apart. The staff shortage crisis is growing, not shrinking: there are 1,500 fewer GPs than two years ago, as these vital gatekeepers retire early in exhaustion. The fewer there are, the greater the strain on the rest – it’s a downward spiral. Take just one typical district general hospital. Kingston hospital, in southwest London, like two-thirds of trusts, has a £6m debt to clear if any new money comes its way. It received no share of the last bung, because perversely it was denied to any hospital in debt. The result was all the money went to already well-off trusts. Kingston’s chief executive, Ann Radmore, talks about the dearth of staff and the loss of EU nurses who make up 15% of the staff: with a 96% drop in nurses arriving from Europe last year, here’s a true Brexit dividend. She describes a recent steep cut in training funds as a disaster for motivating those staff she has. The reason why the NHS keeps needing more money is stark here: in her medical wards, half her patients suffer from dementia, so A&E and outpatients are “challenging”. She still has staff working in 19th-century buildings, but nothing is done due to a longstanding political stalemate about reconfiguring local hospitals. A weak government fails to solve the many local stand-offs, because with no money to ease the path, nobody dares close or move an A&E or maternity unit. The right wing and its press castigates the NHS for waste and “bureaucracy” – but the greatest waste is caused by the monumental assault of Andrew Lansley’s Health and Social Care Act 2012, shattering the health service into erratic fragments competing against each other. The bureaucracy of tendering for every contract has been phenomenal. Simon Stevens, head of NHS England, struggles to repair the damage, merging most commissioners who hold the local purse strings. But in its state of inertia, the government dares not risk another NHS bill to sweep all this away and integrate social care under single regional authorities: Stevens is left wriggling round the law. In front of the Commons public accounts committee yesterday, Stevens gave a pusillanimous response. Yes, he said, this was indeed more money than the NHS had in recent years – but he knows, as does the whole of the health service, that this will bring no “transformation”. This stagnant funding can’t repair the last eight years of strangulation, the longest and worst NHS crisis in all its 70 years: voters will judge from the evidence of their own eyes, and they will judge this government harshly. • Polly Toynbee is a Guardian columnist