Husk How did we ever get here? I have been measuringmy worth in etched wrists for so long I think my bonesare made of aspartame. Or plum blossom. Can Igain solubility, dissolve? Can I become entirely blood?Viscera. Cold palms pressed againstmy back. Ribs. Ankles, spine. This resembles a checklistbut is more truly a prayer. A prayer offeredin the rain with a headache behind my eyes.A prayer offered propped against the car with tremblinghands. Some Magnificat for vivisection. He hath filledthe hungry with good things. Communion wine burnson an empty stomach. Lord, have I already martyredmyself for skinny jeans? What if I wake up a husk,made clean and dry by sunlight? What if I wake upas sunlight itself, yellow and sharp and hard? When I read the entries for the Health Professional and Open categories of the Hippocrates prize this year, I was pleased to notice that the categorisations set no limits on technical prowess or commitment. This was also true of work in another category, that of the Young Poets, whose winners were selected by a single judge, Alisha Kaplan. This time, the demolished boundary was age. These writers, aged between 14 and 18, seem to me no less accomplished than their seniors. Congratulations all round! Margot Armbruster, from Wisconsin, was 16 when she wrote Husk. It’s a compact, tightly structured poem which examines and interrogates the experience of anorexia nervosa, harmonising realist and figurative narratives. It reveals a serious, well-read poet, who has already published widely. Armbruster names Ocean Vuong, Richard Siken and Alex Dimitrov among her favourite poets, adding: “I really like contemporary poetry (American in particular) as I feel it has a vitality that older work sometimes lacks, and I often draw inspiration from poems I see published in the latest issues of literary magazines.” She describes Christianity as the lens through which she viewed her material in writing Husk. The religious dimension is appropriate. The widespread practice of fasting and other forms of bodily chastisement as a route to enlightenment and spiritual perfection, still hover at the edges of our response to anorexia. It’s as if the pursuit of holiness had been reshaped as the pursuit of image in contemporary culture. “Lord, have I already martyred / myself for skinny jeans?” Armbruster’s speaker cries, memorably, half-humorously, yoking the lexical extremes of faith and fashion. The narrative is consistent in its focus on disembodiment, variously symbolised. The quest, of course, is never simply for fashionable slenderness. Neither, here, is it a quest for total physical disappearance. Bones are imagined to be made of “aspartame” or “plum blossom”, the opposition between artificial and natural substances hinting at the perceived difference between science and art. One of the speaker’s many questions concerns the possibility of becoming “entirely blood”. The poem ends with further questions about possible transformation, first, into a husk “made clean and dry by sunlight” and then into “sunlight itself, yellow and sharp and hard”. These figures make clear the seductiveness of the condition. The culminating adjectives suggest a masculine rather than feminine ideal, if we adhere to cultural norms in our reading. Although religious belief and experience are important in the poem, the ultimate values may be connected to the self. Cleanness, dryness, sharpness and hardness are intellectually positive. “Yellow” is the odd word out – but, associated with the sun, loses its aspects of jaundice and cowardliness in favour of golden light. In asking “what if I wake up / as sunlight itself?” the speaker is weighing the possibility of becoming godlike, or even becoming God. The earlier bodily words – viscera, ribs, ankles, spine – veil, or refute, any disgust. They pick up on the opening question, with its echo of the kindly, patronising medical professional. “How did we ever get here?” is a question for the internalised voice of the doctor or psychiatrist. A physical examination is carried out by “cold palms” and with cold words, but this “checklist”, the speaker insists, is more truly heard as a prayer. The most concrete details, after the “etched wrists” of line two, are in lines eight to 12, vividly evoking the miserable symptoms of extreme hunger, but continuing to interlace the physical and the spiritual. “Magnificat” recalls the Virgin Mary’s pregnancy; “vivisection” suggests, perhaps, symbolic abortion. It’s the live body (the woman’s) that is being destroyed, and the power she has over her own flesh seems to frighten her. The hungry are not filled in the poem as they are in the canticle – or perhaps they are filled only by being sent away, empty. Tonally, the poem is courteous, detached, able to smile through its anguish. It neither makes a positive case for anorexia, nor a wholly negative one. If it normalises the condition to some degree, perhaps that’s because it is, to some degree, normal. Fasting still has its place in much religious practice. As a free radical in contemporary secular society, without systems of ritualisation, it easily becomes addictive and life-threatening, as the poem also makes clear.