The first time Andy Murray played at Devonshire Park, in 2006, he partnered Jamie Delgado in the doubles for Great Britain’s Davis Cup team. A dozen years later, Delgado is sitting in the stands as his coach and Murray is reshaping the remaining months and possibly years of his career in a comeback that logically should lead them both back to Wimbledon next week. Yet the prince of perversity refuses to declare unequivocally that he will be in the lists when the draw is announced at the All England Club on Friday morning. “I’ll decide when I’m ready,” he said after bamboozling Stan Wawrinka in 77 minutes here on Monday. “I’m not putting any pressure on myself to make that decision after one match here or two matches, because I don’t need to. I can decide when I want. “I’m coming back from a very serious injury which is not easy. My health and my body are the No 1 priority. If I feel like I’m in good enough shape, I’ll do it. And if I don’t, then obviously I won’t play. But the last two matches have been positive in many respects.” Despite an encouraging return after 11 months out – three close sets against Nick Kyrgios at Queen’s last week, two quick and impressive ones against Wawrinka – he views Wednesday’s match against Kyle Edmund in the second round of the Nature Valley International as another trial of his body and spirit. Indeed, every match is like that for Murray, and always has been. He admits to enjoying the pain and struggle of his sport. He is hardly alone in battling injury, so there is brotherhood of a unique kind with Wawrinka, who had two operations on a knee last year, Novak Djokovic, whose recovery from a long-term problem with his right elbow is more advanced than Murray’s rehab, and even Roger Federer, who chose to miss the clay-court season for the second year in a row as the reigning champion husbands his resources in pursuit of a ninth Wimbledon title when the championships get under way on Monday. Murray’s suffering, though, always has been invested with a greater sense of theatre than that of his peers. His dramatic persona is more Hamlet than laughing boy Bottom. But the tale has life in it yet. It seems inconceivable he will not play at Wimbledon – even if it hurts. He says he will wait to see how his body reacts to Wednesday’s match – regardless of the result but taking into account the performance – before he decides. He will probably know on Thursday morning. But he might not tell the world until the following day, bang on deadline. As for the challenge of playing Edmund, it will be considerably tougher than his match against Wawrinka, which he won 6-1, 6-3 after a flying start and dogged finish. Edmund, who has replaced Murray as British No 1 and is ranked 18 in the world, 138 places above the former world No 1, is in great shape. Murray and Edmund hit together regularly, including here this week, so there are few secrets when they start trading shots. What neither of them can be sure of, however, is how Murray will react when he asks his legs to move at short notice, laterally, to cut off Edmund’s huge ground strokes. Moving to the right, and pushing off the left hip that he had rearranged on the operating table in Melbourne in January, seems to be toughest for him. Not that he will shy away from the challenge. Murray never does himself any favours on court. He has perfected the art of suffering.