Despite being Australia’s closest neighbour, Papua New Guinea (PNG) couldn’t be further away when it comes to maternal health. When I was born in the small coastal village of Kivori, in PNG’s Central Province, my mother was considered lucky to have survived even a routine childbirth. With no healthcare centre nearby, she gave birth to me at home, with the help of several traditional birth attendants as well as a traditional healer. Instead of a delivery bed, an empty rice bag was spread on the ground, and my umbilical cord was cut with the sharpened stick of a sago palm. With no access to an ambulance and the nearest hospital – and doctor – a four-hour drive to Port Moresby, my mother would have been praying that there were no complications. More than 30 years later, little has changed for the mothers of Kivori. Globally, and within the Asia-Pacific region, PNG has some of the worst maternal and child health indicators. It is one of the deadliest places in the world to give birth. One woman dies every day during childbirth in a country just 400km away from Australia, and most of these deaths can be easily prevented. The Royal Brisbane Women’s Hospital has 410 doctors. This is one of many hospitals servicing the city of Brisbane. The whole of PNG has fewer than 400 doctors, and my home province has just one doctor servicing almost a quarter of a million people. The entire healthcare system in PNG is beset by shortages – in doctors, nurses, midwives as well as facilities, medicine and equipment to make childbirth safer. Our village used to have a small aid post, but it had to close in 2013 because of government funding cuts and a lack of trained staff. While Australia’s healthcare system has advanced, PNG’s healthcare system is going in the opposite direction. In Kivori, mothers wanting to give birth in a healthcare facility must walk 10km to a health sub-centre. Once they reach it, they will find a building without electricity or running water, without mattresses for the consulting beds, and a severe shortage of proper medical equipment. If anything should go wrong, the closest ambulance is a 45-minute drive away – if transport can even be found. If they reach the ambulance, the cost of the journey to Port Moresby Hospital is around 200 Kina; the equivalent of over a month’s salary and completely unaffordable for the majority of families. This dire lack of professional, accessible healthcare is why so many women in PNG choose to instead give birth at home. While homebirths are increasing in popularity in Australia, fewer than 1% of Australian women nationwide will give birth without the care of qualified health professionals, compared to as many as 80% of women in some regional areas of PNG. The PNG government has set ambitious targets to reduce these frightening statistics but reaching these targets will require a significant increase in the number of doctors and midwives in PNG. Training people as midwives and doctors takes time so, while we are developing a new generation of qualified healthcare staff, we need to address urgent issues at the community level if we are to save lives. As the head of ChildFund Papua New Guinea’s national health program, I am responsible for programs to give women in rural villages like mine access to a better quality of care when the time comes for them to give birth. We are working to increase technical skills and knowledge at a grassroots level. This means not only upskilling community health workers in remote communities, but training new village health volunteers so they can offer basic health support to pregnant women unable to reach a clinic. We provide delivery kits which contain a plastic ground sheet to give birth on, soap to wash hands, gauze to wipe a newborn baby’s eyes, and a sterilised blade to cut the umbilical cord. These reduce the risks of infection and possible death for both mother and child. We distribute lighting kits so that health workers can see what they’re doing. With proper lighting, it is possible to determine whether the whole of the placenta has been delivered and, if not, ensuring a woman is referred to hospital. Retained placentas are leading cause of infection and haemorrhaging and can result in death. These are simple things, but in PNG, simple things save lives. • Olive Oa is head of ChildFund Papua New Guinea’s health program