Both sides of the latest bitter Brexit battle in Theresa May’s cabinet declared victory on Thursday, as the government published a formal proposal for the Northern Ireland backstop, which it “expects” to cease to apply by December 2021. The Brexit secretary, David Davis, had fought hard for an end-date to be included in the plan, which is aimed at convincing Brussels that the UK can avoid a hard border on the island of Ireland – and refused to deny on Wednesday that he could resign over the issue. The text, which was presented to Brussels at the same time as it was published in London, includes a final clause that says the backstop is a temporary arrangement, which “will be only in place until the future customs arrangement can be introduced”. It adds: “The UK expects the future arrangement to be in place by the end of December 2021 at the latest. There are a range of options for how a time limit could be delivered, which the UK will propose and discuss with the EU.” Following two one-to-one meetings between Davis and May on Thursday morning, a source close to Davis appeared to suggest the inclusion of a specific date was a concession by May. “Obviously there’s been a back and forth on this paper, as there always is whenever the government publishes anything,” he said. “The backstop paper has been amended and now expresses, in much more detail, the time-limited nature of our proposal. However, remain-leaning cabinet ministers believe the clause is a political concession, which would have no legal force. “It’s a sentence added for political expediency,” said one Whitehall source, adding that the EU could easily sign up to it. “They operate in the legal sphere.” Asked whether it was plausible the deadline would be met, he added: “It’s taken us seven years to put 150,000 people on universal credit.” As expected, the backstop as drafted would keep the whole of the UK – and not just Northern Ireland – inside key aspects of the customs union, until a permanent arrangement can be put in place that avoids cumbersome border checks between Northern Ireland and the Republic. Britain would continue to apply the EU’s common external tariff; but would demand the right to negotiate and sign new trade deals, “and implement those elements that do not affect the functioning of the temporary customs arrangement”. Michel Barnier, the EU’s chief Brexit negotiator, said he welcomed publication of the UK proposal, but did not give a verdict on whether it would be accepted. “We will examine it with three questions,” he wrote on Twitter. “Is it a workable solution to avoid a hard border? Does it respect the integrity of the SM/CU [single-market and customs union] Is it an all-weather backstop.” The European parliament’s Brexit coordinator, Guy Verhofstadt, said: “Difficult to see how UK proposal on customs aspects of IE/NI backstop will deliver a workable solution to avoid a hard border, & respect integrity of the SM/CU. A backstop that is temporary is not a backstop, unless the definitive arrangement is the same as the backstop.” Senior EU officials have previously warned against the “fantasy” of an all-UK solution, as they fear giving the UK a back door into the EU single market on easy terms. The EU’s preferred fallback option would be a border in the Irish Sea, excluding Great Britain from the customs union – but May said earlier this year that no prime minister could accept that. One EU diplomat said the UK proposal looked “fundamentally problematic”, as it turns the agreed idea of backstop for Northern Ireland, into a ”never-intended” UK-wide solution. “It also fundamentally raises the question as to why we should do this,” the official said. Earlier, the prime minister’s spokeswoman was forced to deny claims that Davis had come close to walking out over the backstop issue. “No one threatened to resign,” she said. “The prime minister had constructive discussions with the Brexit secretary this morning.” May also met Liam Fox and Boris Johnson, the other two most prominent leavers in her cabinet, as she sought to win backing for the draft. The backstop is the insurance arrangement insisted on by Brussels and Dublin, in case no agreement is reached in the talks that would preserve Northern Ireland’s status. However, Brexiters fear that it will become the norm – particularly as the cabinet remains deadlocked over what the right long-term solution should be. Government sources said there were also concerns about whether UK ministers could unilaterally decide whether the backstop arrangements could be rescinded once an alternative was found. The latest standoff followed a series of clashes between Davis and May, including over the publication of a white paper on Brexit, which Davis was keen to issue before EU leaders meet later this month, and over the role of May’s top negotiator and close confidant, Oliver Robbins. Ireland’s deputy prime minister warned that “a great deal of work remains to be done” on the Irish border question and it “remains vital that a legally-binding backstop is agreed” to ensure a hard border is avoided “in all circumstances”. Simon Coveney said the European commission had made it clear it needed to see operational wording on the backstop solution for Ireland in time for the council summit on 28 June. “Clearly, a great deal of work remains to be done and this needs to be the highest priority for all sides in the weeks ahead,” said Coveney. Not all Brexiters were convinced that the inclusion of an end-date in the text had advanced their cause. Nigel Farage, the former leader of Ukip, said: “It is now time for Brexiters to resist. The relevant paragraph brings to mind the phrase ‘coulda, woulda, shoulda’. It is meaningless and not legally binding. This is clearly a recipe for keeping the UK inside the EU’s customs union and is completely unacceptable to all people who voted to leave the EU.” 