England ended a rain-shortened day in a dominant position on 302 for seven, even if they got there by an unusual route. When the sun finally made an appearance in the last session, the home team’s lead had been extended to 128 runs with three wickets remaining. Yet not a single batsman managed to post a half-century, the highest score being Dom Bess’s 49 in his first role as a nightwatchman. The highest Test score achieved without a batsman hitting 50 is 315, made by England in Trinidad in 1986 – though on that occasion the extras tally went beyond 50. Here the bowling was not so terrifying as that of the West Indians of that era and, unlike the match at the Queen’s Park Oval, England have a very good chance of winning at Headingley. Pakistan were frustrated on Saturday but only by a sequence of little partnerships. Joe Root and Bess had added another 32 together before England’s captain was caught behind. Mohammad Amir had passed his outside edge several times, eliciting an impish, eloquent grin from Root, which seemed to say: “A fine delivery, my good man; but this is Headingley and I’m still here”. However, there were no smiles when he feathered an attempted cover drive off Amir. Root had given the impression that he was enjoying batting with Bess; they scurried between the wickets mischievously, stealing singles, provoking overthrows and then smiling at one another between overs. No doubt Bess was on cloud nine to be batting with his captain while Root may have seen a glimpse of his own youth in the fearless zest of his young partner. They were not at work, but at play. When Dawid Malan joined Bess it was far from obvious who was the nightwatchman. In between the odd sweetly timed boundary, Bess was easily knocking the ball wide of mid-on for another single. Of course he is a bit of a fraud as a nightwatchman. Consider some of his predecessors – Jimmy Anderson, Matthew Hoggard, Pat Pocock and Derek Underwood – and we can admire their bravery under fire rather than the felicity of their strokeplay. Bess is in a different league to these doughty souls – as a batsman. After this impressive start to his Test career, the 20-year-old Bess is in danger of becoming another English spinner who is actually a better batsman than bowler. For the moment we can only conclude that he is a damn fine cricketer, who has that rare and wondrous capacity to enjoy himself out there without feeling any of the burdens that usually come with the intense scrutiny of a Test match. Bess’s batting is based on sound orthodoxy. He goes back, rather than across, as the bowler hits his delivery stride, but he does this rhythmically enough to get forward if necessary; he scores freely square on the off side and likes to cover-drive. Occasionally he innovated; once he walked down the pitch to Mohammad Abbas and nonchalantly clipped the ball through midwicket for three. At the other end Malan must have been impressed since he immediately wandered down the pitch himself before delivering a crisp straight drive, a sincere form of flattery from the older man. This was an important knock for Malan, whose most significant innings in Test cricket have been in Australia. He averages only 20 in England and his status is slipping. He started scratchily but his stiff-armed strokeplay began to bear fruit; he deftly deflected leg-breaks from Shadab Khan in between the odd drive to the boundary off the pacemen. But he could not deliver a major innings. Amir was recalled after tea and his first ball bounced surprisingly; Malan prodded and could only fend the ball to first slip. Meanwhile, Bess’s burgeoning reputation as a batsman was reflected by the fact Pakistan wasted a review against him when Amir struck a pad. Soon afterwards, when he needed just a single to record his second Test fifty, Bess edged a high-bouncing leg-break to slip, where Asad Shafiq held a fine catch. So there was the tantalising combination of Jonny Bairstow and Jos Buttler in harness, an alliance that was bound to keep bums on seats all around the ground. Their partnership flickered to the tune of 48 runs but, just before the new ball was due, Bairstow edged a fine delivery from Faheem Ashraf to the keeper. Buttler remained and was threatening after his rapid start. He hit three consecutive fours off Shadab, the second of which passed through the hands of Hasan Ali at midwicket. Soon afterwards Buttler was hit on the head by a Hasan bouncer but otherwise there were no dramas for him. In fact he played with commendable restraint against the seamers armed with the new ball. The Buttler experiment is looking very promising and worthwhile. We are witnessing him rediscovering how to play red-ball cricket in a Test match. Not many cricketers could contemplate doing that but such is his talent there is an increasingly good chance it might work. Whatever the outcome it is beguiling to watch this experiment unfold. He looked a class act as he ended up unbeaten on 34. Perhaps he can be the man to post that elusive half-century in this innings. Sam Curran, who in his first Test innings crunched two eye-catching boundaries in the final over, may have the same ambition.