Remain MPs have pledged to defy the Daily Express and the Sun after the newspapers published front page editorials urging politicians to back the government when the House of Commons votes on Brexit legislation. In a front page article under the headline “Ignore the will of the people at your peril”, the Express warned politicians that “any betrayal of Brexit will not be forgotten the next time the general election ballot boxes open”. “Today the Daily Express asks every MP sitting at Westminster one simple question: whom do you serve?” Tuesday’s Daily EXPRESS: “IGNORE THE WILL OF THE PEOPLE AT YOUR PERIL” #bbcpapers #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/kZCSQ3CrZK The editor of the Express, Gary Jones, a former Daily Mirror executive, had pledged to tone down the newspaper’s headlines, some of which he said had been “downright offensive”. The Sun’s front page carried the headline “Great Britain or Great Betrayal” and urged MPs to make the “right decision” when choosing whether to “trust the people of Great Britain or trigger a shameful ballot”. When the consequences of a hard Brexit smash into people’s lives perhaps @TheSun will realise it was ignorant headlines & soundbites like their own that really betrayed Britain? pic.twitter.com/ILgSqlf30y The newspapers’ intervention prompted a backlash from some MPs on Twitter. “Editors/owners of British newspapers who believe we’ll be cowed by your threatening headlines can think again,” said Labour MP Luciana Berger. “Tomorrow I’ll be voting for what I believe is best for my constituents and the future prosperity of our country.” The Conservative MP Sarah Wollaston said: “When the consequences of a hard Brexit smash into people’s lives perhaps the Sun will realise it was ignorant headlines and soundbites like their own that really betrayed Britain?” The Labour MP Chuka Umunna said some newspaper editors were “a real and present danger to our democracy” for thinking they could “intimidate and threaten members of parliament”. His colleague Anna Turley said: “Rupert Murdoch you can get stuffed. You’ve been a stain on this country’s character for decades. I’m not interested in your bullying. I will do what I believe to be best for the country and people I love.” The Sun’s front page featured a montage of images it considers to represent Great Britain. These include the Shard skyscraper, power station cooling towers, Stonehenge, the Angel of the North, a rollercoaster, the Loch Ness Monster and some sheep. Interestingly, the front page appears to be near-identical to one the Sun ran in July 2013 to promote its failed attempt to put its website behind a paywall. There is one major difference: a picture of the former England captain John Terry has been replaced with a stock image of a fish and chip shop.