In the hours leading up to this fiery Challenge Cup quarter-final the Leeds coach, Brian McDermott, had peculiarly called on the officials to adopt the refereeing style of the legendary 1970s whistleblower Fred Lindop, and not stand for any ‘old-school’ nonsense from either his side or Leigh. Whether Chris Kendall ultimately heard those calls is unclear, and while it is not hard to wonder what might have been for Leigh had the night’s defining moment – the eighth-minute sending-off of their full-back, Peter Mata’utia – not occurred, few could argue with Kendall channelling his inner Lindop following the horrendous suplex-style tackle on Matt Parcell. The game may have only been in its infancy, but with the Championship side already leading 6-0 and playing with the panache which saw them eliminate higher-ranked opposition in Salford in the previous round, it was not unreasonable to assume Leigh would have at least made it a tiresome work’s evening for Leeds in their battle to reach the semi-finals once again. Within 15 minutes of Mata’utia’s dismissal, Leeds had scored four tries without reply; by half-time, they had crossed for three more to open up a 28-point advantage that, despite the gamely efforts of Leigh, was never likely to be troubled in front of yet another sparse Challenge Cup crowd – though the fact Leeds had to move this game to Featherstone due to the cricket at Headingley played a part in that. Moments like Mata’utia’s dismissal can often split opinion – but even his own coach was accepting of the decision which swung the contest in Leeds’ favour from an early stage. “We saw it the same as you live – and it didn’t look great,” McDermott said. “Yes, it was a sending-off. The manner of victory for Leeds – who have lost their last three Super League games and slipped into mid-table – will be especially pleasing. But with an eight-week gap until the semi-finals in Bolton, arresting their Super League slump will be even tougher following yet more injuries to add to their ever-increasing list. Carl Ablett and Jimmy Keinhorst are set for prolonged spells on the sidelines, McDermott confirmed but the emergence of young talent such as Mikolaj Oledzki and Jack Walker will at least give comfort to Rhinos fans that the future, as it so often is in Leeds, is bright. Walker in particular was a menacing influence all evening, scoring a try and having a hand in several more which put the hosts 40-12 ahead at half-time. Leigh, much to their credit, fought valiantly throughout – best underlined by the tries to Liam Hood and Ben Crooks in the final quarter. By then though, Leeds had scored some magnificent tries – including the pick of them for Richie Myler, who combined superbly with Walker as Leigh toiled with their numerical disadvantage. Leigh can at least turn their attention back to promotion to Super League with some semblance of confidence. For Leeds, though, it is the semi-finals once again – though they have Mata’utia to thank for making it an easier night’s work than it perhaps should have been. Leeds Golding; Briscoe, Keinhorst, Handley, Hall; Lilley, Myler; Cuthbertson, Parcell, Oledzki, Ferres, Ward, Ablett. Interchange Mullally, Smith, Walters, Golding Tries Briscoe 2, Walker, Handley, Keinhorst, Golding, Myler, Smith, Cuthbertson Goals Lilley 8 Leigh Mata’utia; Dawson, Crooks, Hall, Evans; Reynolds, Hutchison; Acton, Hood, Mason, B Thompson, Hansen, J Thompson. Interchange Richards, Higham, Baldwinson, Larroyer Tries Mason, Hutchison, Crooks, Hood Goals Reynolds 3 Sent off Mata’utia (8), Dawson (78). Referee C Kendall Attendance 3,277