On Sunday, Brazil finally started their World Cup campaign. This was the start of something new, a chance to break free from those headlines and nightmares from four years ago, when the Seleção lost 7-1 to Germany to send a whole country into mourning. It has been a long journey for us Brazilians but month by month we have picked up the pieces and gained confidence from the performances under Tite. Neymar’s injury problems were a concern of course but it seemed clear from a fairly early stage that he would be able to play in Russia. In short, we arrived in Russia in good shape and with high hopes. But within minutes of our opening game against Switzerland in Rostov, we could see that this would be a difficult game. The Swiss started aggressively and showed straight away how they were going to handle Brazil’s biggest star: Neymar. They marked him very tightly throughout the game and made it very difficult for him. You could see that he was getting frustrated with the attention that was given to him, gesturing to the officials to give him more protection. The end result, however, was that he did not have his best game and Brazil’s forward play struggled because of it. The referee did not help either. Switzerland’s equaliser was very controversial and replays clearly showed a push on the Brazil centre-back Miranda by the goalscorer Steven Zuber. To make matters worse, Brazil should have had a penalty in the second half when Gabriel Jesus was fouled inside the box. We have seen the so-called smaller teams play tactically smart to deny teams with players of superior quality In both those occasions the video assistant referee (VAR) did not act and tell the referee to review the passage of play. Why, like a review in tennis, is the affected team not able to ask for the decision to be reviewed? Despite the decisions I felt that Brazil did enough to win the game: they had the better chances and it did not feel as if Switzerland threatened Alisson’s goal after the equaliser. However, for all of the work that the team and the staff have put in to prepare for this tournament, I expected much more from Brazil. But it was only the first game of the tournament and I expect the side to bounce back on Friday when we take on Costa Rica. And to be fair to Brazil, we have not been the only favourites who have failed to live up to expectations in the first round. After the World Cup kicked off with Russia’s surprise demolition of Saudi Arabia, we have seen the so-called smaller teams play tactically smart to deny teams with players of superior quality. Uruguay, traditionally World Cup heavyweights, were favourites against a Mohamed Salah-less Egypt but Hector Cuper and his players did a fantastic job to ensure Luis Suarez and Edinson Cavani remained goalless through the game and it was hard on the African nation to concede so late in the game when they had done everything right up until then. One of the most interesting games of the opening weekend was Argentina against Iceland. Our fellow South Americans were huge favourites going into the game but Iceland, once again, were able to restrict them to few chances while causing trouble for the Argentinian defence. It is amazing that Iceland, in their first World Cup game ever, should be able to take a point off Lionel Messi and co but it just shows what hard work and good organisation can achieve in a game. Perhaps we should not be that surprised. In Iceland’s first game at Euro 2016, their first major tournament ever, they also came up against a team with a huge star – and got a draw. That time, against Portugal in Saint-Étienne, they also fell behind but battled back to open their campaign with a point. On both occasions the tactics were pretty much the same – a well-organised defence that tries to hurt teams on the counterattack and set-pieces although they seem to have a bit more flexibility compared to two years ago. It will be interesting to see how far they can get with their approach. What the first round has showed though is that the favourites can’t take anything for granted at this World Cup. Soon the second round of games will begin with Spain, Portugal, Brazil, Germany and Argentina under pressure to get results. The temperature in Russia will carry on rising.