The British foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, is heading for a clash with Russia by using a meeting in the Hague to force a vote demanding weapons inspectors are given expanded powers to identify those guilty of using chemical weapons in Syria. In a bitter trial of diplomatic strength, Russia is fiercely resisting the move, saying it will politicise the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons, and claiming British Russophobia risks wrecking a respected largely scientific body responsible for the overseeing the chemical weapons convention. The UK needs the support of about 60 countries to give the OPCW new powers at a specially convened two-day meeting in the Hague. Britain, following a huge diplomatic operation, won the support of nearly 90 countries to convene the special OPCW conference on Tuesday. Any extension of the OPCW’s powers will unnerve the army of the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, which has been repeatedly accused of using chemical weapons to drive out opposition forces, most recently in Douma, a suburb of Damascus. The Douma attack led to a cruise missile assault on Syrian chemical weapons sites led by the US, France and the UK in April. The OPCW inspectors visited the site of the attack 12 weeks ago and have yet to report. Assad, supported by his sponsor Russia, has repeatedly denied using chemical weapons, dismissing the incidents as stunts mounted by western intelligence. At present, the OPCW’s inspectors only have powers to say if chemical weapons have been used following a fact-finding visit, but not to identify the group or country deploying them in any specific incident. Russia last November at the UN vetoed the renewal of the mandate of the body – known as the Joint independent Mechanism – that had been charged with identifying the perpetrators. The west claimed Russia used its veto as a permanent member of the security council to block the JIM’s renewal because its reports had shown the regime of President Assad was repeatedly breaking the weapons convention mainly by using sarin or chlorine on his own citizens. The JIM had found the Syrian government responsible for an attack at Khan Sheykhun in 2017 that killed as many as 90 people. The UK has the support of the secretariat of the OPCW to give the body wider powers, and enforce the previously established prohibiting the use of chemical weapons. It says the attribution responsibility is within the existing mandate of the OPCW. The UK is specifically calling for the attribution powers to be used initially in Syria, and for a wider strengthening of the OCW to be endorsed and considered at a further special conference in six months’ time. It says the OPCW must adopt a higher profile, or else drift into irrelevance. A quorum of 97 countries is required for a vote to go ahead with a two-thirds majority of those voting required for a resolution deemed to be passed. UK officials are confident they are on the brink of victory, and have welcomed the support of the US for an increasingly important multilateral institution. Russia has tabled a counter proposal that the UK says would give Russia the right to veto the OPCW conclusions, and undermine the independence of the OPCW director general. Diplomatically, it would be a blow for the UK if the special conference, open to any country that has signed the chemical weapons convention, voted both for the British resolution and the resolution backed by Russia. OPCW procedures requires a vote to be held on Wednesday on a show of hands after a 24-hour cooling-off period has been exhausted. The OPCW was expecting much of Tuesday’s meeting to be taken up with arguments about procedures, as well as bitter rhetoric between the Russian and UK delegations.