Every day is a different 7-1. This is an expression that became popular in Brazil after 2014, to talk about daily problems or a bad surprise. It is one of many jokes made by a nation which likes to make fun about its problems. It is a way to escape, or forget, the defeat by Germany in 2014, when Brazil hosted the World Cup and the world was left in shock. The pain of 8 July 2014 is still raw four years later. Six members of the Germany side that thrashed Brazil also played in their humbling by South Korea: the goalkeeper Manuel Neuer, the defender Mats Hummels and the midfielders Sami Khedira, Toni Kroos, Thomas Müller and Mesut Özil. Jérôme Boateng, Hummels’s central defensive partner, would have played if he had not been suspended. Against Switzerland, when Brazil opened their 2018 World Cup campaign with a 1-1 draw, it was clear the wounds of 7-1 had not healed. The players became nervous at the end of the game and Neymar cried in the second round against Costa Rica, a 2-0 victory. A day before the game against Serbia Tite was asked several times if he would like to avoid Germany in the last 16. The Brazil coach said he was thinking only of the final group game. Germany is a taboo subject for Brazil. That is why Tite requested a friendly against them in March, before the finals in Russia. The Germans’ elimination was celebrated in Brazil more than any win by the Seleção at this World Cup. Not to face Germany is a relief for Brazil – not out of fear for their technique or because they were the defending champions but because Brazil is trying to overcome trauma. Asked about Germany’s elimination, the Brazil players refused to comment. “Every nation is in the last 16 on merit,” the defender Miranda said. “We don’t talk about other countries that lose and are disqualified.” Thiago Silva did not play against Germany four years ago because he had received a second yellow card. He said: “We have to say more about our team. If another team didn’t reach the last 16, it isn’t our problem. We achieved our goal to advance to the next stage. Now we have to focus on Mexico. That is a hard team.” Apart from Silva five other players were members of Brazil’s World Cup squad in 2014: Marcelo, Fernandinho, Paulinho, Willian and Neymar, who was injured and did not face Germany in that semi‑final. With Germany now gone Brazil can breathe hopefully in the World Cup and do not need to dwell on the disaster of four years ago. After a bad start in Russia the Seleção will not face the phantom of 2014.