Nick Kyrgios is playing the sort of lights-out grass‑court tennis that should put him in the conversation when Wimbledon starts on Monday week – if he can hold body and soul together. However, there was evidence here on Thursday that his temperament could yet strangle his genius. After pretty much serving Kyle Edmund out of the Fever-Tree championships in three sets, the gifted Australian first proclaimed the loser would be a “massive” threat at the All England Club, then turned on inquisitors who asked him about a burst of swearing at his box near the end of his 7-6 (3), 6-7 (5), 6-3 win on an otherwise pleasant, warm afternoon in west London. “He’s really good on grass,” Kyrgios said of Edmund. “He serves well. His backhand has improved really a lot. He’s got a good forehand. He returns well. He sliced well. His intangibles were good. I would definitely put him [among the few contenders at Wimbledon].” Then it got a little edgy. When asked about his apology to spectators after swearing loudly enough to be heard on the BBC, he said: “Do you swear? No, do you swear? Yes or no? Yes or no? Do you swear? Do you swear?” It will come as a shock only to some vicars and sheep minders in the Orkneys that journalists do actually swear. As for his tennis, Kyrgios’s serve is regularly red-lining around 140mph – even on second serve, occasionally – and he brought his tally of aces to 73 over a total of six hours and 42 minutes across six days, pinning Edmund behind the baseline for two hours and 11 minutes of that journey. When he brought Andy Murray’s comeback match to a conclusion over three sets in two hours and 39 minutes on Tuesday, a hip pain he has been carrying flared, and he conceded on Thursday: “I’m just managing my hip at the moment.” He added that his chronic elbow problem was “fine – that’s the most important thing”. Kyrgios’s British double followed an even more impressive performance in defeat in Stuttgart last Saturday when the world No 1, Roger Federer, needed every ounce of his resilience in a third-set tie-break in the semi-final. Kyrgios next plays the defending champion, Feliciano López. He put 23 aces on Federer, 18 on Murray and a spirit-draining 32 on Edmund. He did not give Edmund a moment’s peace, taking the point on 88% of first serves, 53% at the second attempt. That is enough to break the will of a saint and Edmund did well to stand up to the unceasing pressure. There were no break points in the first 12 games but a couple of poor choices by Edmund and big serving by Kyrgios imperilled the world No 17 in the tie-break. When Kyrgios – four places below him in the rankings – belted a winner from mid-court for set point, Edmund gambled with a net-charge – only to see a perfectly struck backhand fly past him. Edmund had to save his first break point at the start of the second. After a between-the-legs volley (that Edmund punished), Kyrgios held with a 137mph second serve. This was taking on the appearance of his match against Murray – but the Scot had kept the Australia’s ace count down to reasonable proportions (with 11 double faults, as he strove for the quick kill), demonstrating that his defensive game is still in excellent shape after an 11-month break from the Tour. After an hour on court on Thursday, Kyrgios had won the point from 30 of 31 first serves, thanks largely to 17 aces, a phenomenal strike rate. Edmund, ahead in the serving cycle, had to soak up the punches and wait for the counter off the ropes. He did a decent job of holding the shape of his own game until a lazy backhand handed Kyrgios another look in the ninth game. He hung on. Just. Edmund needed an eighth ace to save one of two break points, Kyrgios clocked up a couple of more aces and they went to a second tie-break where, this time, Edmund rediscovered his firepower and precision to level at a set apiece. An over-heated forehand cost the British No 1 his serve in the fourth game of the decider and Kyrgios was back in control. Two more aces and he was 4-1 up. The match was his to lose. He grabbed match point with his final ace – and spluttered into familiar expletives when he pushed a forehand wide for deuce, then dumped a backhand. Edmund crashed to the turf trying to retrieve a drop shot on break point – but there was nothing he could do with Kyrgios’s concluding backhand passing shot down the line. Novak Djokovic remains in awesome form. He took just 65 minutes to beat the former champion and reigning ATP World Tour Finals title-holder Grigor Dimitrov 6-4, 6-1.