A top-class opening day for John Gosden and Frankie Dettori will have the Newmarket pair relaxed and happy as they approach the main business of this Royal Ascot, which, for them, is getting Cracksman (4.20) to win the Prince of Wales’s Stakes. On an unbeaten run of five the colt is a fabulous talent who stands out like a beacon in a race that otherwise seems short of star wattage. Admittedly he made his backers sweat at Epsom three weeks ago but in the end he managed to score from an unpromising position, which is arguably another reason to admire him. The one source of doubt here is the ground, which will be easily the fastest he has encountered since the winning streak began. If he takes time to let himself down on it, there is a risk that one of the others might have pinched a few vital lengths in the meantime. Poet’s Word, who trailed Cracksman by seven lengths in October, could not really be called progressive and surely cannot win unless the favourite runs well below expectations. Hawkbill has it in him to be dangerous but ran no race last time. 2.30 Queen Mary Stakes Supporting Chelsea Cloisters here is a statement of faith in her trainer, Wesley Ward, rather than in the filly herself but faith in Ward would be entirely justified. He has had at least one winner at Royal Ascot in each of the past five years and this has been the most productive race for him, yielding three wins since 2009. Chelsea Cloisters appears to be the pick of his party and gets the sort of fast ground that gives zippy US raiders a big chance. Odds of 9-4 clearly cannot be described as generous in a big field of unexposed types but they are better than expected, just the same. 3.05 Queen’s Vase Aidan O’Brien’s Kew Gardens surely cannot be the right favourite for this, having been beaten at odds-on at Lingfield, followed by a well-beaten effort in the Derby, when he paid for helping to force a strong pace. Can that be the right preparation for this test, 18 days later? Almoghared, a half-brother to Taghrooda, might be the best of these in time but his stablemate, Stream Of Stars, looks more of a ‘now’ horse and can make the necessary step-up from his maiden win around here last month. 3.40 Duke of Cambridge Stakes Hydrangea is all class and will be sharper for her reappearance defeat but she could still be vulnerable, giving 5lb to potential improvers over a trip that is probably short of her best. Urban Fox appeals at an each-way price, having shown career-best form on his first run for William Haggas, landing a handicap over this course and distance last month. 5.00 Royal Hunt Cup Handicap Mick Halford won this race two years ago with a Godolphin-owned four-year-old, carrying a penalty for a recent success at the Curragh, and could do the trick again with Saltonstall. He was a pleasing winner of a competitive handicap last month on the driest surface he had yet encountered and a 5lb penalty leaves him leniently treated. 5.35 Jersey Stakes Here is another prize waiting to be picked up by the Gosden/Dettori combination, represented here by Purser. He idled in front when landing a Listed contest under Rab Havlin last time and ought to be well suited by this stiff seven furlongs.