In a quiet moment away from the television cameras, Gary Cahill could be found in an upstairs suite at the Cronwell Park Hotel in Repino reflecting on the last time England faced Belgium and the painful memories of the incident he regards as possibly the biggest disappointment of his eight years as an international footballer. Belgium’s visit to Wembley on that occasion was England’s final warm-up game for Euro 2012 and, as Cahill recalled, the players already had their cases packed, with the plane waiting on the runway. England won 1-0, courtesy of Danny Welbeck’s first-half goal, but the real story that day was Dries Mertens giving Cahill a two-handed shove from behind to send him into Joe Hart, with devastating consequences for the Chelsea defender. Cahill lost a tooth in the collision and his jaw was broken. His tournament was over before it had even begun. Six years on, Cahill could be forgiven if he held a grudge. Roy Hodgson was furious with Mertens – “unfortunate is too kind a word; I wasn’t happy with it,” the then England manager said – and Joleon Lescott, another of the team’s defenders, described it as “more reckless and dangerous than most two-footed tackles”, furious that the offending player had been shown only a yellow card. Nobody, however, should think there is any lingering bad blood when the two teams renew acquaintances in Kaliningrad on Thursday. “To be honest, it’s a nice story,” Cahill explains. “I saw him while I was on holiday earlier this year and he came over to speak to me. We were in a restaurant and he took time out to come over and apologise which, for me, means it is dead and buried. “I actually respected him a hell of a lot for doing that. It’s not something he had to do – he didn’t know me and I didn’t even know he was in there, to be honest. But he came over to apologise, years down the line. “That injury had big consequences. I was virtually on the plane and it was a huge time for me. I felt like I was in the condition to start that tournament – the age I was at, the form I was in – so it was a huge blow and it took a while to get over. “At the same time, I like to see the good in people and I don’t think he ever did it for those reasons. It was just one of those things: a freak situation. I hit Joe, who was probably the worst person to hit in the whole team because his shoulders are like that [holds out his arms]. And that was that. He didn’t push me thinking, ‘I’m going to push him and break his jaw.’ I don’t know him from Adam but the guy is obviously a decent fella. We shook hands and I hold no grudges.” The footnote to this story is that Cahill was holidaying in Dubai at the time to get over the fact he had not made it into Gareth Southgate’s squad for the friendly matches against the Netherlands and Italy in March. Cahill, England’s most experienced player with 60 caps, forced his way back in after rediscovering his form towards the end of the season but he has had to be patient so far in this tournament, as one of only four outfield players in Southgate’s squad not to feature for a single minute yet. That will change against Belgium when Southgate plans to make significant alterations in the game that determines which of the two sides will go through as Group G winners. Both teams have already qualified and Cahill was unequivocal when he was asked whether there had been any talk in the England camp about it potentially being better to finish as runners-up. “No, the discussions have been to win the game,” he said. “That’s the truth. It’s still a huge stage, no matter what the situation is within the group. Everyone is watching and it is not as if we are going into a friendly or a pre-season tour where you can half take your foot off. Go and win the game. Build momentum, keep that good feeling going.” The danger is that could mean setting up a possible quarter-final against Germany or Brazil if the results go as many people anticipate. Yet Cahill can remember England falling into a similar trap in Euro 2016 before the defeat against Iceland. “We were looking at playing France in their stadium and ‘it was going to be a fantastic occasion’ and then it never got to that. You can look too far down the line. The message for us is to prepare to win the game.” Cahill also believes it will still be England’s most challenging assignment so far even though the pressure is off, to a certain extent, and Belgium are likely to leave out, among others, his Chelsea teammate Eden Hazard, Romelu Lukaku and Kevin De Bruyne. “Both teams are going to make changes – that’s well documented – but who’s going to come in for Belgium? Mousa Dembélé, for one, who is one of the best midfielders in the Premier League. The pressure has eased off a bit, but the size of the game still makes it our biggest test.”