“And when we got home, they destroyed us.” Hernán Darío Gómez is talking about the aftermath of the 1998 World Cup when Colombia were knocked out by David Beckham’s free-kick in Lens. But it is not really about that; it is about everything: a recurring theme in conversation with the Panama manager covering a professional career that goes back 43 years, 37 as a coach. Pressure, demands, fear, suffering. “It’s frightening,” he says. And the 62-year-old says that when he is not talking about the truly terrifying, genuinely tragic moments through which he has lived. Gómez was Colombia’s assistant when Andrés Escobar was shot dead after his own goal at the 1994 World Cup. During qualification for this tournament the Panama midfielder Amílcar Henríquez was gunned down outside his home. And when he was Ecuador coach, Gómez himself was shot after he did not name a politician’s son in the under‑20s. Smashed in the nose with the butt of a gun during an argument, he lay bleeding as three bullets were fired: the first went through his sleeve, the second ricocheted off the floor, the third hit his thigh. But that was that and this, for now, is just football. Only it is never just football. “Oh, it goes way beyond that,” he says. The question, then, is why? Why do it? Why are you still here? Why not walk away? When Escobar was killed, he says, he asked himself the same. But, he adds, “you think that a lot”. And that day in May 2001 when he was shot he intended to walk away. But, encouraged by his mother after leaving hospital, he did return. Six months later Ecuador qualified for their first World Cup, which is part of the answer. “It’s a passion,” he says. “I don’t know if you get used to it too: maybe you need the pressure, the fear, the pitch, the players – the ball.” He glances down. “My soulmate,” he says. Cradled under his arm is a ball. It is not a prop for the photo, more a comfort blanket. He runs his hands over it. “Balls are spectacular: the feel. I always have one with me: during team talks, walking round the hotel, in the corridor at home. There’s footage where everyone’s celebrating qualification and, unconsciously, I’m there with the ball. I’ve got a room full. Every competition, I try to take a ball.” The collection does not include the ball with which Panama began their historic qualification campaign – Gómez gave it to the Panamanian boxer Roberto “Stone Hands” Duran to look after for good luck and has not yet fulfilled his promise to collect it when they got there – but there are hundreds more. This summer he will add a fifth World Cup ball. Assistant to Francisco “Pancho” Maturana in 1990 and 1994, Gómez was Colombia coach in 1998, Ecuador’s in 2002, Panama’s now. Three decades, three countries. Only one other coach, Henri Michel, has taken three nations to the tournament. “But that’s not the record,” Gómez says. “The record’s taking two who have never been.” Do you feel special? “No, I feel proud.” Born in Medellín, Gómez is the son of a prestigious architect who was a severe disciplinarian whose punishments involved beatings with a belt. Nicknamed “Bolillo”, after he once turned up at training head shaved, leaving him looking like a billiard ball, Hernán was a small, underachieving defensive midfielder who later admitted drinking and sneaking women into the team hotel, before sustaining a knee injury that ended his career. Once an ex-player – although he protests “ex-player doesn’t exist; you die as a footballer” – he managed Guatemala, Ecuador and Colombia twice. The second time, in 2011, he had to resign after hitting a woman outside a Bogotá bar. “I’m ashamed,” he said. He arrived in Panama in 2014 just after they had missed the World Cup because of a last‑minute goal from the US. This time they qualified with a late goal which knocked the US out. Gómez calls 2014 “a tragedy” and says “the players had that ghost.” But, he adds: “It’s not football that does that to you, it’s you, your life. How well did you work? Behave? How loyal were you to the sport? How professional? You pay for bad behaviour; football makes you. And when you behave well, football pays you back. To be a footballer you have to be a professional.” “‘He’s a character,” says one member of the backroom staff, as Gómez talks to players in the team hotel. “What kind of coach am I? It’s also: ‘What kind of person am I?’ And what kind of people are they?” Gómez says. “I’m not one for books or conferences. The main thing isn’t the pitch. In countries like Ecuador, Panama, it’s how you live, the personalities. There are tactical coaches, teachers, but a high percentage is leadership: charisma, intuition, group management. My attitude is: all on the bed or all on the floor, unity and equality. This is the self-esteem of a country. The ‘silver’ comes from clubs, the glory comes from the national team. “I have football in my blood, the football I played. But players have changed,” Gómez adds. “Before they read Condorito [a Chilean comic book] or Playboy; now they read judicial texts. They don’t ‘receive’ information so easily, so passively. You have to give them more. Before, it was ‘you play as a No 10, you 7, you 6, you 8, you 5’” Now they play England. “I remember England in 1966 with Bobby Charlton, Bobby Moore. Gary Lineker in 1986. And Beckham in 1998 and that little striker – Owen! After 1994 the whole country [Colombia] hated us: everywhere we went they abused us. Pancho went to Atlético and I took a declining generation to France, lost to that Beckham free-kick and they destroyed us. You’ll see that again if Colombia don’t finish in the top five. “England always arrived with great names. But this team is even better, in my opinion. Obviously Kane stands out but I see homogeneity, a perfect team. Physically they’re perfect. People talk about ‘modern football’ but ‘modern football’ was played by Germany, by Holland in 1974. What’s changed? Look at England: a young, ordered team in the best physical condition. Slim! And that’s the thing. Neymar’s an example: his physique, the agility. That’s modern football. Diet, conditioning. England look great: so, so slim, stripped down.” Panama look different – and in the final week of dawn training sessions before heading to Russia, that was Gómez’s concern, along with emotional management. This is unlike anything his players have ever experienced and it has been a long journey. “They could write a book,” he says. “When you get there you can grow, but you can shrink too. A World Cup is the greatest party. You see the most beautiful woman and you can dance with her. Your legs tremble.” Gómez says there are four possible results for Panama: win, draw, lose, get hammered. “Belgium are here,” he says, holding his hand up. “England here,” he adds, hand the same height. He drops it a little. “And Tunisia here.” His hand drops further. “And this is us.” “I’m the poor man but, if we’re going to play, let’s play. But let’s compete. Think of Colombia in 1994: everyone said we’d win the World Cup because we’d beaten Argentina 5-0 and what did we do? We pushed high, went to play, and ciao. It’s easy to think ‘that’s it, we qualified, relax’ but I can’t settle for that. No, no, no. I want to depart with dignity. Without going through, we can still leave as winners. By playing well, doing good things, having an idea, showing this team has something. “This has united the country a lot but you know how the world is: lose and this will turn to misery. They’re waiting for us. You suffer. I’m very scared that a team that’s brought a country together, the source of everybody’s happiness, ‘the dream of a nation’...” Gómez says, adopting an affected cinematic voice for the final line. ....is some responsibility? “Yes,” he says. Do you suffer? “Yes. A lot. It’s scary. If we lose some will think all that’s destroyed because we didn’t beat England or Belgium. They’re two candidates to win the World Cup!” If you were going there with them, or with Brazil or Germany, you’d be going to win it? “For sure,” Gómez says. “Look at the Germany coach or Brazil’s, or Mourinho or the managers you always hear about. See if they could come and qualify Panama. But now we have to go again. Others went and never returned – El Salvador for example. We have to work, improve. If not, what’s the point? Go to the World Cup and then just fold your arms?” And yet, even if they never go back, this is huge and it matters. “Ah no, of course: it’s historic,” Gómez says. “No one can ever take that away.”