The dilemma I’ve been married for 18 years and the last three have been difficult. My interests differ very much from my husband’s. I want to be surrounded by people who understand me better. I have developed friendships where I feel I can be more myself. Our sex life would probably be described as good– varied, interesting, fulfilling for him. But I don’t feel any connection sexually and emotionally with him. I feel if it wasn’t for the kids we would no longer be together. But having split up before, I don’t want to break his heart. Also there is the further challenge of my mental health and wellbeing. Having been on medication for anxiety and depression for seven years, I recently stopped completely. Finally, and this has no impact on the decision affecting my marriage, I have a close friendship where strong feelings have developed. We are not having an affair, but I know how I feel and this confirms that my marriage is on very rocky ground. Mariella replies It certainly sounds like it. It’s no mean achievement to compromise your myriad and individual personal needs in pursuit of family harmony. You wouldn’t be human if you didn’t reach a point where you wondered whether there isn’t something or someone beyond the horizon, or closer by, who would make the next phase of your life more exciting and inspiring. You describe your deeper connections with friends – one of the great benefits of maturity and compensation for occasionally threadbare conversations with your partner. I won’t try to convince you that staying together at all costs is the answer, but if you’re looking for carte blanche to pack his bags you’ve written to the wrong agony aunt. You sound particularly aggrieved about what many would simply describe as “natural evolution”. The changing dynamics and evolving personalities in a couple over decades are hard to navigate. We all want inspiration, continuing sexual chemistry, challenge and excitement, but it’s rare to experience any of them as constants. That’s why other factors – loyalty, kindness, generosity and commitment – shouldn’t be diminished in favour of their more enticing opposites. Should we be looking for the same things from a lover in adulthood that was of value in our youth, or appreciating what we’ve gained? These days I regard 20-year-olds with a degree of envy; the physical perfection and emotional volatility of youth that they take for granted are so precious, so memorable and so fleeting. That absolute conviction on any topic under the sun and the way investing all your hopes and dreams in one person seems perfectly sensible, all seem so innocent and admirable. Then you grow up some more and realise that heightened passion can’t sensibly be sustained over the long term – and being wholly consumed by a lover rather than life itself starts to seem faintly ridiculous. Heightened passion can’t be sustained over the long term Parenting is an obvious distraction and keeps you busy enough not to focus too hard on potential cracks in the foundations for a good 16 years or more. After that, things often take a downward turn as that familiar face across the table fails to reflect you the way you want to be seen. That’s when it’s important to try to identify the benefits of your partnership rather than zooming in on the easy-to-access flaws. You describe your sex life as varied, interesting and fulfilling for him – that puzzles me. If it is varied and interesting, why isn’t it fulfilling for you? Perhaps you think a new relationship will solve historical woes, and that’s a common mistake. Relationships can be revamped, sometimes simply by putting the energy into them that you’re tempted to invest elsewhere, but once they’ve been abandoned there’s no going back. You say there is someone with whom you have a deeper connection, but that it’s irrelevant to your desire to move on. You may not be involved in an affair, but it’s totally naive to imagine that this “friendship” isn’t having a dramatic impact on the way you see your marriage. I’d also caution you to take no dramatic steps while you are adjusting to life without your long-term medication. I’m glad it’s something you have given consideration to and suggest seeing a doctor to check what side-effects you might expect. Then consider how much of what you currently value exists in tandem with your relationship. As we mature, friendships become deeper and far more important to us. If we’re lucky, we develop independence and confidence, find joy in places we never thought of looking and discover new people and passions. If the revelation that we are not wrought of the same metal as our partner is a reason for splitting up, we should all be going our separate ways in middle age. Perhaps it’s utter madness that we even try to stay together with so much stacked against enduring love. The road you are contemplating may bring you the intimacy and connection you feel you are lacking, or distract you for long enough that you lose what you’ve built over the years. Most of what we need to make us happy we carry within us, so looking to others for that missing ingredient can be a costly distraction. I can only caution that sometimes what you have is far more precious than what you think you’ve lost. • If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1