Ever wondered which is the loneliest job in the world? A shepherd on the Isle of Eigg perhaps? President of the Sepp Blatter fan club? Here is another one for the list: Icelandic newsreader. Each night the Icelandic TV channel Stöd 2 broadcasts its evening news show, Fréttir, at 6.30pm. On Tuesday it will be scheduled directly against the national football team’s Group D decider against Croatia. When Iceland played Argentina in their opening match, 60% of the domestic population were watching. That translated to 99.6% of all TVs switched on at the time. Getting people to turn over will be one of the biggest challenges in world broadcasting, so what tricks do Stöd 2 have up their sleeve? “I’ve just finished an interview with the assistant governor at the Icelandic Central Bank”, says Thorbjörn Thórdarson, a broadcast journalist for Fréttir. “He’s leaving the bank after 28 years so it’s quite a big deal.” Er, great. Sounds just the ticket. Anything else? “We had a very productive news meeting this morning. There was some discussion that maybe we might read out the score sometimes.” Right. Is that it? “We’re still rounding up the items for the evening. Look, we are under no illusions we will have abysmal ratings. But, you know, we have to get the news out and the news won’t stop because of the football.” What a commendable attitude. Professional and determined, Thórdarson seems to share the ethos that has made Strákarnir okkar (“Our boys”) the talk of international football these past few years. Neither is he a fool. He will have guaranteed access to a big screen TV (“several, actually”) in the office. Despite their defeat by Nigeria on Saturday, which means anything other than a win will send Iceland home, Thórdarson believes this country of 300,000 is still very much behind their team. “I can only speak for myself and what I experienced with my friends and relatives,” he says, reaffirming his commitment to honest reporting. “Defeat against Nigeria was a big blow and we had big hopes of getting through after drawing against Argentina. But in general everyone around me has had pretty sober expectations. We have a measured opinion of things; not too up, not too down. We are adjusting expectations according to the results.” Sounds pretty much like the English then. “The mood in the culture and the society is reflected by coverage in the news,” says Thórdarson. “The English media, in my opinion, is too quick to shame their players. The shift in the tone of coverage in the UK is much more polarising than how we approach things here. Coverage of the team is more sober and more relaxed. We have both our feet firmly on the ground.” That is the verdict from Reykjavik then, and a big “Áfram Ísland!” to both footballers and broadcast journalists, both of whom are fighting against the odds. Oh, hang on, we have some breaking developments. Sources close to Channel 2 have revealed they may yet postpone Tuesday’s Fréttir until after the game has finished. This news is as yet unconfirmed, however. More when we have it.