For four straight years the Golden State Warriors and Cleveland Cavaliers have fought for the NBA’s championship – a parallel odyssey that has never happened before in league history. On Friday night, the Warriors asserted their dominance in the tetralogy, winning their third of the four championships with a 108-85 victory in Game 4. The title is the Warriors’ sixth in a franchise history dating back to their founding in Philadelphia in the league’s inaugural 1946-47 season. The four-games series sweep is the ninth ever in the NBA finals and the first since 2007. And it was the easiest of the four Golden State-Cleveland battles, with the Cavaliers barely putting up a fight on Friday night. Steph Curry had one of his finest NBA finals games with 37 points. Kevin Durant had 20 and earned Most Valuable Player honors for the second straight year. But the overriding storyline was that it was likely the last game in Cleveland for hometown star LeBron James who had returned to the city in 2014 after four years in Miami during which he won two titles with the Heat. Soon a free agent, many expect James to leave the Cavaliers. He scored 23 points on Friday but he looked discouraged, let down by teammates who could not rise to the level he demanded. The series probably ended on JR Smith’s dribble out at the end of regulation in Game 1, but after Golden State’s late Game 3 rally the Finals were really all but over as the Warriors held a 3-0 lead. But they still had to play Game 4. And so they cranked up the volume on the arena speakers one more time, blasting music and shooting flames out the side of the scoreboard. The Cavs tried, fighting hard for rebounds and keeping the score close for much of the first half. They had no energy, however. Golden State started to pull away at the end of the second quarter. Curry hit a lunging three-pointer just before halftime to put the Warriors up 61-52. After that, the game quickly fell out of hand. Golden State scored three quick baskets to start the third quarter. During a time out, James sat on the bench, waving his arms and screaming at his teammates. His cries were to no avail. Cleveland were done and the Cavaliers seemed to know it. They were powerless to stop the onslaught of Warriors players rotating into the game, hitting jump shots and driving for layups. When Golden State’s Draymond Green shoved James midway through the quarter, something seemed to go out of the Cavs. James’ mighty shoulders dropped. He quickly picked up his fourth foul, the Warriors went on a 11-2 run and Cleveland never came close again. James spent the first three minutes of what will probably be his final quarter as a Cavalier sitting on the bench, draped in towels. After an incredible postseason in which he pulled the Cavs, almost single-handedly to these Finals, he looked defeated. He left with 4:03 left in the game to chants of “M-V-P! M-V-P! M-V-P!” His second homecoming had come to an end with just one title. The night, just as this most recent era, belonged to the Warriors. This is a developing story. More to follow.