For a period during the 1950s it seemed that Peter Thomson, who has died aged 88, virtually owned golf’s oldest major competition, the Open Championship. Between 1952 and 1958 the Australian won the Open four times and was three times a runner-up. Although his grip on the title loosened, he managed to add another in 1965, making five Open victories in all. Only the great Harry Vardon exceeded that, in the years around 1900, and Tom Watson is the only player to equal it since Thomson’s time. Thomson’s affinity with the Open stemmed chiefly from his mastery of the windy, sand-duned seaside courses on which such championships are traditionally played. One of the greatest links golfers, he had in abundance the low ball-flight skills needed to deal with the unpredictable surfaces of such hard-running courses, where a feel for the bounce of a ball is more important than launching it high and long. He used those attributes to win the Open three times in a row – at Royal Birkdale (1954), St Andrews (1955) and Royal Liverpool (1956). He was runner-up at St Andrews the following year and reclaimed the title at Royal Lytham & St Annes in 1958. But his fifth win, at Royal Birkdale in 1965, was acclaimed as the best of the lot. His others had come when the superb South African Bobby Locke was at his peak, but at a time when relatively few of America’s top players entered the Open – and then not always regularly. By 1965, with the advent of a truly international tour, all the world’s best golfers were there, including the “big three”: Arnold Palmer, Jack Nicklaus and Gary Player. He beat the field by a clear two shots. Thomson’s old-fashioned links skills were not so well suited to the US tour, and he failed to win any of golf’s other three majors, all based in America. He never played in the US PGA Championship, appeared in the US Open only three times (with a best finish of fourth) and took part in the Masters on only six occasions (with a best of fifth). Thomson once declared he was “revolted” by the kind of big-hitting, target golf that US courses encouraged. Perhaps because he largely turned his back on the US, and because his biggest successes marginally preceded the era of golf on television, his achievements have sometimes been underplayed. But he was a great of the game, and the best golfer Australia has produced. The first of four sons of Arthur, a signwriter, and Grace (nee Watson), a dressmaker, Thomson was born in the working class district of Brunswick, Melbourne, where he began playing golf in his early teens on the nine-hole Royal Park course, across the street from where he lived. The second world war was raging, so Royal Park was largely empty and Thomson was left to make up his own mind about how the game should be played, hardly seeing any good golfers. The course was hard and bouncy in the hot months and it was there that he developed the trademark abilities that served him so well on the links. At the age of 16, as his talent began to be noticed, he was able to engineer a move to the more prestigious Victoria golf club, where he honed his skills in dry conditions. Having gained a diploma in applied chemistry at Footscray Technical School in Melbourne (now part of Victoria University) in 1945, Thomson worked as a rubber technologist for Spalding in Melbourne, helping to design and make golf balls – which he used and tested himself. But by 1949, after winning a series of amateur titles, he had decided to become a professional golfer. A successful trip to the Philippine Open, where he came sixth, gave Thomson enough prize money to fly to the US and on to Britain, where he came sixth on his debut in the Open at Royal Portrush in 1951. His exploits so impressed the then dominant Locke that he immediately took Thomson with him on a tour of South Africa, where they played 63 lucrative head-to-head exhibition matches in nine weeks. Already Thomson was making an excellent living as a pro and, unusually for the era, was doing so without being attached to any club – something even the biggest names still felt obliged to do. On his second trip to Britain in 1952, Thomson was runner-up to Locke in the Open at Royal Lytham & St Annes. He was tied for second when Ben Hogan took the 1953 Open, then from 1954 went on a run of four wins in five years, only missing out narrowly on a victory in 1957 at St Andrews when he came second to Locke, who should theoretically have been disqualified for failing to replace his ball properly after marking it on the final green. The authorities felt Locke had gained no advantage from his oversight and, as he was three shots ahead of Thomson anyway, awarded him the title. Thomson fully supported the ruling, but Locke wrongly got it into his head that his closest rival was behind a subsequent whispering campaign against him, and their friendship died. By the 1960s, Thomson had lost any residual interest in challenging for honours in the US, concentrating instead on golf in Europe, where he won the German, Spanish, and Italian Opens as well as the British Masters (twice) and the News of the World Matchplay tournament (four times). He continued to fare well in the Open, with eight top 10 finishes between 1960 and 1969, including his fifth win in 1965 – the first to be televised. The compact, late-hitting swing he had developed in the quiet war years at Royal Park was a thing of beauty, and he made sure not to ruin it through over-analysis. He believed that a happy golfer was a better golfer, and played with a ready smile and a simple, relaxed demeanour that displayed an underlying disdain for the trappings of fame or fortune. After the 1956 Open at Royal Liverpool, he had to borrow a friend’s jacket for the winner’s presentation. Only when his acquaintance took it to be dry-cleaned later did he discover Thomson’s £1,000 winner’s cheque still in the pocket, completely forgotten about. Apart from playing on British links, Thomson’s other passion was golf in the far east, which he promoted with fervour by playing in various tournaments across the region. In all he won 26 championships in Europe, 19 in Australia and New Zealand, and 11 in Asia and Japan. He won just once in the US – at the Texas Open in 1956 – but after playing his last Open in Britain in 1984 he decided to join the American seniors tour, and the following year won nine tournaments. Having proved he could play on US courses if he really felt like it, he walked off into the sunset. Thomson had many interests – he loved opera and painting, and once stood as a Liberal for the legislative assembly in his home state of Victoria. But he stayed close to golf both as a longserving writer for newspapers and magazines and as a golf course architect with the firm Thomson, Perrett and Lobb. He was president of the Australian Professional Golfers’ Association from 1962 to 1994 and was three times a non-playing captain of the international teams in the Presidents Cup against the US in 1996, 1998 and 2000, coming out victorious on the second occasion. In 1979 he was appointed CBE, and in 2001 AO. Later in life Thomson conceded that even he had sometimes underrated his achievements. “For the last 40 years I’ve been ignoring them, but I’m now beginning to be a bit more proud of myself,” he said. “If I had won all of my Opens in the 60s, I think my name would have been much bigger. If I had won five times on television it would have been different. That’s what happened to Tom Watson, and he became a household name.” Thomson, however, professed himself “in no way envious” of such fame. “I didn’t want to be a public star,” he said. “I had a very joyful time, playing a game that I loved for the sheer pleasure of it. I don’t think I did a real day’s work in the whole of my life.” In 1960 he married Mary Kelly. She survives him, along with their three children, Peta Ann, Fiona and Andrew; his daughter, Deirdre, from his first marriage, to Lois Brauer, which ended in divorce; 11 grandchildren and four great-grandchildren. • Peter William Thomson, golfer, born 23 August 1929; died 20 June 2018