The Conservative party has a problem with Muslims. It is not a few bad apples; not a few social media posts taken out of context. The problem has been growing unchecked for years, despite warnings by Muslim party members, and has now become so normalised that incidents are being reported with alarming frequency. Last week, the Muslim Council of Britain (MCB) called for an independent inquiry into Islamophobia following more-than-weekly occurrences in the party last month. In these past four weeks alone, Conservative party representatives and candidates have called Islam “the new Nazism”, posted a picture of bacon on a door handle as a way to “protect your house from terrorism”, and shared an article that called Muslims “parasites” who “live off the state and breed like rabbits”. There will be few voters at the ballot box who will shun the Tory party because it makes fellow citizens feel unsafe Muslim party members also reported casual racism linked to the religion, and conversations where it was heavily implied or overtly spelled out that to get ahead in the party, they had to shed as much of their Muslim identity as possible. This is now a pattern. Peter Oborne wrote last week that in his research over the years he has shown that it is impossible for a practising Muslim to make his or her way to the very top of the Tory party. Prejudices do not just land at the door of certain parties. They bubble upwards from some foundational corruption. There is a reason that the anti-Muslim bigotry that has developed over the last two decades nested on the right, and found a home in the Conservative party. There is an overlap between specific antipathy towards Muslims and general hostility towards immigration, a cornerstone Tory attitude. And there is a reason it has intensified under the auspices of today’s party. A nativist government tone sharpened after the Brexit vote and overtures to the far right have won over Ukip voters and even ex-BNP supporters. Just as antisemitism on the left arises from a warped, conspiratorial view of a world in which Jews are enablers of powerful interests that conspire against the weak, anti-Muslim prejudice on the right arises from an obsession with immigration gone haywire, hence Muslims are hordes, invaders, breeding like rabbits and changing the culture with their creeping sharia. Hate speech against Muslims also conveniently channels a racial element that on its own would meet with far more opprobrium. There are many fig leaves that cover the naked prejudice, such as: people have legitimate concerns about immigration; Muslims change the culture of a place far more than people of other religions do; is it so wrong for a nation to want to preserve its culture? A handy manual for this sort of obfuscation is Douglas Murray’s The Strange Death of Europe: a masterclass in how xenophobia can take on a respectable shape by sublimating prejudice towards Muslims – and by extension immigrants – into a legitimate cultural anxiety. But the biggest fig leaf of all is that, somehow, it is all just legitimate criticism of Islam, that no one really has an intrinsic problem with Muslims. There is not much value in arguing against this logic because it is a set-up. Those who have been grappling with the whole “Islam is not a race” diversion for a while now know that it is obvious that hate speech, mockery, calling for internment and damaging people’s employment prospects, as studies have found, is not a legitimate interrogation of a faith. The religion-not-race canard is a threadbare semantic excuse deployed cynically by those who know that, once the religion element is stripped away, all that is left is the racist bigotry. A party that engages in populist rhetoric against immigration, the party of the Windrush scandal and the “go home” vans, is the natural home for the politics of fear. Zac Goldsmith’s shameful smear campaign against Sadiq Khan still stands as its monument. On Sunday morning, the home secretary, Sajid Javid, dismissed the MCB’s claims, citing its supposedly “favourable comments” on extremists, and refusing to engage with the fact that senior Tories, journalists and junior party members have all made the same claims. This is deliberate strategy. Raise the spectre of extremism and just hope everyone moves on. Of course legitimate interrogation of Islam can be, and is often, mislabelled as anti-Muslim prejudice, just as legitimate interrogation of Israel is often mislabelled as antisemitism. But it really is not hard to also see that, just as antisemites use Israel to hide their prejudice against all Jews, anti-Muslim bigots use Islamic extremism to excuse theirs. But the similarity ends there when it comes to popular condemnation. The difference in the public outcry against Labour and Conservative failures to tackle effectively race and prejudice issues in their parties is telling. We have become inured to the sharpness of the tone against Muslims, because criticising Islam has lent a civilising comfort to those who just don’t like Muslims, and Islamophobia has been successfully twinned with immigration in the public consciousness. There will be precious few pundits calling for an inquiry or radio shows asking callers whether Theresa May is fit to lead a party whose members bully and stigmatise Muslims. There will be few voters at the ballot box who will shun the Tory party because it makes their fellow citizens feel unsafe. Pressure must continue to grow on May to tackle the problem, but the only way that can happen is if the cause is taken up by others, not just the MCB. The present situation says much about the Conservative party and the alarming direction in which rightwing politics is taking the country. We’re seeing Islamophobia not just popularised, but gentrified. • Nesrine Malik is a Guardian columnist