On a stretch of Scotland’s north-east coast, two historic acts of Highland pillage, separated by ages, are linked across golden sands. The village of Embo in Sutherland lies in the shadow of the grander cathedral town of Dornoch but its beach is known globally for the unique ecosystem its dunes support. Now, a planning decision by Highland council has left many of the 1,200 animal and insect species to be found in this corner of Scotland facing an uncertain future. High on Ben Bhraggrie overlooking this place stands the 200ft statue of George Granville Leveson-Gower, the first Duke of Sutherland and the most ruthless perpetrator of the Highland clearances which harrowed this place two centuries ago. Some now fear another harrowing is imminent. Councillors last week chose to defy the objections of just about every Scottish environmental and natural history agency by giving consent to a multimillion-pound golf development which may damage this site. Coul Links is the dream of US billionaire Mike Keiser, who owns an assortment of America’s finest golf courses and is, in the high stakes game for ascendancy in the luxury golf sector, Donald Trump’s main rival. In a curious twist to this clash of US corporate titans, the coastline of Scotland has become its battleground. Trump already owns two links developments in Aberdeenshire and Ayrshire. He too had to overcome environmental objections about damage to another unique system of sand dunes. An early-morning hike across these sands and the dunes behind them delivers rich rewards. As oystercatchers inspect the board of fare left by a receding tide, a colony of sand martins dip and weave among the dunes that define this expanse. Andrew Mackay is one of the activists leading a brawny fightback against the golf development. “It’s just so unnecessary,” he says. “They could still have a beautiful and unique golf course just a few hundred yards behind these dunes.” The development, he feels, is a desecration. “This area is a site deemed to be of unique scientific and cultural significance by three UK and global agencies. All manner of birds, insects and animals will be affected and many endangered; all for the flimsy promise of some jobs that can’t be guaranteed.” Once you’ve seen this place it’s difficult not to be persuaded by the objectors’ arguments. These shapes have been formed by natural forces over millions of years. They are a special gift to Scotland bequeathed by nature and it seems unthinkable that they are soon to be nipped and tucked into a manicured confection on the whim of corporate America. Keiser’s plans are accompanied by the usual accoutrements of these types of projects: hundreds of jobs and a boost to the local economy. Trump’s golf resort at the Menie estate in Aberdeenshire carried the same guarantees, yet four years later they have yet to materialise. And it’s not as though Scotland needs more golf courses. There are already seven within a 20-minute drive of this place. The final decision on the development now rests with the Scottish government, who may yet choose to call in the project and ultimately to jettison it. Environmentalists feel Holyrood owes them one. Five years ago it overruled the decision of the local authority and granted planning consent to Trump’s resort. That decision was reached by a government headed by Alex Salmond, a golf enthusiast. His successor Nicola Sturgeon does not play golf and she is also considering another independence referendum. For this she will require the support of every Scottish Green MSP. One of then, John Finnie, who represents this area, has been a vocal opponent of the golf course. Matters could become very interesting if he were to make the issue the price of his support. The managers of the Coul Links proposal are adamant that they can overcome all environmental objections and insist that protection of flora and fauna will form a key part of their strategy. The US businessman Todd Warnock, who is involved in the development, said: “After more than three years of thorough consideration of the project, we are excited to win such overwhelming support from the committee. The development has been comprehensively and fairly assessed by the two statutory bodies as well as the competent planning authority and we now look forward to bringing to Scotland the economic benefits of such a prestigious golf course.” In Embo, Andrew Mackay was having none of it. “They say that only a small part of this site will be altered. But that’s like painting a moustache on the Mona Lisa and saying that only a small area has been affected.”