When young athletes on the rise get close to a big moment they can turn into robots, as if erecting an invisible wall to avert all unwanted distractions that might disrupt their carefully assembled programme. Sloane Stephens, affable and interesting all fortnight, tried to pull the shutters down, ever so politely, on Friday as she contemplated the challenge of beating the world No 1, Simona Halep, in the French Open final on Saturday. But she allowed some light in. Once one of the angry young brigade on the Tour, cavilling at the smallest perceived slight in misinterpretation, the 25-year-old American has been a singular beam of contentment – although she did say she would be happy if no one wrote a single word about her. “I just try to go day to day, take it moment by moment,” she said. “I try not to put too much pressure on myself. That’s the easiest way to compete, when you’re not thinking about too many things. If you’re struggling with things and you’re not happy, it makes it a lot more difficult to have good results or success.” Since returning last year from 11 months out with injury, Stephens has blossomed, winning her first major title in New York against her good friend Madison Keys, whom she also beat in the semi-finals here. “Yeah, I’ve had some great results. A lot of hard work went into it, a lot of adversity, a lot of ups and downs. A lot of emotional stuff: am I ever going to be the same, am I ever going to play good again at a high enough level, am I a protected ranking? There were so many things that went into it. “Now I’ve matured a little bit and have recognised the opportunities when they have been presented. The most important thing is that I have taken those opportunities and done a lot with them. “When you have confidence, you can do anything. When you’re calm and relaxed and you don’t panic and you stay steady, you allow yourself to work through obstacles and adversity – or anything that might happen on the court that you were not prepared for.” It is the fear of the unexpected that keeps Stephens – and all athletes – wary of intrusion. So, while guarded about analysing her opponent’s tennis, she did say: “She’s a great player. She’s No 1 in the world for a reason.” If anything, Halep is more complex than Stephens. Her courtside contretemps with her Australian coach, Darren Cahill, are becoming set pieces of legend on the WTA Tour, although she, too, has been relatively cool here. Reaching the final has secured her No 1 ranking and she brings the experience of two previous finals here – losing to Maria Sharapova in 2014 and Jelena Ostapenko last year – and one in Melbourne, where she lost to Caroline Wozniacki. She has had some crazy ups and downs for a good player, dropping first sets here to Alison Riske and Angelique Kerber, but finding a rhythm again in the semi‑finals against Garbiñe Muguruza. “It’s my favourite grand slam,” she said. “I feel like home here.” She did not offer a lot else, except to say she is hoping for a fine day and a nice crowd, but she did concede she is happier now than she once might have appeared. The nerves might not jangle so loudly or the head drop so quickly as it used to. “I’m a little bit different now because I have more experience,” she said. “I’m more relaxed about this situation. I expect to give everything I have and to try to play my best tennis. “It’s nice that in 12 months I have played one more final in Melbourne. I feel good. I feel great in this position. Hopefully tomorrow I will be better than previous ones.” So, a happy, smiling final: that would be a fitting conclusion to what has been a pretty good tournament. And Halep might just wear the bigger smile at the end.