Peace, aged 11, is perusing an email from a council whistleblower. “Look,” he says urgently. “He says he can give us more details but he’s afraid of losing his job.” At the next table, Emma, also in year 6, wants to hear from the council about why it is threatening to fine homeless people £2,500. “There might be a reason,” she says, giving the council the benefit of the doubt. But fellow pupil Raheema thinks it’s wrong to fine people when they have no money. “Shocked and surprised” is her assessment of how readers will feel when they find out how homeless people are being treated by Oxford city council . These pupils at Linton Mead primary in south-east London have taken on the roles of reporters and editors as part of a Guardian Foundation project to teach them how to unpick fact from fiction, and bias from balance. Run in partnership with the National Literacy Trust, Google and the PSHE Association, the Newswise project, which launches nationwide this autumn, has two aims. “Fake news is causing stress and anxiety when young people can’t find a solid foothold in the world, so it’s about developing literary and critical thinking skills, but it’s also about children’s wellbeing,” says Angie Pitt, the director of Newswise. With a US president who repeatedly tweets that the media is making stuff up, and who is often accused of doing the same, fake news couldn’t be bigger news. How citizens perceive the content and context of what is presented as news has become a pressing concern to legislators: the parliamentary select committee for digital, culture, media and sport has been taking evidence for its inquiry into fake news, and on Wednesday the all-party parliamentary group on literacy will launch its report on fake news and the teaching of literacy skills in schools. This will include recommendations for government and the education sector on how children can be empowered to test the vast array of information they freely access via a multitude of sources. Last year, Beth Hewitt, the director of broadcast media at Salford University, collaborated with CBBC, the children’s TV channel, to find out from 300 nine to 14-year-olds what news they trust, and why. She discovered that while they thought they could distinguish fake news from real stories, in practice they weren’t as savvy as they imagined. There is growing concern, says Hewitt, that if the media industry ignores the problem of fake news, “then young people will actually not be able to trust in anything, and there will be a fear that whatever they’re reading is not the truth”. In the US, the News Literacy Project is well established: in the UK, the Economist Educational Foundation has been working with state schools since 2013, teaching students how to question information and arguments in the news. “They learn how information can be presented and shaped in different ways by being content creators themselves,” says Emily Evans, the foundation’s chief executive. “The students learn that all news stories have multiple perspectives by taking part in discussions across different communities with different opinions and experiences.” While critical literacy is not a curriculum requirement at primary level, it is at secondary, and the need for children to develop and hone their ability to discern what is true and what isn’t is growing. Earlier this year, the BBC launched an initiative for secondary students which aims to combat the spread of fake news. It involves high-profile reporters going into schools to discuss journalistic standards and explain how sources’ claims are verified, as well as offering students access to its new iReporter game. “It’s a vitally important part of a good society that people can trust the news that they read and talk about with their friends and families,” says Kamal Ahmed, the BBC’s economics editor. Ahmed recently ran a workshop session at his old school in west London, where he says that students weren’t yet cynical about journalism, but brought “an enquiring sense” that they wanted to understand how news was being constructed so they could better grasp what was really going on in the world. “Their big question to us was how can you make sure what you broadcast is trusted?” he recalls from discussions with students. “In a society like ours we want engaged people who have the tools to navigate these complicated worlds. We can’t let the peddlers of malicious information win this battle.” In testing the Newswise teaching materials, Linton Mead’s pupils faced a range of stories to assess for credibility and newsworthiness. They soon discovered that the two are not always the same. Social justice is clearly a big concern for these year 6s, with all but one group picking the homelessness story – once it has been stood up as genuine – as their priority for investigation. During a Q&A afterwards, one girl asks: “How do you stop your emotions from affecting how you write a story?” It’s an issue of obvious relevance to any reader trying to assess how objective a news report might be, and demonstrates that this pupil has been able to reflect on her own reaction to being asked to report on an issue that touched her. Newswise will initially last a year, but there are hopes it will become a five-year programme. “If we achieve one thing,” says Pitt, “it will be to encourage a pause … encouraging children to take that time to think, and to have at their fingertips some questions about how to test information before sharing it.”