Morrissey has postponed all his UK and European tour dates in July, his management has said. A statement from representatives of the former Smiths frontman said concerts in the UK, Germany and Sweden had been postponed “due to logistical circumstances” beyond their control, but promised to reschedule the events. The announcement comes after Morrissey’s manager, Peter Katsis, attacked plans to hold an anti-racism party near the singer’s concerts in Manchester on 7 and 8 July organised by former Hacienda nightclub DJ Dave Haslam. Reacting to the postponement of Morrissey’s UK dates, Haslam said: “I sympathise with fans who made plans to see him, we know what it’s like to be let down by Morrissey.” Earlier this month, Morrissey voiced his support for the former English Defence League leader Tommy Robinson after he was jailed for breaking contempt of court laws, criticising the “shocking treatment” of Robinson, whose real name is Stephen Christopher Yaxley. Morrissey has denied accusations of racism after several controversial comments, including the claim that “halal slaughter requires certification that can only be given by supporters of Isis”. In a Facebook post on Thursday before the postponements, Katsis wrote: “The Guardian Gets It Wrong Again! Let’s get real. ‘Former Morrissey fans’ have not organized anything. That ‘Has-Been Haslam’ character was never a Morrissey fan. “And his agenda, stated as using music to spread peace, could not be any further from the truth. He is simply using the situation to gain some much needed attention to himself.” But Haslam said Morrissey’s management team were clearly “rattled” by the planned Love Music Hate Racism event. He added: “If dates are rescheduled, we’ll be happy once again to provide an alternative event in the city, one that counters Morrissey’s support for Tommy Robinson and the far right.” I sympathise with fans who made plans to see him, we know what it’s like to be let down by Morrissey. If dates are rescheduled, we’ll be happy once again to provide an alternative event in the city. One that counters Morrissey’s support for Tommy Robinson and the far-right. pic.twitter.com/9ldW2urEEW A statement released by Morrissey’s management announcing the postponement said: “All original purchasers from official ticket outlets will have the full ticket fee refunded, including booking fee, to their credit/debit cards. “Refunds from ticket agents will be actioned from midday on Monday 2 July. The LIHS [Low in High School] World Tour will continue, starting back up in Mexico City on 23 November.”