Despite changes in Australian cricket following the ball-tampering affair, Jos Buttler expects Justin Langer’s team to be as hard-nosed and verbally adversarial as ever in the upcoming one-day series against England. Australia will take on Eoin Morgan’s side in the first of five Royal London one-day internationals at The Oval on Wednesday without the former captain Steve Smith and the opener David Warner, the pair banned for their part in the plot to doctor the ball with sandpaper in the third Test against South Africa at Cape Town in March. The fallout from that scandal also led to Darren Lehmann resigning as head coach and Langer, his successor, insisted this week that the players would adhere to a stricter code of on-field behaviour under his leadership after years of opponents complaining about Australia’s verbal hostility. Although Langer admitted this new‑look Australian set-up would continue to use sledging as a legitimate tactic, he was at pains to say this should not stray from “banter” to outright abuse. Buttler, who was not involved in the Ashes last winter but did play a leading role in England’s 4-1 one-day series win that followed, is not expecting Australia to have lost any of their competitive zeal in what will be their first cricket since their tour of South Africa. Buttler, who broke into Somerset’s team at the end of Langer’s final season as captain at Taunton in 2009, said: “He’s obviously a really successful coach in Australia and some of the mantras he lives by I saw a little bit at Somerset – a highly organised, competitive team with a hard-nosed edge. “I think they will still have that side. It’s international cricket, it’s going to be hard and competitive. I think they are coming as well with a bit of a point to prove and they’ll want to put that [the ball-tampering scandal] behind them and play cricket again. So I expect a really tough series.” Asked whether he expected Australia to be as aggressive with their sledging as they have been previously, Buttler said: “It’s an interesting one. Everyone determines the word ‘sledging’ differently. My interpretation is completely different to yours or Eoin Morgan’s or Justin Langer’s. So there’s always going to be grey areas. “I don’t know what my definition of sledging is. Personal abuse? You wouldn’t walk down the street and abuse a postman for not delivering letters in the right way. But at the same time in professional sport – Steve Waugh called it mental disintegration – if you’re making someone in the middle think about something else and they’re not 100% focused on the ball coming you’re gaining an advantage. “There’s so many grey areas I don’t know what is allowed and what isn’t. People always say ‘you know where the line is’ but whose line is it? It’s a hard area to judge.” As well as the absence of Smith and Warner, Australia will also be without the Ashes-winning pace triumvirate of Josh Hazlewood, Pat Cummins and Mitchell Starc in this series. With England ranked the world’s No 1 one-day team Buttler, who has been rested from the one-off ODI against Scotland in Edinburgh on Sunday, is optimistic. “We go into the series very confident and excited. England v Australia are always games you want to win and taking the spoils is enjoyable.”