Sarai Walker has been fielding a lot of questions about body image recently, and there are some for which she still doesn’t have an answer. The author of the feminist instant classic, Dietland, now adapted into a 10-part TV series, was asked at a Q&A which movie characters she has seen herself in. “My answer,” she says, “was: ‘I’ve never seen that’ … I’ve never had that connection, a character that reflected me as a fat person. It was always the opposite for me; cringing, you know? Like with Fat Monica from Friends. There would be this dread while watching – ‘Oh, God, there’s not going to be a fat person in this, is there? I know I’ll be humiliated.’” Dietland centres on Plum, a 135kg (21st)-plus woman working in the glossy-magazine industry. Plum isn’t overweight in the usual Hollywood sense – think Jan from Grease (a regular-sized woman wearing a thick jumper) or Amy Schumer in the recently released film I Feel Pretty. Plum is fat, and the story centres on the diet industry, objectification, fat shaming, terrorism and feminist rage. Neither the character nor the subject matter is something the entertainment industry has a particularly good record of depicting. If you are fat, the dread that Walker mentioned becomes the Pavlovian response to a larger person walking on to the screen. Watching TV and film from a fat perspective – and particularly a fat woman’s perspective – can be like gazing through a looking glass into a world where you and those who look like you don’t exist (male characters are allowed more leeway with their weight, although fat men on screen are certainly stigmatised, too). When a fat female character does squeeze into the narrow frame the entertainment industry has created, reasons for their uncomfortable presence swiftly follow, because no fat woman in mainstream cinema and television is just fat – that extra flesh has to serve a purpose. The first time I noticed this was while watching a US crime drama years ago, one of those that features a death on the beach or at a fashion show every week, so the skinny, sexy corpse can wear a bikini. My vague memory is that the victim was a teenage girl who had died in a poisoned prom dress. The killer had been a fat girl, jealous of her victim. The evidence that solved the case was Cheetos dust on the seams of the dress. Watching these shows, you soon figure out that if a fat person shows up, they have probably killed someone because of their own self-hatred. In the case of the cheese-puffs-dust killer, she hadn’t even stopped eating to do it. There are a few other reasons for fat people to show up on screen, beyond murder. We are usually in comedy and the jokes often relate to our weight: Pitch Perfect character Fat Amy (played by Rebel Wilson), and Melissa McCarthy in Bridesmaids and Spy. Matt Lucas and David Walliams found great success in Little Britain by wearing rolls of foam and plastic to look like naked fat women – that being the extent of the joke, and one they returned to a lot. If it is a drama, the weight will be there for pathos. Kate battling with the scales in This Is Us. Willamena at her weight loss camp in Huge. Martha “Dumptruck” Dunnstock’s suicide attempt in 1988’s Heathers. Heather in EastEnders was pretty piteous, too – when she wasn’t ruminating about her love of eating cheese. Heather Trott, both comedy and tragedy. Fat characters can also be a handy tool to help the central (always slim) characters grow. Not grow bigger, obviously. Grow as people. In the 90s, if a new girl showed up on the teen shows California Dreams or Saved by the Bell who didn’t fit the standard template for a love interest for protagonists Sly and Zack, it was a safe bet she was there for Very Special Episode reasons. For Sly, Allison was blind. For Zack, Wendy was fat. When Walker was growing up, fat women on screen embodied tragedy, particularly when they were female celebrities. “I came of age in the 90s,” she says, “when every fat person in the media was trying to lose weight, always portrayed as miserable and desperate to be thin.” It’s easy to remember famous female faces who have sold that message of misery, so perpetually is it played out through magazines, talkshows and diet ads. Oprah Winfrey, Kirstie Alley and Ricki Lake in the US. Natalie Cassidy, Claire from Steps and Anne Diamond in the UK. Fat celebrities who have filled up our screens with their tragedy, then their triumph when they lose the weight. This narrative of sadness and pity has an effect on the reception to a fat body. Walker has noticed the impact in reactions to Dietland. “In the first two-thirds of the book, Plum is the kind of fat person we usually see, right? Like: oh, poor Plum, she’s miserable. Then she switches to a more angry person. There were a lot of readers who said: ‘I don’t like Plum at the end of Dietland, I liked her at the beginning. The tone of the book changed and I don’t like that.’ A lot of people were responding to – and were comfortable with – the fact that she’s the ‘miserable fatty’. But when she becomes a badass and fights back, they’re uncomfortable – because she’s not miserable, it’s very disorientating. I think a lot of people are going to find it threatening in the show. They might like to think about why that makes them uncomfortable.” Plum goes from being scared and sad to angry, an emotional journey visibly fat women have to navigate. We are not supposed to be angry; that is not what the messages we all receive tell us. Extreme weight loss shows continue to do well. Programmes such as My 600lb Life and The Biggest Loser (shows that Roxane Gay, in her memoir Hunger, deemed “anti-obesity propaganda” – as well as “wish fulfilment”) are a message to fat people that they can change, but more importantly, that they should. Fat is wrong, fat is shameful, fat people are miserable and shouldn’t exist – unless it is for entertainment purposes. Yet, we do. For Walker, it was vital that Plum shouldn’t be a weak and watery Hollywood-accepted version of fat; this wasn’t a role for a skinny actor in a chunky jumper, and there wouldn’t be a makeover and reveal at the end. This was a serious consideration when she was fielding offers from TV companies. “I kept thinking, is this going to be a Gwyneth-Paltrow-in-a-fat-suit type thing, like in Shallow Hal? Or an Amy Schumer-sized person? That was my main fear. I was like: “You’re going to have a real fat person playing this role, right? Like, a real fat person?” That was probably the most important thing to me.” Plum is played by Joy Nash in the series and she looks right. To see Plum on screen finding her anger, and finally starting to live, feels revolutionary. She doesn’t serve as a lesson for other characters before disappearing in time for the next episode, and we are not invited to look at her with pity or cruel laughter – she just exists, as herself, as Plum. Writers and directors haven’t really known what to do with fat characters through the years. The nicknames yelled at fat people are a reminder of the times they have tried: Jabba the Hutt; Ursula (The Little Mermaid); The Penguin; the dancer in Return of the Jedi with six tits; Big Bertha the Bouncer at the Boom Boom Bar (Super Mario Bros); Sherman Klump (The Nutty Professor); Tracy Turnblad (Hairspray); Precious; the fat vampire from Blade. When putting her own list together, the writer Lindy West searched hard for a positive fat role model and finally came up with Mrs Potts from Beauty and the Beast. A teapot. “I’m hoping [for] a change in the culture,” says Walker, of Dietland’s debut, “that we’re going to see more fat people and smarter portrayals of fat people.” Considering what has gone before, I hope so, too. • Dietland is now available on Amazon Prime Video.