The family of a retired British couple believed to have been murdered in their home in Jamaica have said they are “completely devastated”. Charlie and Gayle Anderson, aged 74 and 71, had recently retired to the Caribbean island from Manchester, their family said. The Jamaican police has opened a double-murder investigation after the couple’s bodies were found with serious injuries by officers in their home in Mount Pleasant, on the island’s Portland parish. In a statement issued through the Foreign and Commonwealth Office on Sunday, the couple’s sons said: “Charlie and Gayle were pillars of the community in Manchester and Jamaica, and were hugely popular and loved by many. “They were just beginning the next chapter of their lives, retiring to Jamaica before this terrible tragedy. We are completely devastated and ask for privacy at this extremely difficult time.” The couple had “enjoyed a long and happy marriage” of 55 years and left behind four grandchildren and one great-grandchild, the statement added. The pair, also known as Florence and Halford, were found dead on Friday, according to local media reports although the FCO would not confirm when they were discovered. The Jamaica Gleaner, the country’s oldest and best-known newspaper, reported that the couple had been the victims of fraud and had reported the matter to police before they were found dead. Dep Supt Troyville Haughton was quoted by the Sunday Gleaner as confirming that the police discovered Charlie Anderson’s body close to a primary school shortly after 1.30pm local time on Friday. His wife’s body was found a short time later at a different location. Residents in Mount Pleasant, a farming community about 10 miles north of Kingston, said they were shocked by the killings. Jerome Heslop, a farmer, told the Gleaner: “I am baffled by these murders. They have given so much to this community, and they have never said no to anyone. “Each time they are in Jamaica, they bring back shoes, clothes, tablets, food stuff, school items, and other stuff for residents. It is a wicked and sinful act, and the community has lost two great people.”