Twenty years ago at the World Cup in France, the Mexico striker Cuauhtémoc Blanco drew international acclaim when he introduced the world to the cuauhtemiña (“the bunny hop”) a playful move in which he gripped the ball with his feet and leapt between two seemingly impenetrable defenders, consequently escaping their tackles. A week later, against Belgium, Blanco cemented his reputation when he scored one of the most memorable goals in Mexican history, a side-footed volley that helped pave the way to qualification for the last 16. Blanco retired from soccer in 2015, at the age of 42, but this summer his reputation as one of Mexico’s greatest players is casting a shadow on a different profession: politics. Blanco is currently the favorite to win the election for governor of the state of Morelos, a short distance south of Mexico City. For someone with little more than two years of political experience that might seem remarkable. But that would not be taking into consideration the current state of the country’s politics and the influence of soccer in Mexico, where El Tri are central to the nation’s identity – particularly as they prepare to play Brazil in the World Cup on Monday. Blanco grew up in Tepito, a neighborhood in Mexico City with a reputation for poverty and roughness. It may be best known for the number of legendary boxers who have come from there. “Everyone knows that if you come from the fierce barrio of Tepito, you know how to fight in life, to struggle for life,” the historian and commentator Enrique Krauze told the Guardian. “It has that aura.” Blanco fit the bill. “Cuauh” or “Temo,” as he is known, became famous for his goals as well as his provocative celebrations. Once, after scoring a penalty, he mimicked a dog urinating in the goal. Sometimes he would dance around defenders after he scored. His signature celebratory pose, a nod to the Aztec emperor of the same name, became known as the temoseñal, or the “Temo sign”. Blanco is “an iconic sports figure who became part of Mexico’s national collective consciousness,” says Duncan Wood, the director of the Mexico Institute at the Wilson Center. “He is the most popular soccer player we have ever had,” says the journalist Carlos Puig, who has covered Blanco’s political career for Milenio TV. “We have had better soccer players, but more popular? I don’t think so.” Blanco had his detractors too, even if they were in the minority. “He is not always a man of sympathy,” the novelist and soccer journalist Juan Villoro says. “He is the kind of guy that you can find in the backstreets of dangerous neighborhoods in Mexico. Therefore he has this kind of special charisma. He isn’t likable for many Mexicans. He remains an uncultivated man. He speaks in broken sentences.” Shortly after Blanco retired from soccer, the Social Democratic Party, a small political party, approached him to run for mayor of Cuernavaca, the capital of Morelos. Cuernavaca is known as the City of Eternal Spring. Many Mexico City residents have weekend homes there. Blanco did too. Blanco’s new career is no surprise to Villoro, who points out that Mexican voters, like others around the world, have become tired of career politicians. “It wasn’t a very strange surprise that he decided to run for mayor of Cuernavaca,” Villoro says. “He was very famous and our politics nowadays is in a very confused and terrible situation. People are fed up with politicians and everyone is looking for outsiders. It can be an intellectual. It can be a former movie star. It can be a former medalist in the Olympic games. It can be a fighter for civil rights. Or it can be a soccer player.” Some of the public questioned Blanco’s experience. Doubts were cast about his motivations. It would later be alleged that he had been paid 7m pesos ($353,000) by the Social Democratic Party to run for the office. (Blanco denied this, and reportedly no evidence has been found that any money was exchanged.) Not many seemed to take Blanco seriously as a politician, including Blanco himself. Nonetheless, he won handily. “Cuernavaca is a paradise on earth,” says Krauze, who lives there for part of the year. “At the same time, it’s hell.” To the west of the city is the state of Guerrero, which has one of the highest percentages of drug-related violence in the country. It’s where much of the country’s heroin supply is produced. The most direct route from Guerrero to Mexico City is through Morelos. Krauze calls Morelos “the door from Guerrero to Mexico City.” Not surprisingly, over the last 20 years, Morelos has become synonymous with violence as well. In a recent survey of Morelos voters in the newspaper El Financiero, people said security was their most pressing concern. Perhaps it’s no failure on Blanco’s part that as mayor of Cuernavaca he didn’t reduce the violence. It’s unclear if anybody can. But it wasn’t his only flaw. “In the terrible earthquake we had on 19 September last year, Cuernavaca was very badly hit,” Krauze says. “And I didn’t see much of Cuauhtémoc Blanco’s activity.” His mayorship was “distinctly disappointing,” Wood says. “We thought that that was going to be the last stop in his political career,” Villoro says. “But then Graco Ramirez, the governor of Morelos, committed a terrible mistake and that was to go after Cuauhtémoc Blanco. So Blanco decided to do what he has done many times on the soccer field, to fight back. And this made him a local hero.” According to Puig, the animus between the two began when Ramirez wanted the state to take control of the police throughout Morelos, including in Cuernavaca. Blanco wanted to keep the city’s police department localized. Ramirez had other problems too. Allegations of corruption had exploded under his tenure. Residents had protested against him in the streets. In a poll this past March, his unfavorable rating reached 83%. “We can explain this current political carnival not because of the political virtues of Cuauhtémoc Blanco, but on the contrary, because of the political failures of all the Mexican political class and especially the current governor of Morelos, Graco Ramirez,” Villoro says. In March 2017, after a falling out with his previous political party, Blanco joined the Social Encounter Party (known as PES in Mexico), a conservative, evangelical Christian political party that’s against same-sex marriage and abortion. It’s still not wholly clear if Blanco shares the party’s views. “He never gets into politics,” Puig says. “He only talks about helping people.” Around this time, the party and Blanco began to float the idea of Blanco running for governor of Morelos. In a stroke of political good fortune for Blanco, three months after he joined PES, Andrés Manuel López Obrador (often referred to by his nickname “Amlo”), who is expected to win Mexico’s presidential election this Sunday in a landslide, formed a coalition of seemingly disparate political factions that included Obrador’s own left-leaning Morena party and Blanco’s PES. “Amlo has accepted support of groups that don’t belong to his ideology,” Villoro says. “But we can say that nowadays in Mexico there are no ideologies, and we can even say that there are no real political parties. Cuauhtémoc Blanco belongs to this very extravagant smorgasbord. It’s not a matter of ideas. It’s just a matter of opportunism. It’s realpolitik and nothing else.” In addition to the claim of getting paid to run for mayor, other sordid stories have swirled around Blanco since he took office. There were complaints that he was an absentee mayor. In December 2016, he went on a hunger strike that lasted two days until Mexico’s supreme court issued a stay against attempts to impeach him. There was reportedly an investigation into the allegation that he had two voter ID cards with different residences, which is illegal. Last April, after a local businessman had been murdered in Cuernavaca, the alleged killer reportedly said that Blanco had paid him $10,000 to commit the crime. (Blanco denied the allegations.) Last month, a member of PES claimed that six hitmen had been hired to murder Blanco. Blanco blamed the threats and allegations against him on Ramirez and his administration. These claims are all unproven but what is clear is that politics in Mexico is a dangerous job. Since September, more than 100 politicians have been murdered, including two in the last week alone. In an El Financiero poll last week, 53% of voters in Morelos said they were going to vote for Blanco. His nearest challenger stood at 14%. His victory in Morelos appears as assured as López Obrador’s does nationally. The two have benefitted each other, Krauze said. “It’s like the perfect duo, the man who presents himself as the savior of Mexico and the most renowned soccer player. It’s the best couple imaginable.” Add in the memories of Blanco’s World Cup heroics being refreshed by El Tri’s run in Russia and he could be unbeatable.