The breakdown in sexual communication between men and women cannot be solved by technology alone. Take the dick pic – that singular phenomenon of late-stage capitalist patriarchy. A new study by Southwestern University in Texas says, to nobody’s surprise, that men are more likely to send unsolicited pictures of their genitals to strangers. Nobody seems to know why some men feel compelled to do this. Nor is it clear why so many seem confused that their enthusiasm is so rarely shared by female strangers or by law enforcement. For every lonely genital self-portrait artist trying to harass strangers, there are others looking for approval or attention. Then there is the element of daring that might, if you squint, be mistaken for a grand romantic gesture: for you, beloved, I will gladly infringe section 27 of the Malicious Communications Act 1988 with this carefully angled image of the last turkey in the shop. Another shocking revelation from this study is that women and girls are less likely to send unsolicited nudes to strangers than men – even though it was seen as significantly less offensive when women did so, according to those surveyed. There is more to this than good manners. The sexual power imbalance between men and women means that, if you are female and you take erotic risks, you are more likely to be socially punished, slut-shamed or blackmailed – so you get used to not letting your guard down. Second, there is a difference between a nude and a dick pic. A Lovecraftian closeup of somebody’s downstairs jumble is rarely immediately identifiable. Sending it out, at least if you don’t do it from your verified Twitter account while seeking re-election to public office à la Anthony Weiner, may give you the buzz of the common or garden park-bench flasher without the same guarantee of arrest. It is difficult to imagine a Kelly-Anne Conway type figure doing the same. I don’t want to yuck anyone’s yum here. Exhibitionism can be fun, in the proper, consensual context, and there are reasonably priced clubs you can go to for all that and so much more. But, of course, as we now know all too wearily well, consent is a turnoff for some people. There are those for whom that element of surprise, that risk of getting in trouble, is a big part of the thrill. I imagine there are quite a few people serving life sentences who would argue the same. But maybe there is a gentler explanation. When you get down to it, genital selfies are a matter, quite literally, of perspective. One of the advantages of having a vagina of your very own is that, when it lets you down or gets you in trouble, you don’t have to look it in the eye the next day. Perhaps, on a subliminal level, the humble dick pic is a cry, if not for help, then at least for sympathy: a plea that somewhere out there a stranger might see things, for once, from your point of view.