Paris St-Germain want Paul Pogba, says the Sun, and will fund the move by selling their Italy midfielder Marco Verratti, or by offering him to Manchester United in part-exchange. There are still many uncertainties lingering over the potential deal, including the fact Verratti has been offered a new contract in Paris, and the admission “it is unclear whether United have any interest in moving on Pogba”, but apparently it could still happen. Less likely to happen is a Tottenham move for Anthony Martial, with the Londoners scared off by United’s £75m asking price. Amid rumours of a move to Arsenal, a “high-ranking Sevilla official” has told the Independent that the Argentina playmaker Ever Banega is “not for sale under any circumstances”, though it is not clear whether a club meeting his surprisingly low release clause – estimated in the region of €20m – is one of those circumstances. If it is it would surely make a mockery of the entire concept of release clauses, and if it isn’t it would surely make a mockery of the high-ranking Sevilla official. The Mill’s money is on option two, as it seems is the Independent’s and the high-ranking Sevilla official’s, with the story going on to explain “there is a back-up plan in place should the Argentinian’s release clause be activated”, with that back-up plan being Swansea’s Roque Mesa. Craig Dawson is so determined to leave West Brom that he will put in a transfer request, with the Mirror reporting that the club wants £15m for the 28-year-old defender. Burnley have already had a bid rejected, apparently. The Telegraph, however, says West Ham have had a £15m bid rejected, so where that leaves us it’s hard to know. Adding to the confusion is the Mail, who insist West Ham’s bid was only £12m and the asking price is actually £20m, all of which suggests it is now make-up-a-number-and-stick-it-in-a-newspaper time. West Ham have also failed to sign Jack Wilshere after offering the midfielder just a one-year contract, thought news that the injury Manuel Lanzini suffered just before the World Cup will rule him out for the entirety of next season might force them to reconsider. Juventus, previously tipped to move for Wilshere themselves, have instead made CSKA Moscow’s Aleksandr Golovin their top midfield target and are readying an £18m bid. Wayne Rooney could tie up his move to DC United in the next 48 hours and he might be joined on the plane by Everton team-mate Leighton Baines, who is interesting Chicago Fire and Philadelphia Union. Everton’s top pick as replacement left-back is Bayer Leverkusen’s Wendell, who is valued, a little scarily, at around £32m. Everton have also been linked with RB Salzburg’s 19-year-old attacking midfielder Hannes Wolf. Chelsea will refuse to sell Ruben Loftus-Cheek this summer, though they might send him out on loan again. Crystal Palace and West Ham would both be keen on a season-long loan arrangement, says the Mail. Southampton are about to raid Celtic again, mining the same rich seam that gave them Virgil van Dijk and Victor Wanyama to bring in 26-year-old midfielder Stuart Armstrong for £7m. And in price-tag-slapping news, Peterborough have slapped a £6m price tag on the head of 33-goal striker Jack Marriott, and Brighton have been told they will have to pay £4m to take striker Percy Tau from Mamelodi Sundowns.