The New South Wales Department of Health has announced an inquiry into the disgraced gynaecologist Emil Shawky Gayed and his work for at least four public hospitals after an investigation by Guardian Australia. Health authorities say the section 122 inquiry will examine the surgeon’s work over more than two decades. They say hospitals will make direct contact with any patient who has previously raised issues or complaints in the past regarding the treatment they received from Gayed. But anyone else with concerns about treatment they may have received should call a dedicated telephone line set up at each of the hospitals. The independent investigation will be headed by the senior counsel Gail Furness, known for her work on the child sexual abuse royal commission. The move follows the revelations by Guardian Australia that dozens of women in and around the mid-north coast town of Taree have suffered because of treatment they received from Gayed. Last week the Health Care Complaints Commission announced that it would examine management at the Manning Rural Referral hospital in Taree where Gayed worked, including whether staff working with him had failed to report errors or concerns. A HCCC investigation in June found he had removed women’s reproductive organs without their consent and that many of his patients suffered serious complications. He performed surgery on women despite their conditions in some cases being treatable with bed rest, the investigation found. As a result, the NSW civil and administrative tribunal ruled that he be banned from practising for three years. But dozens of other women have since come forward saying they too have been harmed by Gayed. One patient died after he operated on her and failed to give her appropriate treatment. The independent section 122 review will examine the quality of care and safety of patients treated by Gayed. NSW Health’s deputy secretary, Dr Nigel Lyons, said since the HCCC investigation and the subsequent NSW civil and administrative tribunal ruling, the ministry of health had also conducted an internal investigation.They examined four NSW public hospitals where Gayed worked; Cooma hospital (1994-99); Kempsey district hospital (1990-2003); Manning Base hospital (1999-2016); and Mona Vale hospital (2002-07). The Guardian contacted all the hospitals involved so far in what is a burgeoning public health scandal. A spokeswoman for Cooma said they were currently pulling out their patient archives. The three other public hospitals referred calls to NSW Health officials. The NSW inquiry under Furness will be assisted by Dr Greg Jenkins, a specialist obstetrician and gynaecologist. The inquiry will also look at the management of any complaints, adverse events or performance issues relating to Gayed and subsequent action taken by each local health district. Furness has been asked to report back to NSW Health by 30 September. “Ensuring our patients receive quality and safe care is our priority and I am very sorry that this has not been the case for some women treated in the past by Dr Gayed,” Lyons said. “Our focus is on ensuring any woman with concerns about the care she may have received under Dr Gayed is provided with advice and any appropriate follow-up assessment.”Lyons said each of the four hospitals will make direct contact with any patient who has previously raised issues or complaints concerning Gayed.He encouraged anyone else with concerns about treatment they may have received to call the dedicated telephone line at each of the hospitals. A senior clinician will be available to answer questions and make any appropriate referrals for follow-up care. Mayo private hospital in Taree, owned by Healthe Care, on Friday said it had also launched an investigation into Gayed as a result of reporting by Guardian Australia. Gayed was first registered in 1994 and holds a speciality in obstetrics and gynaecology. He obtained his bachelor of medicine at Ain Shams University in Egypt, documents obtained by Guardian Australia show. He became a fellow of the Australian College of Obstetricians and Gynaecologists in 1993. The Guardian has attempted to contact Gayed about the allegations against him. Today a woman who said she was his wife answered the door at what is believed to be his home on Sydney’s northern beaches. She said she was aware of the inquiries around her husband but did not want to talk as she herself was sick . Neighbours spoken to by the Guardian said they had not seen Gayed himself for a number of weeks. 