It has been a momentous week for Turkey – but for reasons that have little direct bearing on today’s nationwide elections. In a ceremony thousands of miles away in Forth Worth, Texas, the Turkish air force took delivery of its first Lockheed Martin F-35A joint strike fighter, known as the Lightning II – possibly the best combat jet in the world. Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, Turkey’s president, whose government has ordered 100 F-35s, appears well satisfied with the multibillion-dollar deal. The planes will enable Ankara to project military firepower across the Middle East and beyond. National prestige will be enhanced. It is the sort of thing Erdoğan loves. But Turkey’s enthusiasm is not entirely shared in Washington, where Congress is trying to block the sale. Its anger is focused on Turkey’s recent actions in Syria, its collaboration with Iran and human rights abuses. But what has really upset the Americans is Erdoğan’s parallel purchase of Russian S-400 anti-aircraft missiles that are designed to shoot down F-35s. It seems Erdoğan wants it both ways – and that’s a familiar problem. The row accurately reflects the ambivalence that is now widely felt among the western democracies towards Turkey under his leadership. This in turn reflects deep divisions within Turkey itself, as revealed by the election campaign. The US and Europe need Turkey for a host of strategic, political, practical and geographical reasons. But Turkey under Erdogan is proving a less than constant friend. Not so much an ally, it is increasingly seen as a threat. In an extraordinary open letter published last week, members of Congress lambasted Erdoğan’s record. “Contrary to its Nato obligations, Turkey is actively operating to undermine US interests around the world. Turkey’s repeated military actions against American interests, relentless degradation of human rights and democracy under President Erdoğan, and clear intention to build a strategic partnership with Russia have completely eroded the US-Turkey relationship,” it said. Russian missiles aside, Erdoğan’s confrontational behaviour in northern Syria, where he has threatened US troops working with Kurdish forces to defeat Isis, has left the Pentagon asking whose side he is on. Turkey’s military incursions into northern Iraq in pursuit of Kurdish PKK militants are destabilising. Likewise, Erdoğan’s de facto alliance with Iran is another big worry. On the other hand, the US wants and needs Turkey’s help for a multitude of reasons. It has use of an important military airbase at Incirlik, south-west Turkey, which gives it region-wide reach. It knows there can be no lasting settlement in Syria without Ankara’s blessing. And Turkey is, or used to be, a vital buffer against Russian expansionism in the Black Sea region, the Caucasus and the Balkans. European governments are in a similar bind. They value Turkey as a secular, democratic and pro-western outpost in a region where such qualities are rare. They still, in theory, see Turkey as a future member of the EU. But they are obliged to temper their deep unhappiness with Erdoğan’s domestic abuses and regular anti-European tongue-lashings in order to retain his cooperation in stemming Syrian refugee outflows and tracking Isis terrorists. Chronic ambivalence is also a fair description of how Turks view their president. Since attaining national prominence, the former Istanbul mayor has become an increasingly divisive figure. For Erdoğan supporters, predominantly rural conservatives, observant Sunni Muslims and nationalists, the man who has dominated political life since 2003 is Turkey’s saviour. His admirers put him on a par with Kemal Atatürk, Turkey’s founding father. Better still, in their view, he has overcome Atatürk’s secular legacy through his devout, neo-Islamist outlook and his implacable hostility to the old, privileged ruling elites. He is credited with transforming Turkey into a modern, urbanised, industrialised economy restored to its rightful place in the ranks of the world’s leading nations. That, in part, is what the F-35 purchase is about. Last week saw another highly symbolic step, further inflating national pride: the first ever runway landing at Istanbul’s shiny new airport. Naturally it was Erdoğan who touched down on board his personal jet. But this was no mere campaign stunt. When the airport opens in October, it will be one of the three biggest in the world, eventually handling up to 250 million passengers a year. It will also house the world’s largest duty-free shopping complex. Yet there is another, darker side to Erdoğan’s Turkey. It is a world where tens of thousands of people have been jailed without trial or dismissed from their jobs under an ongoing state of emergency. It is a shabby world of dictatorial presidential powers, an emasculated parliament, a tame judiciary, a subservient media and unchecked corruption. It is a world where prestige infrastructure projects, like the airport and the $3bn Yavuz Sultan Selim bridge over the Bosphorus, coexist bizarrely with a weakening, overheated economy and national shortages of food staples. The tensions between the opposing views of Erdoğan – friend or foe, hero or villain – will not be resolved by today’s elections. In the hall of mirrors that is Erdoğan’s Turkey, advanced fighter jets are in plentiful supply, but potatoes and onions are scarce. If he wins again, grab a crash helmet and fasten your seatbelt.