The bike hire shop owner in Cap Ferret, near Bordeaux in France, was rueful as he lent me his new e-bike last summer. “You are going to love it,” he said. “They are so much fun but it won’t last. They will limit the speed, make you wear helmets, show your insurance. Enjoy it for now.” He was right. It was fun (and the only way an out-of-shape holidaymaker could do the 40-mile circuit of Arcachon Bay in an afternoon). He was right about the rules too: this week, in an amendment to the motor insurance directive, the EU said that anybody with an e-bike could soon be cycling illegally unless they have third-party insurance, or a government scheme that will pay out in the event of the rider crashing into someone. Cue predictable headlines about “EU bureaucracy gone mad” (no, I’m not going to link to the Express) and outrage from cycling groups around Europe and MEPs. E-bike sales have boomed in Europe in the past few years – not just because they are fun, but also because they are great for commuting and for older cyclists who need a little “assist” getting up hills. In Holland, at the forefront of cycling in Europe, e-bikes make up one in three of all sales. Individual registration and insurance of e-bikes is the proverbial hammer to crack a nut. Irish MEP Brian Hayes called the EU’s restrictions “crazy”, tweeting: “We should be encouraging alternative forms of transport like e-bikes as that will reduce our reliance on cars. E-bikes promote a healthier lifestyle and are more sustainable for our cities.” Insurance will require e-bikes to be registered and maybe even carry number plates. It will stop sales dead in their tracks at the very time we are trying to remove heavily polluting diesels from our streets. Look what happens in cities that make it illegal to cycle without a helmet – almost instantly, cycling rates decline (even if helmets are a good thing). It will be the same if insurance is required. That said, as I hurtled down the Bassin d’Arcachon’s cycle path, a speed camera aimed at cars flashed up that I was exceeding the French 50km/h (33mph) speed limit. It’s easily done on an e-bike. And in Holland, the craze for e-bikes has resulted in a spike in deaths; more people now die on bikes in the Netherlands (206 in 2017) than in cars (201). A quarter of the cyclists who died were on e-bikes, many of them in their 60s – the group most enthusiastic about e-biking. In the UK, 102 cyclists died on the roads in 2016, according to Department for Transport figures. More importantly, for insurance purposes, it is estimated that cyclists are involved in only three pedestrian deaths a year compared with the 300-plus killed by car drivers. Individual registration and insurance of e-bikes is the proverbial hammer to crack a nut. Yet some sort of cover is probably sensible. A levy on the sale of e-bikes could go into a central fund to meet payouts and would probably need to be no more than a few quid. E-bikes are already limited to 15.5mph (the power-assist cuts out when the cycle reaches that speed) and can’t be used by under-14s. They are one of the solutions to our polluted streets and we should be promoting them, not regarding them as an insurance problem.