The hosepipes snaked all the way down to the river Clyde, thick with water, as firefighters smothered the last of the flames on Friday night. While they worked, students and artists, architects and sculptors gathered in the streets around the Glasgow School of Art’s Mackintosh Building – Charles Rennie Mackintosh’s art nouveau masterpiece – to find out what had happened, and ask: four years after the Mack was devastated by fire, how could it happen again? “It should have been the safest building in Glasgow,” Margaret Archbold said. The 48-year-old artist graduated from the school in 1994 and was looking forward to the building’s reopening next year. “It’s so ironic that all that money was put back into restoring the building. It’s devastating to see when you know what’s in that building. It just keeps getting kicked in the teeth. It shouldn’t have happened again.” The Mack has been at the heart of Glasgow since it was completed in 1909, a focus for the community of artists who meet at the Vic cafe and bar opposite for gossip and inspiration. The imposing windows stretching up the building and the mahogany furnishings inside are viewed as the pinnacle of Mackintosh’s achievements. Sir Christopher Frayling, the former chairman of Arts Council England, described it as “the only art school in the world where the building is worthy of the subject”. The first fire came in 2014, starting in the basement and spreading up through wood-lined vent ducts. The famous library, which housed many rare and archival materials as well as original furniture and fittings, was gutted, but more than half of the building and its contents were saved. A fund backed by the actors Peter Capaldi and Brad Pitt and writer and broadcaster Muriel Gray raised £35m to restore the building. The stonework was a particular concern, weakened by being heated to 1,000C then cooled rapidly by hoses. But slowly the refurbished library, carved from longleaf pine and tulipwood as Mackintosh had used originally, began to take shape and the school began using the building again. Friday had been a day of celebration, marked by a graduation ceremony. Students had been packing up the works from their degree show and later heading out into the warm Glasgow night to drink at the Vic and other bars at the top of Garnethill. But at 11.15pm people noticed the flames rising from the roof and called the fire brigade. Aidan Dick, an eyewitness, posted videos of the fire on social media, saying it appeared to have become more intense “in the space of a few minutes”. By 2am police were concerned enough to start evacuating people from their homes in Renfrew Street and the number of firefighters had grown to 120. Residents said the heat was so intense it could be felt several streets away, with chunks of blazing timber and debris raining down on neighbouring buildings. “People were dodging fist-sized flaming embers,” said Jane Sutherland, who graduated from the school in 1982 and could see the blaze from her flat. “All the neighbours were out – we were all worried all the roofs were going up. This area is full of architectural gems. It was terrifying. The smell of it, and you could feel the heat of it two blocks away.” Fire crews ran hosepipes down to the Clyde in search of enough water to douse the flames, but the fire was “well developed” and they struggled to contain it. Flames spread to the Campus nightclub and the O2 ABC venue. It was only by 6am that Iain Bushell, deputy chief officer with the Scottish Fire and Rescue Service, was able to say that the fire was under control. “There are a few hotspots and we can still see flames. It’s difficult to reach because it is such a large building and we are only firefighting from the outside because of the risk of collapse of structural elements..” Even then, the building continued to smoulder well into Saturday afternoon. Fifty firefighters carried on pouring water on the stones, to make the building safe enough to investigate whether the fire had been stopped in time to save the Mack. Fire officers said they were not yet able to get into the building to assess the full extent of the damage or start investigating the cause of the fire. Bushell said: “The roof is gone completely. We cannot get in yet to assess the damage. I can only see from the street but it looks as if the building has been extensively damaged.” Nicola Sturgeon, Scotland’s first minister, said the scene was “heartbreaking”. “The fire has been a devastating blaze, much much worse than the one that took hold of the Mackintosh building four years ago, so the damage is severe and extensive,” she said. “Obviously there are assessments and discussions ongoing with the fire service and building control about the structure of it and its structural safety. Obviously all of us hope the building can be saved but I think it’s too early to draw any conclusions from that.” She said the Scottish government would provide any support required, while the secretary of state for Scotland, David Mundell, said the UK government was ready to help the school “financially or otherwise”. Other Scottish politicians, architects, historians and musicians from bands who studied at the art school, including Travis and Franz Ferdinand, all spoke of their sorrow. “The building was the jewel of Glasgow,” Peter Swanton, a former student, said. “It sat up on Garnethill looking over the entire city. From the hen run at the top of the building, you could sketch the city skyline guided by the straight lines of the window frames. Mackintosh designed this to teach students about perspective.” Swanton had studied at the art school during the renovations, “soundtracked by the noise of construction”. “Nobody cared. Everyone knew this was what needed to happen. The building was rising from the ashes.” Stuart Robertson, director of the Charles Rennie Mackintosh Society, said the fire was a “massive body blow”. “To see some of the work and the beautiful craftsmanship that’s gone on – and I’d seen a glimpse of the new library taking shape – and the studio work and all the painstaking work that’s gone into the restoration is just … people must feel sick.”