“It feels like I’ve been dumped over a text message,” wrote one of my friends. She sounded like a heartbroken lover, but in fact she was talking about the Turkish opposition’s presidential candidate, Muharrem İnce. It was around 11 o’clock on election night, and İnce was missing while people were risking their lives trying to monitor the vote count. Half of the nation – responding to İnce’s call to fight until the end – had been trying to protect their votes from the government’s poll theft. It was like something from a Hollywood romance. The woman, having been disappointed so many times before that she fears opening up to another man, finally lets down her guard to love again – only to be disappointed once more. We, the heartbroken woman in this story, learned that İnce had acknowledged Erdoğan’s victory through an off-the-record text message that he sent to a TV presenter, not thinking that it would be revealed live, on air. The fireworks from the governing party buildings and the celebratory gunshots from the Erdoğan supporters seemed to mock the defeat of democrats and rub our faces in how stupid we were to believe in a leader again after so many disappointments. We did believe in him, but at the end of our film, President Erdoğan gave one of his classic victory speeches as the sole leader of the country, in which he said, “One nation, one flag, one state”. We, the opposition, as it has been very clear for a while, are not included in his understanding of this nation. For those who do not know much about Turkey – except for its current representation in the media as the crazy country where anything can happen – we have been living under a series of maddening political absurdities that have become easier to relate to since Donald Trump came to power and western countries started to have their own share of rightwing populism. However, prior to these elections – the first since the Gezi protests of 2013 – there was real hope for those who opposed the hostile polarisation imposed on the country by Erdoğan. It wasn’t only the rallies of the social democrat candidate İnce that brought millions together despite the embargo on the mainstream media. It was also felt by ultra-nationalists and Islamic conservatives, including the mainly Kurdish party HDP. There was a de facto alliance of democracy against this one-man regime. For the first time in years, the choking sentiment of “Erdoğan the impregnable” was shattered. The man himself was stammering during his rallies, forgetting his words during speeches where the audience was paid to attend, and his election promises – such as free cake in coffee houses – were widely ridiculed. Despite the fact that we all knew it wouldn’t be a fair election, the spirit of “Yes we can”, was in the air. Even the hardcore cynics were having second thoughts during the campaign. The younger generation was expected to play an important role in the outcome, and they were out campaigning for İnce. After years of division, that long-missed feeling of brotherhood among the different factions of our political spectrum was an inspiration. So much so that I wrote: “This is the liberation war of democracy. The western countries should follow the Turkish elections to see how democracy can be saved from rightwing populism even when all the state powers are seized by a ruthless leader.” I wasn’t alone in this enthusiasm; the international media for the first time in years was talking about a Turkish politician who was not Erdoğan. “I am sorry”, said İnce, in his long-awaited speech, one day after the election. He was genuine and open as he apologised for not appearing in public to make a statement the previous night. “If you still want me to lead you through this walk, I am ready.” Since neither his party nor his intensely emotional supporters gave him any credit, he was embarrassed to do it himself: “In only 50 days of an election campaign the votes of my party increased for the first time since 1977. Imagine what we can do in 500 days.” It was met with mixed feelings. Some wanted to get back to their comfortable cynicism, others wanted to try again. In the coming days we will see if İnce will be able to convince the exhausted opposition of Turkey or not. Whatever the result may be, it is thanks to İnce and the other opposition candidates that Turkey showed the entire world how half of our country is ready to join the struggle for democracy, at a time when the concept itself seems in decline globally. In countries like mine, politics is highly emotional and leaders are either loved or hated. Supporters carry their leader’s photo in their wallet like a secret lover. Perhaps this might have seemed an odd phenomenon to western societies. But now there is the “Oh, Jeremy Corbyn” chant and “I love you Bernie” screams. This happens when people are faced with the fear of rightwing populism. Just like the Turkish people, Brits and Americans have started looking for a saviour, a valiant prince who wouldn’t let them down. As I was reprimanded by my self-loathing friends after the election for my childish enthusiasm and passionate behaviour on social media during the night, I thought of the last line from the Al Pacino and Michelle Pfeiffer romance Frankie and Johnny: “Maybe I am crazy but I’d still like to believe in love.” In our case, in Turkey, determined as we are to stand together and continue to hope, that rings true. No matter what. • Ece Temelkuran is a Turkish political commentator and the author of Turkey: The Insane and the Melancholy