The prime minister has warned Conservative MPs that defeats over the Brexit bill would undermine her negotiating position with Brussels. She told a meeting of the backbench 1922 Committee attended by ministers including Philip Hammond and David Davis: “We must think about the message parliament will send to the European Union this week. “I am trying to negotiate the best deal for Britain. I am confident I can get a deal that allows us to strike our own trade deals while having a border with the EU which is as frictionless as possible. “But if the Lords amendments are allowed to stand, that negotiating position will be undermined.” May’s comments came as Tory rebel remainers warned her that her changes to the EU withdrawal bill before its return to the House of Commons this week do not go far enough to head off a revolt. The Conservative MPs told the Guardian that they are not yet satisfied with some of the changes to the legislation despite senior government figures saying they were confident of getting them through. Downing Street insiders believe they can overcome the 15 defeats by the Lords, covering areas including giving parliament a meaningful final vote as well as seeking to keep the UK in the customs union, even though Labour has said it will support all the amendments but one. However, several of the leading Tory remainers who helped inflict May’s only Commons defeat on Brexit when they voted in December for a legal guarantee of a vote on the final deal, insisted their support should not be taken for granted. Former chancellor Ken Clarke told the Guardian he remained determined to back the meaningful vote amendment. “It will mean that parliament will have a decisive say on the broad nature of the final deal and, without it, parliament will be marginalised,” he said. He pointed to last week’s standoff between Theresa May and her pro-leave Brexit secretary, David Davis, as evidence that Downing Street risks being pushed around by the Brexiters. “Without our involvement, the government will face the same situation it faced last week, when the final agreement comes round, because the Brexiters will give threats and briefings against any deal unless they’re satisfied with it. They will have a veto, and parliament will have no effective control.” Former minister Jonathan Djanogly, the MP for Huntingdon, said: “There remain serious issues to be debated and the government line that the rebels have been silenced or placated is simply not true.” Sarah Wollaston, the MP for Totnes and chair of the Commons health select committee, said she was minded to support the Lords amendment on giving parliament a meaningful vote on the exit deal, and called for further concessions on the customs union. “We would like to see further concessions on the amendment on the customs union because it is just a very sensible amendment that says keep it on the table, don’t completely rule it out,” she told the BBC. Leading Tory rebel Nicky Morgan confirmed she would put her name to an amendment, drafted by Oliver Letwin MP, that would replace the word customs “union” with “arrangement”, which was also expected to be backed by a senior Brexiter backbencher. She told reporters: “It buys them time.” Brexit minister Steve Baker said: “The government will look very carefully at what they have tabled and will take a decision on whether or not we can support it.” At least two more Tory rebels told the Guardian they were planning to rebel against the government again, despite whips warning that it could be counterproductive ahead of a key Brussels summit later this month, where May will try to negotiate a trade deal. One said that the updated amendment tabled by ministers on the meaningful vote went quite a long way towards addressing concerns but warned the issue was still “exercising a lot of people”, in particular over what might follow if the government failed to get a deal at all. The Tory MP added: “If there are no more changes I think the rebellion will be quite big. Most people are very firm. There are one or two additional potential rebels who have not yet indicated firmly what they intend to do, but are raising concerns with Downing Street. “Any defeat suffered by a government is never helpful and clearly there is a European council but I think there is a heavy element of normal whips’ tactics there which I don’t think people will be that susceptible to.” Another potential rebel said it would be “pathetic” if parliament was bought off with the promise of a statement after 28 days. “The statement may say we’re leaving without a deal, and it might say: ‘get lost.’” One Tory rebel predicted that “the discussions and big battles” over the customs union would take place when the customs and trade bills returned to the Commons in July instead. Downing Street insiders suggested there would be more discussions with backbench MPs who had outstanding concerns over the bill. One source said: “There have been lots of meetings, we’re keen to engage with all members of the parliamentary party, and I imagine that there will be.” Meanwhile, the EU said that May’s customs plan would create a hard border in Ireland, carrying “serious risks of fraud”, lack of governance and controls of standards. In 11 pages of slides comparing the May and EU proposals for the Irish border, the European commission said “key questions [are] unanswered”; and that May’s plan “does not cover regulatory controls, leading to a hard border”. On tariffs, the EU said there would be issues with collection and allocation of revenue and the definition of the origin of products under strict rules of origin protocols. On VAT it said the UK plan would lead to “piecemeal application” of the rules and post “serious risks of fraud” on a significant source of revenue for member states.