There will doubtless be no shortage of intensity at the sharp end of the French Grand Prix but away from a tight title fight, for many in France it will be an unashamedly emotional affair. For Jacques Laffite, the race’s return to the Formula One calender after a 10-year absence and at the Paul Ricard circuit has special resonance. A pleasure amplified by the obvious joie de vivre the former F1 driver derives from Lewis Hamilton’s performances. France hosted the first grand prix in 1906 and had held 86 further meetings by its last race in 2008 at Magny-Cours. Unsurprisingly a decade on there is a celebratory air at Paul Ricard, which hosted the race 14 times between 1971 and 1990. Laffite knows it well, the charismatic 74-year-old raced at the track in his heyday when driving for Ligier, taking six wins. In the 70s and early 80s, Laffite and France were synonymous. His French team, running in the country’s traditional blue colour, also sported that most Gallic of cigarette sponsors, Gitanes. Laffite retired in 1986 when Alain Prost was in his pomp, having already taken two of his four titles, and the French Grand Prix was a meeting whose future never looked in doubt. Laffite was an F1 commentator for France’s TF1 when the race was last hosted and he believes its resurrection is of real importance. “The people have missed it,” he says. “We have been waiting for 10 years, the French Grand Prix was one of the best in the world for a long time. We love F1 here, its return is good for everybody, especially for France and especially at Paul Ricard.” He took his and Ligier’s first GP win at the 1976 Swedish Grand Prix and stresses how important it was for him to be racing for a French team. At the next round, his home race in Dijon, he and the team realised they had made their mark. “There were so many people that turned up they did not have enough tickets to sell,” he recalls. “It is stressful but I love it, to race in my country. It felt like a real home race, especially with Ligier, and Gitanes in a French blue car. It was fun to see all these people supporting us.” He rates one of his best performances at home as his run at Ricard in 1980. He had claimed pole with a superb lap but, although leading for much of the race, could manage only third after his tyres went off. He is still fond of the circuit, which is using its classic configuration this weekend, and pleased it is hosting the return for the French GP. Perhaps most intriguingly he is looking forward to how Hamilton takes to the challenge. “He is my favourite driver,” he says. “Hamilton is more of a fighter than Sebastian Vettel. When you need it he is able to do something incredible with the car. Vettel is really competitive but is not taking as many risks compared to Hamilton. Hamilton is able to just do things better than Vettel.” It is Vettel, however, who leads Hamilton by one point after a 15-point swing in the Ferrari driver’s favour at the previous grand prix in Canada but the world champion topped the timesheets in both practice sessions on Friday. Hamilton was 0.704sec quicker than Red Bull’s Daniel Ricciardo in second practice, while Vettel was only fifth fastest. The session included a 10-minute red flag period, caused when Sergio Pérez’s Force India lost a wheel at 150mph on the Mistral straight. Mercedes have fitted an upgraded, new specification engine and will expect to match and even better the step forward Ferrari made with their upgrade in Montreal. For McLaren the pressure to perform has proved testing already in France, especially for the racing director, Éric Boullier, who faced stern questions about his future with the team. Hoping to fight for podiums this season, the car has not been the step forward that was expected. Fernando Alonso’s fifth in Australia has been their best result. Boullier had to defend himself after reports of deep unrest in the team and that McLaren had given out 25p chocolate bars as a bonus to staff. One of whom reportedly described the atmosphere as “toxic” and that Boullier and other management figures were seen as “untouchable”. Boullier dismissed the affair as “chocolate-gate”, perpetrated by employees he described as merely “a couple of people who are grumpy”. He also insisted he would not be leaving. “We are all responsible for the car performance. No, I will not resign,” he said. “I’m in my 20th year in racing, I’ve won races and championships with every team I’ve managed before, including Formula One, so this is some record you cannot take away from me.” However while Boullier eventually tired of discussion of the topic he did throw doubt on McLaren’s expectations. The team had switched to Honda engines in 2015 in the belief they needed a works partnership to win. They dropped the manufacturer for Renault after three woeful seasons but Boullier suggested the former relationship was required to challenge at the top. “Red Bull is the proof that you can win races as a customer,” he said. “I think winning a championship is another level, you need to have a works team status.”