Andy Murray has only a day or so to analyse his form and fitness three matches into his comeback but, if he does commit to playing Wimbledon next week – he was still undecided on Wednesday night – he will return as surely the best three-digit outrider in the world rankings since Andre Agassi. The mercurial American, Murray’s childhood hero, drifted as low as No 141 a year after being No 1 in the world during an existential collapse in the 90s before climbing back to the top, and retired a decade later at 36. Agassi’s dip was spiritual and his comeback redemptive; Murray, who has slipped to No 156, is renewing his tennis after the physical trauma of surgery to groin and hip, as well as the internal discussion he must have about his self‑belief in the strongest era of the sport. On another warm afternoon in Eastbourne, Murray, who turned 31 last month, showed in losing to Kyle Edmund over two decent sets in the second round of the Nature Valley International that most of the components he needs to compete at the highest level are in place. Whether he can reproduce it over five sets in a slam, nobody knows, not even him. He served well enough after a slow start, his backhand slice whirred like a butcher’s blade, he struck some pleasing forehand winners and his movement was satisfactory. But Edmund, whose hard, flat groundstrokes are feared on the circuit, was pretty much in control at the end, and he won 6-4, 6-4 in an hour and 40 minutes. “I feel all right,” Murray said of his body’s reaction to two matches in three days. He said he would probably decide before the draw on Friday morning but would not play an exhibition match. “I don’t feel like I get as much out of them as competitive matches.” He added: “I don’t anticipate any issues from today’s match. With each match I’m trying to gain information about where I’m at physically and where my game is at. Today I was reacting a lot rather than being the one that was dictating on my own serve. They are the sort of things that when you play against the best players, that tells [you] a little bit. “Maybe there are things I can do to improve over the next few days or maybe there are not. I’ll need a little bit more time. There is no risk [to his hip] of me playing tennis just now. It’s just whether I feel like I’m able to do myself justice. I want to be able to compete properly. If I don’t feel like I can do that, then I won’t play. If I do and physically I feel ready, mentally I’m in the right place, then I’ll go for it.” This was, some said, the future of British tennis against the recurring past, but Edmund – who plays Mikhail Kukushkin next – resisted the idea it represented a changing of the guard. “He’s the best ever British player and one of the best tennis players that’s ever lived,” he said, looking back on the time when they started working together at Murray’s Miami winter training camp six years ago. “For me to be a young 17-year-old who just got a pro ranking, it was amazing to be part of that. And all these years later it was weird playing him at Queen’s first [in 2016], and now to be on the winning end. But that’s sport. It happens. You have to be selfish and win. He probably did the same thing when he beat Tim [Henman] for the first time [at Basel in 2006].” There is no denying the operation Murray had in Melbourne in January has pinched a yard or two of pace from his trademark retrievals, especially when he moves to the right off his left leg, and, while Edmund was alive to that vulnerability, he said later he did not prey on it just because of the injury. Edmund is just the fifth British player to beat Murray, alongside Henman, Matthew Hilton, David Sherwood and Tom Greenland. Victory for Murray on Wednesday was always going to be in the performance rather than the result. After breaking a 342-day absence at Queen’s last week with a three-set workout over two hours and 39 minutes against Nick Kyrgios, he beat Stan Wawrinka in style in an hour and 17 minutes here on Tuesday, even if the Swiss was struggling with his own knee troubles. One out of three is not bad. Murray had his chances against Edmund, and the crowd seemed evenly split – although sentiment for the triple-slam knight of tennis grew as he began to struggle. As Murray dug deep to hold for 4-5 in the first set, there were successive shouts from the packed stands of “Come on, Andy”, “Come on, Kyle”… and “Come on, both of you.” But there was little the Scot could do about a second-serve 117mph ace down the T that delivered the set to Edmund. The second frame was old-fashioned attrition, Murray broken twice and saving five of seven break points, then breaking back before a wicked Edmund backhand down the line finished the job. Johanna Konta has lost to the world No 2, Caroline Wozniacki, in the third round at Eastbourne. The 27-year-old made a promising start but her preparations for Wimbledon, which begins on Monday, were undermined by a 4-6, 6-1, 6-4 defeat. Wozniacki, who had lost her previous two matches against Konta, progresses to the quarter‑finals where on Thursday she will meet Ashleigh Barty of Australia. Playing in her home town and against an opponent whose natural strengths are not suited to competing on grass, Konta made an impressive start. She broke Wozniacki in the first game and went 2-0 up to build a sense of momentum. Even when she dropped serve to allow the Dane back to 3-3 she responded by breaking Wozniacki again and closing out the set. During her victory against Aleksandra Krunic on Tuesday there were hints of the inconsistency that undermined her in the second set against Wozniacki. Konta had hinted this week at plans to play with greater aggression but it was that which began to undermine her when Wozniacki capitalised on her coming to the net. After avoiding dropping the opening game on her serve, the Dane performed clinically, was gifted a further break when Konta sent a forehand long and then converted a fifth break point to secure the set. The Briton’s frustration grew at the same rate she appeared to be losing her confidence. Konta increasingly attempted to force play which particularly suited Wozniacki with the short ball and contributed to unforced errors. She held at 0-40 down to move to 3-4 but eventually proved incapable of resisting when, for the fifth time this year, she lost against one of the world’s leading players after taking the first set. The promising Cameron Norrie, 22, reached the quarter-finals of the men’s competition after defeating fellow Briton Jay Clarke 6-4, 6-3. He will next face Slovakia’s Lukas Lacko, who earlier overcame the top seed Diego Schwartzman 4-6, 6-4, 7-5. Press Association