Paul Gustard put on a brave face when addressing the fact that 14 tries have been conceded in the past two matches by claiming that more are being scored at international level and pointing out how England themselves have scored 11. Of more concern will be the 53 missed tackles across both matches. Gustard is a proud coach and certainly the defea last week will have hurt but it seems obvious that his imminent departure to join Harlequins has had an effect on the national squad. Gustard’s career highlight with England remains the second Test in the 3-0 series victory in Australia in 2016 – a remarkable defensive performance in a 23-7 win. That, too, followed a chaotic and high‑scoring series opener – albeit one that England won – but given the circumstances, if he can instil similar resilience this weekend it would eclipse that unforgettable backs-to-the-wall display in Melbourne. Martin Johnson used to bemoan England’s penalty count against, so too Stuart Lancaster and it has become a familiar refrain under the current management. Including free-kicks, England gave away 17 against South Africa and while Eddie Jones has said “all the smart guys tell you it’s got to be under 10, but the data doesn’t show you that”, the tally in the first Test last week was simply too high. Again the key area is the breakdown and if Brad Shields can show England the way there he will take some shifting from the No 6 jersey. It is easy to expect too much of Shields considering he has been in camp for less than a fortnight but if he can assess how the breakdown will be refereed early, duly adapt and encourage his teammates to follow he will confirm suspicions he can be the leader of the pack England do not have without Dylan Hartley. The sight of Maro Itoje tumbling as Faf de Klerk scored South Africa’s first try in Johannesburg was frankly embarrassing. It was clear Itoje had been charged with getting stuck into South Africa’s livewire scrum‑half but the more he tried the less impact he had. Itoje had a poor Six Nations but found his best form with Saracens when sticking to what he does best – commanding the lineout and being a nuisance at the breakdown without trying to force things. If De Klerk is to be marked it should be the responsibility of his Sale teammate Tom Curry while if Itoje is to impact at the breakdown the way he does for Saracens he needs guidance from his scrum-half Ben Youngs. Youngs did not have a great game last weekend but he, like many others, needs one , and dictating a steady flow of numbers to the breakdown, without leaving England short in defence, would be a start. What a difference a day may make. England have consistently denied altitude was a factor last week but South Africa – players, coaches and World Cup winners alike – have been queuing up to disagree. The theory goes that somewhere between a week and a month is the optimum to fully acclimatise, but another suggests arriving at altitude as late as possible can also pay off. England went to Johannesburg on the Thursday before the first Test, thereby falling between two stools, but they did not head to Bloemfontein until afternoon. Eddie Jones has stuck to his guns over his decision to base England in Durban for the tour but it must be said that part of the reason he picked this particular base was to replicate what he wanted to do at next year’s World Cup and fly in and out of the host cities. It should also be said World Rugby announced he could not a couple of months ago. It was nothing short of staggering to read that Jonny May put England’s collapse last weekend down to how they had “shocked themselves” with how good they were in the first 20 minutes. Before the tour started Eddie Jones did not expand on “there is a way to play rugby at altitude and we intend to play that way” but the opening 20 minutes last week suggested that the New Zealand blueprint – where both the All Blacks and the Super Rugby teams try to blow the South Africans off the park in the first half – was being followed. It does not always work, as the 2017 Super Rugby semi-final at Ellis Park demonstrated, but that England did not have the conviction to see it through to half-time, having established a 24-3 lead, is worrying indeed. Owen Farrell carries the can as captain but he alone cannot be blamed. For it takes collective responsibility to keep the foot on South Africa’s throat.