Cape Town’s water shortage is thankfully easing and so, at long last, is the English rugby drought. There was nothing remotely pretty about their display on a damp, blustery afternoon but, even with the series gone, the touring team finally have something to declare on their return to Heathrow. Rather than a sixth successive Test defeat niggling away at them all summer they can now lie on the beach dreaming of slightly rosier times ahead. Eddie Jones will be suitably relieved and so will his captain, Owen Farrell, whose haul of 20 points punished a slightly off-colour Springboks side in atrocious conditions. Perhaps significantly, too, there was a telling shaft of genius from the recalled Danny Cipriani, whose lovely angled cross-kick created England’s game‑clinching try for the increasingly prolific Jonny May eight minutes from time. Who knows what the future now holds for Cipriani in an England shirt but, just for a fleeting moment, his decade‑long wait for another England start was gloriously rewarded. While not even Jones would claim that England are suddenly reincarnated as world-beaters on the back of this outcome, it was also a satisfying occasion for Chris Robshaw, recalled to the back row for a contest which suited his strengths, and young Tom Curry, who has never flinched during this frequently demanding series. Not all Tests, unfortunately for the visitors, are played in these sort of aquatic conditions or at this sluggish pace. Plenty more stern examinations loom this autumn before the English patient can be classified as fully cured. In the final analysis, South Africa may also conclude that the weather beat them as much as their opponents. No one locally is complaining about a little bit of winter moisture but conditions were a far cry from the serene weather England have otherwise enjoyed on this tour. Boats have been unable to head out to Robben Island for the past two days because of high winds and choppy seas and Table Mountain was shrouded in a thick shawl of grey cloud. Even the prancing tribal warriors preceding the home side on to the field struggled to keep their footing on the treacherous surface, a sure sign this would be a very different type of game to the previous two Tests. In some respects, though, nothing much had changed with England’s early discipline once again questionable. Maro Itoje and Nathan Hughes both conceded avoidable early penalties and England were lucky that Elton Jantjies missed a very kickable chance to put the hosts ahead. Instead the more reliable Farrell put England 3-0 up from one of his side’s few forays into home territory; if it was not quite the spectacular start to which they have become accustomed it was enough to give the visitors an advantage they retained until the interval. It was never going to be an easy day for creative types, let alone a fly-half starting his first Test for 10 years. Cipriani had to make do with the odd touch here and there as South Africa drove hard and tackled with enthusiasm. If ever there was a series-defining snapshot it came in the 20th minute. The tiny Faf de Klerk, like Asterix after a couple of glugs of magic potion, single-handedly drove the massive Hughes several metres backwards towards his own line, the No 8 having peeled ponderously off the back of a scrum. With Jantjies struggling to gain any kind of grip on the ball or the contest, however, England just about deserved their half-time lead, albeit with a touch of assistance from their hosts. Mike Brown and May did well to prevent what should have been an almost certain try, Jesse Kriel and S’busiso Nkosi failing to convert a clear two-on-one opportunity down the right before another Jantjes fumble four minutes before half-time gave Farrell the chance to extend England’s lead to 6-0. Having clawed back a penalty just before the break, however, the Boks were in front within seven minutes of the restart. Rassie Erasmus has made excellent use of his bench in this series and swapping his entire front row en bloc again paid immediate dividends. Up the middle barrelled the impressive Steven Kitshoff and with England’s defence scrambling Warrick Gelant slipped through a lovely grubber for Kriel to gather and score. With the 37-year-old Schalk Brits on for his first Test appearance since 2015, Willie le Roux reinstated at full‑back and Handré Pollard replacing the hapless Jantjies, there was also suddenly more experience in green and gold ranks. Farrell, however, swiftly recaptured the lead with two further penalties before Cipriani and May combined brilliantly to ensure England’s first win since they defeated Wales at Twickenham back in February. If this was the final Test to be played at Newlands, sadly, the famous old stadium was not blessed with the sold-out status it deserved. It is entirely possible the weather deterred some while the fact the series was already decided probably caused a few others to stay at home. Either way, fewer than 34,000 in were in attendance and it was not a spectacle the locals will recall fondly for years. Jones’s England, in contrast will cling tight to this result all summer as proof there is a brightening future ahead of them.