Whenever we invited people over for a big lunch, my mother would usually make a variation of this salad and it would be the highlight for me. As far as the nuts and garnish go, I often play around with it depending on my mood, so feel free to adjust based on what you have to hand. For a variation, use courgettes, cut in half and sliced lengthwise, instead of the aubergines, and use walnuts, pomegranate seeds and sumac for the garnish. Serves 4-6 as a starter or side dishaubergines 1kg (about 4 medium)olive oil for brushing salt and black pepper For the yogurt sauceGreek yogurt 400g garlic 1 small clove, crushedsalt ½ tsp lemon juice ½ tsp (optional) For the garnishpomegranate seeds 2 tbsp mixed nuts 50g, such as almonds, pistachios or hazelnuts, lightly toasted green leaves a small handful, such as rocket, dill, or chives Preheat the grill to high. Slice the aubergines into 1.5cm rounds, brush both sides with olive oil, and sprinkle with salt and pepper. Place the aubergines on a rack and grill for about 10 minutes on each side, or until they develop a golden brown exterior. In the meantime, put all the ingredients for the yogurt sauce into a bowl and whisk together to a smooth consistency. The lemon juice is optional but it helps bring all the flavors together, especially if you are using a mellow yogurt, not a tangy one. Once the aubergines are done, arrange in overlapping circles on a round platter. Spoon over the yogurt mixture then top with pomegranate seeds, toasted nuts, and green leaves.From The Palestinian Table by Reem Kassis (Phaidon Press, £24.95) The joy of these, particularly, is that they are wonderful eaten cold as well, their pink juiciness trapped within their eggy parmesan coating. If you don’t have any stale bread to hand for making the breadcrumbs, then just split open some pitta breads, leave them a short while – even half an hour will do – to dry out and then tear them up and blitz them in a processor. Serves 4lamb chop cutlets 10, with bone in fresh white breadcrumbs 175g, or 3 pitta breads, processed grated parmesan 10g eggs 2, beaten with salt and pepperolive oil for frying (not extra virgin) Remove the thick layer of fat from around the edge of each little chop, either by tearing it off by hand, or with a pair of scissors. Be careful not to lose the shape of the chop, or it will fall to pieces on frying. Layer the chops between 2 sheets of clingfilm, and beat them vigorously with a mallet or rolling pin so that they are flattened a little. Then, in a wide, shallow bowl, combine the breadcrumbs and parmesan, and put the seasoned eggs in another bowl. Pour some olive oil into a frying pan, to come about 1cm deep, and put it on the heat. Dip the lamb chops first in the eggy mixture and then press them well in the cheese and breadcrumbs before frying them in the hot oil. Cook the chops for about 3 minutes each side: they should be a deep golden brown and crunchy outside, within a still tender pink. Eat them as they are, left to get to room temperature or even cold: there is no way these are anything less than compulsively delicious.From Forever Summer by Nigella Lawson (Chatto & Windus, £16.99) Lemons, olive oil, basil … the only other ingredient needed is sun. Serves 6 as a starterspaghetti 250g lemons juice of 3-4, preferably Amalfi lemons olive oil 150ml parmesan 150g, freshly gratedfresh basil 2 handfuls, leaves picked and finely chopped lemon zest finely grated, optional Cook the spaghetti in a generous amount of boiling salted water, then drain thoroughly and return to the saucepan. Meanwhile, whisk the lemon juice with the olive oil, then stir in the parmesan – it will melt into the mixture, making it thick and creamy. Season with sea salt and black pepper and add more lemon juice to taste. Add the sauce to the spaghetti and shake the pan so that each strand of pasta is coated with the cheese. Finally, stir in the chopped basil and, ideally, some lemon zest.From River Café 30 by Ruth Rogers, Rose Gray, Sian Wyn Owen and Joseph Trivelli (Ebury Press, £28) When the sun is out and the barbecue lit, the first thing I want to eat is sardines. The smell of them cooking over coals is fantastic. If you don’t fancy butter, make the same recipe but use olive oil. It will work just as well. Serves 4sardines 20, de-scaled, gutted and butterfliedolive oil to drizzlesea salt and freshly ground black pepperlemons 1-2, cut into wedges, to serve For the flavoured buttergarlic 8 cloves, skin onunsalted butter 250g, softenedcurly parsley 3 tbsp, chopped shallots 2, peeled and finely choppedlemon 1, finely grated zest and juice To make the butter, heat your oven to 180C/gas mark 4. Lay a piece of foil on your work surface and sprinkle with 1 tsp salt. Place the garlic cloves on the foil and drizzle with oil. Wrap the foil over the garlic and seal to form a parcel. Place on a baking tray and bake in the oven for 25-30 minutes depending on the size of the garlic cloves. To check if they are done, open up the parcel and gently give them a squeeze; they should be soft. Once cooked, remove from the foil and allow to cool. Put the butter, chopped parsley, shallots and lemon zest and juice into a bowl and mix well. Squeeze the garlic out of the skins onto a board and chop it through. Add the garlic to the butter and season with salt and pepper. Mix until thoroughly combined. Now either place in the fridge to use later or put to one side while you cook the sardines. Light your barbecue around 30 minutes before you are planning to start cooking. To cook the sardines, season them with salt and pepper and brush with a little olive oil. Place skin-side down on the barbecue grid and cook for 3 minutes; don’t be tempted to move them now or you may tear the skin (which is protecting the fish). Carefully turn the sardines over and place them on a baking tray. Once you have all the sardines on the tray, place it on the barbecue grid for 1 minute to finish cooking. Once cooked, remove the sardines from the tray onto a platter so that everyone can help themselves. You can eat the sardines straight away or let them cool and eat them cold. Whichever way you choose, you’ll need to heat the butter until it is hot and melted and pour it over them before serving. Serve with lemon wedges for squeezing and chunks of bread to mop up the delicious juices.From Nathan Outlaw’s Home Kitchen by Nathan Outlaw (Quadrille, £20) In the heat of summer, the Darjeeling hills are a great shelter from the blistering temperatures of Kolkata. But the journey from Kolkata to Darjeeling is turbulent and long, and all I ever want when I arrive (aside from a medicinal gin and tonic) is a bath and the freshest, most cooling salad I can think of. This is that salad. Serves 6 as a sidefennel 1 medium bulb  red onion 1 medium mixed peppers 3 (red, yellow and orange) cucumber ½fresh coriander 10g salt 1 tsp nigella seeds 1 tsp, plus extra to servefresh mint leaves 20g green finger chilli ½-1 Greek yogurt 100ml lemon juice 2 tbsp sugar 1 tsp (or to taste) Remove and discard the tough outer leaves of the fennel, top and tail it, then cut off the fronds, reserving them for later. Chop the fennel bulb, red onion and peppers into 1cm dice (the smaller the better), and place in a serving bowl. Halve the cucumber lengthways, remove the seeds with a teaspoon, then chop it into 1cm dice and add to the bowl. Finely chop the coriander and add to the bowl, along with the salt and nigella seeds. Next, make the dressing. Chop the mint and green chilli as finely as you can, put into a small bowl and mix well. Add the yogurt, lemon juice and sugar, mix together and taste. There should be a good balance between the heat, sweetness, saltiness and lemoniness, so adjust if need be. Pour the dressing over the salad just before serving and mix well. Sprinkle over the fennel fronds, and a few more nigella seeds for good measure.From Fresh India by Meera Sodha (Penguin, £20)