Visa has admitted that 5.2m transactions failed during its IT collapse earlier this in June – because a back-up data centre designed to handle all transactions across Europe would not switch on when the problems emerged. The extraordinary service failure on the afternoon of Friday 1 June saw queues build up at petrol stations and shopping left at supermarket tills as customers were unable to pay. In the UK, 2.4m transactions failed to process properly, while a further 2.8m failed in the rest of Europe. In a letter to the Treasury committee of MPs (pdf), Visa’s Europe chief executive, Charlotte Hogg, said the service failure began on the Friday at 2.35pm and was not completely fixed until 12.45am the following day. The core of the problem was a humble switch, rather than a cyber attack or a catastrophic software failure. “The incident was caused by the failure of a switch in one of Visa’s data centres,” Hogg said. “We understand what hardware malfunctioned (the switch) and the nature of the malfunction (a very rare, partial failure). We do not yet understand precisely why the switch failed at the time it did.” Like other major multinationals, Visa maintains vast “redundant” data centres designed to kick in should their main system go wrong. But in this instance the failsafe failed. “We operate two redundant data centres in the UK, meaning that either one can independently handle 100% of the transactions for Visa in Europe. In normal circumstances, the systems are synchronised and either centre can take over from the other immediately … in this instance, a component with a switch in our primary data centre suffered a very rare partial failure which prevented the backup switch from activating.” Hogg said it took nearly five hours for Visa to fully deactivate the system causing the transaction failures at the primary data centre, and several more hours before all processing was functioning correctly. Visa has hired consultants EY to produce an independent review into the failure, and promised compensation to merchants and customers who suffered losses. Visa’s statement to MPs followed questions sent by Nicky Morgan, chair of the Treasury select committee, in the wake of what she described as a catastrophic failure in the country’s payment infrastructure. In her response to Morgan, Hogg said: “At its peak, the disruption affected people in the midst of returning home from work, socialising in restaurants and pubs, and doing end-of-day shopping. We take seriously our important role in supporting financial stability in the UK. A disruption to our processing that impacts consumers at any time is unacceptable, let alone during a busy Friday afternoon.” Hogg added that despite the IT failures, most transactions were processed, even though some cardholders had to try several times. It said there were two periods of peak disruption, the first for 10 minutes just after 3pm, the second for 50 minutes between 5.40pm and 6.30pm. During those times 35% of all transactions failed, while at other times the failure rate in the UK was closer to 7%. Morgan said she was satisfied with Visa’s response. “The Treasury committee is satisfied with Visa’s answers regarding its system failure earlier this month. It appears that the problems have been fully resolved. “The news that debit card payments have overtaken cash use for the first time shows that the reliability of IT systems is becoming ever-more important. The detriment caused to consumers by IT failures is greater than ever, so the committee will become less tolerant of them.” 