For a few years I was lucky enough to share a flat with two River Cafe chefs, Joe Trivelli and Stevie Parle. They opened my eyes to a new world of Italian cooking. One of the classics, pork loin braised in milk, had always piqued my curiosity. How could curdled milk be a desirable outcome in a dish? Of course, once I had tasted that exquisite sauce, with the milk, citrus and meat juices somehow at once bound and separated, I was hooked. This uses beef mince instead of the usual pork loin to make a quicker, but beautifully flavoured pasta sauce. Prep 10 minCook 1 hrServes 6 2 tbsp olive oil8 thin slices of pancetta, about 50g roughly chopped2 small (or 1 large) white onions, peeled and chopped2 garlic cloves, peeled and choppedSalt and black pepper800g beef mince1 tbsp fennel seeds, lightly crushed1 bay leaf1 tbsp rosemary, needles finely chopped250ml white wine½ lemon300ml whole milk200g baby broad beans300g fresh or frozen peas3 handfuls grated parmesan, plus extra to serve500g penne4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil Warm the olive oil in a large, heavy-based pan over a medium heat. Add the pancetta, fry until it begins to colour and release its fat, then add the onion, garlic and a pinch of salt. Fry for a further eight to 10 minutes, until the onions are soft and sweet. Season the beef with plenty of salt and pepper. Turn up the heat under the onion and add the meat, fennel seeds, bay leaf and rosemary. Fry for five minutes, stirring, until the mince is beginning to colour. Add the wine and leave to bubble away until it has reduced by half. Shave the skin off the lemon in long, wide strips, then add to the pan with the lemon juice and the milk, lower the heat and leave to simmer slowly for 30 minutes, until the liquid is reduced and the beef is tender – it may curdle, but don’t worry. Add a splash of water if it begins to look dry. When you’re ready to eat, bring a deep pan of salted water to a boil. Add the broad beans, cook for a minute, then add the peas and blanch both for a minute more, before draining, reserving the boiling water for the pasta. Fold the peas and broad beans into the ragu, remove the bay leaf and lemon peel, and add the grated parmesan. Put the water back on to boil, add the pasta and cook until al dente, then drain, reserving a cup of the cooking liquid. Loosen the pasta with half the extra-virgin olive oil and a few tablespoons of the cooking liquid, and do the same to the ragu sauce. Serve the pasta with the ragu, some extra parmesan and olive oil at the table. This ragu is also delicious made with pork or veal mince, so try the different versions to see which you like best. It also works with short lengths of just-blanched asparagus, while the season is with us. Sometimes I make meatballs with the same recipe, which is a hit with the children.