Late-night hosts on Tuesday discussed the supreme court’s decision to uphold Donald Trump’s travel ban and the ongoing debate over “civility” in US politics. Meanwhile, Comedy Central’s Trevor Noah addressed mounting calls for “civility” from Democrats and Republicans. “Sarah Huckabee Sanders: queen of the press room and mother of lies,” he began. “Ever since a Virginia chicken restaurant asked her to leave this weekend, the big debate in America has been: ‘Do government officials have the right to be left alone when they’re off the clock?’” Noah proceeded to show cable news coverage of the debate, in which one pundit said “there are certain lines you shouldn’t cross” while another asked: “Whatever happened to tolerance?” Noah shot back: “Tolerance got grabbed by the pussy, didn’t you hear? Trump called her an animal, locked her up, and threw her kids in a cage, that’s what happened to tolerance. Isn’t it Interesting how calls for civility tend to come from those in a position of privilege?: https://t.co/gsQPKEHst2 pic.twitter.com/k2AnjsMRF1 “These people have more amnesia than the characters in a Lifetime movie,” he added. “Let’s not get it twisted: that restaurant owner didn’t ask Sarah Huckabee Sanders to leave because of her opinions. She’s a senior official of the Trump administration, not some rando with a blog.” “People in power would like to be insulated from the effects of their actions,” Noah said. “But if you’re in a position where you can influence other people’s lives, you shouldn’t be shocked when you hear from the people whose lives you affect.” The host then said that “calls for civility always tend to come from people in a position of privilege,” remarking on the suggestion by pundits that protesters today model themselves after Gandhi, Nelson Mandela and Martin Luther King Jr. “Don’t ever forget, in their time, people were not exactly happy with how they protested,” Noah said. “The British called Gandhi an agitator. Governments around the world called Nelson Mandela a terrorist. What you forget is, back when Martin was marching, people were complaining about him the same way people are complaining about protesters right now.” “You remember the guy in Washington who tried the whole Muslim ban that they said, ‘Not a Muslim ban, a travel ban’,” Stephen Colbert began. “Well today, the supreme court fell for it, upholding Trump’s ban by a 5-4 vote. “This was actually Trump’s third travel ban after the previous version explicitly banned people from Muslim-majority countries,” the host explained. “Now, I seem to remember Trump saying one or two bad things about Muslims during the campaign, but in his decision Chief Justice Roberts set aside Trump’s anti-Muslim statements while finding the ban itself falls within the president’s authority. “In fact, the ruling says the statements made during a campaign may not be legally determinative,” Colbert said. “Does that mean he’s not making America great?” Colbert then laid into Trump for his tweet celebrating the decision, in which he wrote, “Supreme Court upholds travel ban. Wow!” “After the decision, Trump got together with members of Congress to celebrate and promised to continue his harsh immigration policies,” said Colbert, who showed a clip of Trump decrying America’s immigration laws, adding, “That’s why I was put here.” “Put here?” Colbert replied. “I think you mean Putin here.” NBC’s Seth Meyers focused on Trump’s rally in South Carolina yesterday, where he discussed his administration’s policies toward undocumented immigrants. He said: “Trump continues to use racist, dehumanizing language to talk about immigrants, and now he’s calling for stripping them of their constitutionally protected due process rights and deporting them without being able to make their case in front of a judge.” Meyers was referring to a tweet the president sent on Sunday in which he said “we cannot allow all of these people to invade our Country” and suggested they be deported “with no Judges or Court Cases”. At his rally, Trump responded to a call for 5,000 extra judges on the border. “What other country has judges? Where are you going to find 5,000 people to be judges? They don’t even know the number even though they’re in charge.” “No dude, you’re in charge,” Meyers said. “What other country has judges? Most other countries. In the Netherlands they even have judges at a special court in The Hague and, who knows, maybe you’ll get to meet them one day.” Trump, Meyers explained, “hasn’t always felt so cavalier about the due process protections provided by the constitution.” He read a tweet the president sent while his own staffers were under investigation by Robert Mueller. “People’s lives are being shattered and destroyed by mere allegation,” he wrote. “Is there no such thing any longer as due process?”