The open-textured breads – sourdough and ciabatta – toast splendidly, their rough edges catching and crisping in the heat and their generous holes allowing the butter or olive oil to trickle teasingly through to your fingers. Torn rather than sliced, those jagged edges are sharp enough to grate a cut clove of the new season’s softly fragrant garlic, something I like to do when there are good tomatoes in the house for pan con tomate. I was brought up on tomatoes on toast made with sliced white Wonderloaf and tinned tomatoes, so the first time my friend James made it for me the way his grandmother did in Spain, the idea suddenly made sense. The thick, open-pored bread was baked until thoroughly crisp, rubbed with a clove of new, sweet garlic, then moistened with grated tomatoes, olive oil (we used Nuñez de Prado) and flakes of sea salt. I begged for basil, but he said no. At home, his family would probably use pan de cristal, similar to ciabatta but thinner and more crisply crusted, and with a chewier and larger-holed crumb (infinitely superior in other words). It is almost impossible to find here, but pretty much any bread is fine, as long as isn’t too dense, or brown, too crusty or too fresh. As with everything so simple, the details need to be carefully thought through. Stale bread is lighter and more airy than fresh, the olive oil needs a peppery kick and the tomatoes are best when verging on the over-ripe, so they collapse into a juicy dressing. A simple thing, perfectly executed. On a slightly more complex note, I’ve been baking this week: a savoury apricot and rosemary-scented foccacia made specifically to go with goat’s cheese. It was worth taking 10 minutes to cook the fruit before adding it to the dough, the result being silky fruit but also a fantastic apricot and rosemary-scented oil with which to moisten the baking bread. As a fruit and herb bread for a sharply lactic, snow-white cheese, it proved easy to make and difficult to beat. Serves 4 ciabatta or pan de cristal 200gcherry tomatoes 400g, ripe but not too sweetolive oil 4 tbspgarlic 3 or 4 cloves Split the bread lengthways. This is easiest with a very long, slim-bladed knife, but tear rather than slice if possible. Cut each half into pieces roughly 7cm x 9cm. Using a coarse-toothed grater, grate the tomatoes into a mixing bowl, then stir in the olive oil with a good pinch of sea salt. Place the bread, cut side up, on a baking sheet and brown lightly under an overhead grill, or else cut side down on a hot griddle. Peel the garlic and cut each clove in half. Rub the garlic over the surface of the toast, discarding each piece as it loses its juice, then spoon the tomato and olive oil over the toast. Trickle with a little more olive oil and serve, with more salt for those who wish it. I have long been an advocate of the baking stone – a thick piece of stone or chunky unglazed tile left in the bottom of the oven to heat up, on which to cook bread or pastry. The extra heat held by the stone ensures a crisp base to pies, loaves, tarts and foccacia. My own has done years of service both as direct heat for a pizza or loaf and as something on which to sit a baking sheet or tart tin. If you are thinking of picking one up for your oven, may I suggest the heavier the better? Whatever, they do wonders for a foccacia. Serves 8 For the dough:strong white bread flour 500geasy-bake yeast 1 7g sachet sea salt 1 tspolive oil 2-3 tbspwarm water 350mlapricots 400golive oil 4 tbsprosemary 3 bushy sprigs Rub the bottom of a baking tin, approximately 22cm in diameter, with a little of the olive oil. Set the oven at 230C/gas mark 7. Put the flour and yeast into a large mixing bowl and crumble in the sea salt, then the olive oil and the warm water. Mix thoroughly, adding more water if necessary, to produce a soft, but not sticky dough. Generously flour a board or work surface, tip out the dough, then knead or fold gently but firmly for about 5 minutes. If you wish, use a food mixer with dough hook. When the dough feels elastic, transfer to a lightly floured bowl, cover with a cloth or clingfilm and leave in a warm place to rise for about an hour, until it has doubled in size. Cut the apricots in half and remove their stones. Warm the olive oil in a shallow pan, add the apricots and let them cook for a few minutes until they have softened. Pull the rosemary needles from their stems and add to the apricots, then set aside. Gently remove the dough from its bowl and push it into the oiled tin, pressing it out to reach the edge. Place the apricots on top of the dough then spoon over the rosemary and oil from the tin. Cover with a cloth and leave to rest in a warm place until the dough has risen almost to the top of the tin. Scatter lightly with sea salt. Bake for about 30-35 minutes until the fruit is starting to brown here and there and the dough is springy to the touch. Remove from the oven and leave to cool for 15 minutes before removing from the tin. Place on the table, with some goat’s cheese, for everyone to tear apart. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter@NigelSlater