The actions of a contestant on Love Island have prompted a domestic abuse charity to issue a warning about unhealthy behaviour in relationships. Women’s Aid said that there were “clear warning signs” in Adam Collard’s treatment of fellow contestant Rosie Williams, who he had coupled up with on the ITV reality show. The pair were involved in a heated argument on Tuesday’s episode, with Williams accusing Collard of ignoring her in favour of new contestant Zara McDermott. Collard, in turn, has suggested that Williams had been overreacting, and her jealousy over his flirting with McDermott had “pushed him away”. In a statement, chief executive of Women’s Aid Katie Ghose said that Collard’s behaviour towards Williams exhibited signs of “gaslighting and emotional abuse”, and called on viewers to make a stand against domestic abuse. Gaslighting is a form of psychological manipulation in which a person – often a woman – is made to question their own perception of reality through deception and the withholding of information. The term derives from the 1938 play Gas Light, in which a husband attempts to convince his wife of her own insanity in order to distract her from his criminal behaviour. The play was twice adapted for film, first in a 1940 British production, and later in a 1944 Hollywood version that starred Ingrid Bergman. While the term 'gaslighting' has been present in academic literature and some colloquial use since the 1960s, it is only in recent times that it has come into common usage with the rise of social media. It has been a recurring subject in popular culture, with films, TV series and radio serials such The Girl on the Train, Jessica Jones and The Archers including storylines that feature the trope. The term has also been used in political commentary, most frequently in reference to US president Donald Trump, who has been accused of gaslighting US citizens with frequent lies and misinformation. In May 2018, Theresa May suggested that she would seek to strengthen UK laws around gaslighting following the death of the daughter of Commons deputy speaker Sir Lindsay Hoyle. “On the latest series of Love Island, there are clear warning signs in Adam’s behaviour,” Ghose said. “In a relationship, a partner questioning your memory of events, trivialising your thoughts or feelings, and turning things around to blame you can be part of a pattern of gaslighting and emotional abuse. “Last night, Rosie called out Adam’s unacceptable behaviour on the show. We ask viewers to join her in recognising unhealthy behaviour in relationships and speaking out against all forms of domestic abuse – emotional as well as physical. It is only when we make a stand together against abuse in relationships that we will see attitudes change and an end to domestic abuse.” The Guardian has contacted ITV for comment.