Tom Watson has vowed to face down an online campaign to oust him as Labour’s deputy leader after he criticised the party leadership’s handling of the antisemitism row. Critics of Watson caused the hashtag #ResignWatson to trend on Twitter, after an Observer interview in which he said Labour faced a “vortex of eternal shame” unless it tackled the issue head-on. The deputy leader called for the party to end disciplinary action against the MPs Ian Austin and Margaret Hodge, who criticised Jeremy Corbyn’s response to the row, and also said Labour should fully adopt the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (IHRA) definition of antisemitism and all its examples. On Monday, the party suspended George McManus, a member of Labour’s national policy forum, after comments he posted on Facebook about Watson and “Jewish donors”. McManus, who stood for election to lead the body this year, highlighted donations received by Watson from the businessman Sir Trevor Chinn and wrote: “Apparently Watson received £50,000+ from Jewish donors. At least Judas only got 30 pieces of silver.” Luciana Berger, the MP who leads the Jewish Labour Movement, submitted a formal complaint to the party about the comments. The Facebook post has since been deleted and McManus has apologised. “I’d like to apologise to Tom Watson for my drawing an analogy between him accepting money from Jewish donors and the biblical story of the betrayal by Judas. I fully accept that such an analogy is wrong and am sorry for making the comparison,” he wrote. The Labour MP Wes Streeting called the comments “100% antisemitic trope” and Berger said the party must take swift action. Labour is preparing to adopt three of the four IHRA examples that had been excluded from the antisemitism definition in its new code of conduct, the Guardian understands, which include comparing Israel’s actions to the Nazis and accusing Jewish people of “dual loyalty” to Israel. However, an impasse remains over one final example, “claiming that the existence of the state of Israel is a racist endeavour”, because of concerns that it could hinder legitimate criticism of Israel. Jewish community leaders have insisted the definition should be adopted in full and say it does not prohibit criticism of the actions of the Israeli state. The former cabinet minister Yvette Cooper also urged the party to adopt the IHRA definition. “I think this problem that we are in is awful for the Labour party that’s got such a history of fighting racism. To be stuck in this mess, it’s an awful situation that we are in,” she told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme on Monday. “I think it is not going to go away until the party adopts the international definition of antisemitism. I support Tom on this. I think the point is we need to address it.” After his Observer interview was published, Watson tweeted that he was taken aback by the extent of the backlash. It sometimes feels like people have been calling for me to stand down from day one but I never, ever thought I’d be facing demands to #resignwatson for standing up for people who are facing prejudice and hate. Over the weekend, Corbyn sought to further defuse the row with a video message apologising for “hurt that has been caused to many Jewish people”. “Our party must never be a home for such people and never will be. People who use antisemitic poison need to understand: you do not do it in my name or the name of my party. You are not our supporters,” he said. “And anyone who denies that this has surfaced within our party is clearly actually wrong and contributing to the problem.” However, Marie van der Zyl, the president of the Board of Deputies of British Jews, and Jonathan Goldstein, the chair of the Jewish Leadership Council, wrote in a New Statesman article that Corbyn needed to acknowledge his “problematic” history. “Until Corbyn can honestly and fully own up to the problematic nature of some of his own past actions, he will struggle to lead the cultural change that is needed to clear the decks of a loud minority within Labour who behave in this way,” they said. Van der Zyl and Goldstein said the leader’s office had consulted them as to whether it would be insensitive to release a statement on Friday afternoon, shortly before the Jewish Sabbath, but had not taken their advice. “We said it would be an act of tremendous bad faith. He clearly ignored us,” they said. On Sunday night, another shadow minister added to the calls for the disciplinary cases against Hodge and Austin to be dropped. Anneliese Dodds, the shadow Treasury minister, said: “My personal view is I don’t really see the merit in pursuing this. What John McDonnell said about this was perfectly reasonable ... People can say things in the heat of the moment, but actually these cases really should just be quietly dropped.”