Seeing as José Mourinho thinks Manchester United didn’t lose “from the strategic point of view and from the tactical point of view” in their 3-0 defeat at the hands of Tottenham Hotspur, it’s probably safe to assume he would also scoff at the notion that they are a club in crisis. Nevertheless, the c-word is being bandied about willy-nilly across back pages and if what happened to United at Old Trafford isn’t something approaching a mess, it will, to paraphrase Sheriff Ed Tom Bell in No Country For Old Men, certainly do til a mess gets there. One of several players scapegoated for United’s previous loss against Brighton, Anthony Martial, was left out of Mourinho’s matchday squad for the Spurs game and has made no secret of his desire to leave the club. While Mourinho would happily sell him to raise funds for more of those centre-backs who can’t defend properly that he seems to have so much time for, Ed Woodward has already turned down offers from Milan and Atlético Madrid. United’s chief executive seems determined to hold on to the 22-year-old Frenchman, who he clearly believes will thrive under United’s next manager. Still struggling with depression and financial problems following the break-up of his marriage, among other personal issues that have left him down on his luck, the one-time Arsenal cult hero Emmanuel Eboué could be thrown a career lifeline by LA Galaxy. The MLS side are reported to value the Ivorian’s experience, while Brazilian side Cruzeiro are also being linked with the full-back. Having blocked his mooted move to Spurs towards the end of the transfer window, Aston Villa have scheduled talks with Jack Grealish for September. With two years left on his current deal, Grealish is already on £20,000 per week, a stipend which will more than double if he inks a new and improved contract. Meanwhile in London, Tottenham midfielder Moussa Sissoko is wanted by Fenerbahce, who could take him on loan with a view to making any deal permanent. The French midfielder is currently surplus to Mauricio Pochettino’s requirements and few Tottenham fans would shed tears if he left the club, but with Harry Winks only just returning from injury he might be required as cover. Having spent the summer hawking their £18.3m record signing, Giannelli Imbula, around various European clubs without success, Stoke City are hoping to ship him out to Spanish side Rayo Vallecano before the end of the week. The Belgian spent last season on loan at French side Toulouse and has been told he doesn’t have a future at the Britannia Stadium. A man who has been linked with no shortage of Premier League clubs but never joined any of them, Kevin Strootman is about to leave Roma and join Marseille for £22.5m. The Dutch midfielder is understood to have undergone a medical yesterday and was left out of Roma’s matchday squad for last night’s 3-3 draw with Atalanta. Elsewhere in France, It’s looking like Thierry Henry will turn down the Bordeaux job due to the lack of transfer funds that will be made available to him. In Nice, his former Arsenal team-mate, Patrick Vieira, is about to sign the Paris Saint-Germain reserve goalkeeper, Kevin Trapp, on loan. And finally, there’ll be love in the air over Ibrox if Rangers sign Eros Grezda for £2m. The winger plays for Osijek in the Croatian top flight and will come in as a like-for-like replacement for Jamie Murphy, who is out for the season after rupturing knee ligaments in a League Cup match against Kilmarnock.