Sam Curran credited a “no fear” approach for his day-one salvage job in Southampton before stating his aim is to emulate Ben Stokes as a regular impact all-rounder. The 20-year-old’s return, after being left out of the third Test at Trent Bridge, provided the sole break in the clouds during a gloomy start to the fourth Test for England. His 78 from 136 balls turned a deeply troubling 86 for six into 246 all out, following stands of 81 and 63 with Moeen Ali and Stuart Broad respectively. “I just tried to play my natural game,” Curran said. “I love being in the side and I almost played with no fear, tried to be nice and positive and get some partnerships – not try to overthink it. Luckily enough it came off and we have a decent score on the board. “I love batting and bowling. I’d like to be up the order a bit more at Surrey. I just look at the way Ben Stokes contributes and that’s what I want to do. That’s what all-rounders love doing: big performances when the team need you.” His omission for Nottingham was deemed harsh, not least because two Tests earlier he had been the player of the match at Edgbaston following a similarly ice-cool 63 when England’s second innings was wobbling at a mirror-image 86 for six. Curran, who made way when Stokes returned from his court case and in light of Chris Woakes registering a maiden Test century at Lord’s, said: “I was disappointed but at the same time took it as a positive. You can’t really leave out someone who’s got a hundred. It’s a great squad at the minute, and everyone is fighting for their places. “I wasn’t proving a point at all – I was just playing the way I do, naturally and freely. I was unlucky obviously last week to miss out. There are some great names in the team and I’m learning so much.” It is telling of England’s batting problems, albeit in a series they lead 2-1, that Curran’s 205 runs from only four innings make him the second-highest scorer behind Jonny Bairstow’s 212; the left-hander also has more than the opening pair of Alastair Cook (97) and Keaton Jennings (94) combined. Joe Root perhaps missed a trick not feeding off the left-armer’s adrenaline in the late four-over burst with the ball too, instead preferring to stick with the senior pair of Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad but seeing openers KL Rahul and Shikhar Dhawan survive. Curran added: “Jimmy and Stuart are class at what they do, so I think I’m going to have to wait my turn for a couple of years.”