You know where you are with pop fandom: construct homemade banner, queue up outside hotel or TV studio, scream, return home. But if you’re an Aphex Twin fan, this seems positively ascetic in its simplicity: the Cornish producer sends his fans down labyrinthine rabbit holes full of clues and in-jokes. He has just released his first new material since 2016: the high-tempo stuttering electro groove of T69 Collapse. The first sign of it was the appearance of his rune-like “A” symbol in London’s Elephant and Castle tube station – perhaps a nod to the rumour that he bought up the silvery structure in the middle of the area’s roundabout – followed by the same 3D design printed amid the greenery on a wall of an Los Angeles record shop. Then there was an announcement of sorts, a distorted press release promising an EP called Collapse. An enterprising fan has unpicked and transcribed the document, though we’re not really any the wiser: it bimbles on about “simulated latte-mummies” and declares the EP “a fun water gathering. Apex spread the twin tails and succeeded in his early car … Frolic rating 23!” There was a hint that new music might come “in the middle of the week”, and so it proves: the video, with its glitching street scenes images and mutating lines of text referring to peanut butter, will send fans off on more decryption missions. This is classic Aphex japery. His previous album, Syro, was heralded via a fluorescent blimp appearing over London, followed by an announcement made on the deep web. And for every stunt, there’ll be fans putting in the legwork – or money. When he released tens of demos to his SoundCloud page, fans annotated them in a gloriously nerdy Google Doc, pointing out samples of Eazy-E, Joni Mitchell and the movie Short Circuit, alongside sage observations (“uses the same shaker sound as Girl/Boy”). And when one of the five copies of lost album Caustic Window emerged, it became one of the most expensive records ever sold after it was bought in an eBay auction by Minecraft creator Markus Persson for $46,300. Aphex fans clubbed together to buy another copy, raising $67,424 – an endeavour organised on We Are the Music Makers, a message board full of Aphex memes and fan-created art(someone has already made a collapsing gif version of a 3D Aphex logo that has appeared in recent weeks). The numerous Cornish place names across his back catalogue have even been plotted on Google Maps by We Are the Music Makers users: if surfing at Newquay sounds a bit high-octane, you could perhaps indulge in an Aphex road trip on your Cornish summer holiday.