Hop into my time machine. We are heading back 10 years – summer holidays, Stoke Newington, 2008 – I spent most of my time out with my pals, kicking ball, water fights ... But when the clock struck four, Tony the ice-cream man came to our estate, and on a hot day it was the best thing – even if the ice-cream wasn’t the best. His knickerbocker glory, though ... wow: super simple but so tasty. Big love to Tony for inspiring me for this bake. Vanilla, strawberries, retro decorations ... what else could you ask for? You’ll need to start making this the day before. Prep 30 minCook 1 hr 30 minCool 2 hrMakes 1 cheesecake For the biscuit base200g shortbread biscuits50g ice-cream cones100g unsalted butter, melted For the filling900g full-fat cream cheese200g golden caster sugar 4 tbsp plain flour 1 tsp vanilla extract 200ml soured cream3 large eggs For the ice-cream layer1 litre vanilla ice-cream For the strawberry daiquiri sauce1 punnet strawberries, hulled and slicedJuice and zest of 1 limeJuice and zest of 1 lemon2 tbsp caster sugar 2 tsp cornflour 2 tbsp white rum To decorate200ml double cream, whipped with 2 tbsp caster sugarWafers, sprinkles, chocolate flakes Start with the base. Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas 6. Line the base and sides of a 24cm springform tin with baking paper. Blitz the biscuits and ice-cream cones in a food processor or by double-bagging sandwich bags and crushing them with a rolling pin. Mix with the butter, then press into the base of the tin and bake for 12 minutes. Once baked, set aside to cool and crack on with the filling. In a large bowl, beat the cream cheese with an electric mixer (or in a stand mixer) until it has loosened up. Tip in the sugar and give it another mix to combine. Add the flour, vanilla and soured cream, then – one at a time – add the eggs, mixing them in slowly. Going slowly at this stage is important, because it will stop the cheesecake’s surface cracking later on. Pour the filling on top of the biscuit base, then bake in the middle of the oven for 12 minutes. Turn down the oven to 150C/300F/gas 2, then bake for a further 35-40 minutes: when ready the cheesecake should still wobble in the middle. Switch off the oven but keep the door closed and leave the cheesecake to cool in there for an hour. Then open the oven door and leave it cooling with it slightly ajar for another hour. Finally, take it out of the oven, cover and cool at room temperature a third hour – again, going slowly prevents cracks. Cover with clingfilm and refrigerate overnight. The next day, you need to prep the ice-cream layer and the strawberry sauce. Put the ice-cream into a food processor and blitz until smooth. Put half on top of the cheesecake and spread evenly. Pack the rest into an airtight container, and then put both the cheesecake and the remaining ice-cream back into the freezer to firm up again. Blitz the strawberries, citrus juices and zest to a puree. Put into a small saucepan with the caster sugar, cornflour and rum over a medium heat and whisk to get rid of any lumps, stirring until it thickens, then cool. When you are ready to assemble, remove the cheesecake from the tin and peel off the paper. Decorate with the remaining ice-cream, whipped double cream, drizzles of the strawberry sauce and scatterings of wafers, sprinkles and flakes.