Sebastian Vettel said he has no concerns over the legality of his Ferrari in response to Lewis Hamilton’s claims of “tricks” the Italian team used to gain an advantage at the Belgian Grand Prix. Hamilton, who arrived late at Monza on Thursday to begin preparations for the Italian GP because of what Mercedes described as “an unavoidable personal commitment”, insisted at the time he was not insinuating Ferrari had broken Formula One rules, a comment that did not seem to convince Vettel. The German narrowed the gap to Hamilton in the world championship to 17 points with Sunday’s win at Spa, where the Ferrari enjoyed a power advantage to which Mercedes had no answer. Vettel overtook Hamilton on the opening lap with such alacrity Hamilton said: “He drove past me like I was not there”, and prompted his reference to Ferrari having “tricks”. Vettel said yesterday. “I think he said in the press conference something with tricks. But then I think he said many times as well that he doesn’t want it to be interpreted in the wrong way and I think, maybe he did, I’m not so sure.” Hamilton was unable to respond because he did not attend the usual Mercedes pre-race press conference. Mercedes would not elaborate on what had delayed him, nor was there an explanation from the driver. Hamilton did arrive day evening and met fans to sign autographs. He will take part in practice as normal on Friday. The FIA race director, Charlie Whiting, has repeatedly said Ferrari comply with all of the governing body’s rules and Vettel agreed. “In terms of is the car legal or not, the FIA are responsible for it,” he said. “We have several checks throughout the weekend to prove that, so as long as I don’t hear anything on that front then I believe it is fine.” Vettel won his first grand prix at Monza for Toro Rosso a decade ago, a race for which he has great affection, but he has yet to win at the track for Ferrari. With the straight-line speed and power advantage his car is enjoying, he is in the best possible position to return a home win, which would be Ferrari’s first since Fernando Alonso in 2010. “Things are going in the right direction,” he said. “But the opponent we have is still very, strong. It is good to see we are getting stronger and in some areas we have caught up and in some areas even have a little bit of an edge. We still have a lot things that can be improved, a lot of potential that can be unleashed, a lot of processes that can be improved.”