Williams are to retain their independence rather than becoming a partner to a manufacturer in Formula One. The team are enduring one of the worst seasons in their 41-year history and when Williams admitted earlier this year they were considering the option of a partnership such as that between Ferrari and Haas, it was reported they would join up with their current engine supplier Mercedes and effectively become a B-team. Williams have won nine F1 constructor’s titles and seven drivers’ championships but go into Sunday’s Italian Grand Prix bottom of the table with only four points and a car that is well off the pace. The team’s deputy team principal, Claire Williams, said: “It would have been remiss of us not to investigate a collaboration of our own. However once we had done our due diligence we felt it was not right for us. That’s not to say we rule it out forever but it is not something we want to enter into. Williams remains an independent constructor.” This season has been an exceptionally difficult one for the 42-year-old, who took up her role in 2013. Williams have finished in the points only once. “It is genuinely painful; it is horrific; it is heartbreaking; it is soul destroying,” she said. “I read a comment the other day that Williams don’t feel pain any more at losing. If anyone thinks that I personally don’t take responsibility for it or don’t feel pain – well it’s up there with some of the most painful experiences of my life.” There is an awfully long way to go but that the team will remain independent is to be welcomed. There is also a sense things are on an upward curve. The team had been in what Williams described as “crisis management”, attempting to solve the problems of the car – largely balance on corner entry and stability – and had the second half of the season as their target. “I feel we have definitely turned a corner although you might not see it on the race track,” Williams said. “A lot of those issues have been addressed on balance and stability and that is real progress. It is the step forward we were hoping for, we are hitting targets.” Certainly Williams is more optimistic than of late. “I am enjoying life again, it feels like Williams is in a good place again.” Work will continue on this year’s car but the focus has already shifted to 2019. “Rob Smedley [head of vehicle performance] described it as an ‘evil car’,” she said. “I don’t ever like to think of any Williams car as evil but we know we have a number of issues and we need to do better.” They face losing driver Lance Stroll and the money his father brings if, as is likely, they decamp to Force India. Equally, their sponsorship deal with Martini ends this year, compounded by the drop in championship funds 10th place would entail. Williams, however, is confident that financially the team remain strong – a factor in rejecting a partnership. “We are on target to meet the numbers we have set for next year,” she said. “I have no doubt we will be in F1 next year with a healthy, competitive budget.” Fans of the team, which is still held in great affection, have Williams’ sympathy but she insists the process will ultimately prove to be beneficial, albeit not as she would have liked it to happen. “Sometimes you need to hit rock bottom to shake things up a little. This has given us the opportunity to breathe some life back into the team and to do what we probably should have done a number of years ago to make sure this team will remain relevant for the future in F1.” Formula One’s draft calendar for 2019 will again have 21 races and the venues will be the same as this season. Hockenheim has concluded a one-year deal to again host the German Grand Prix and Suzuka renewed its contract for the Japanese GP until 2021. The season will open in Australia on 17 March and close in Abu Dhabi on 1 December.