The Donald Trump administration is only 18 months old but there is already a scramble to set down the first, second and third drafts of history. Along with countless tweets and newspaper articles, the Trump era is being chronicled by a growing list of books, partly because of record breaking turnover of staff, partly because of its unique fascination and a widespread conviction that it will be studied decades from now, even more intensely than other presidencies. Unhinged: An Insider’s Account of the Trump White House by Omarosa Manigault Newman The former reality TV star was the only African American on the senior staff at Trump’s White House but did not last long. Her book offers a damning portrait of Trump’s attitudes to black people, women and his own staff. Critics will seek to cast doubt on her credibility and whether she had as much access to Trump as she claims. The Briefing: Politics, the Press, and the President by Sean Spicer Trump’s first White House press secretary cannot be accused of writing a jaw-dropping tell-all. He describes Trump as “a unicorn, riding a unicorn over a rainbow”. In this, the first memoir of the Trump administration by one of its alumni, the much lampooned Spicer also attempts to justify his own role as spokesperson for a president synonymous with falsehoods. Fire and Fury: Inside the Trump White House by Michael Wolff In the New York Times number one bestseller, the journalist detonated political dynamite with his fly-on-the-wall account of chaos, infighting and staff who regard Trump as unfit for office. Wolff said he was able to loiter in the west wing and observe as well as conducting numerous interviews. Sceptics accused him of exaggeration. Fear: Trump in the White House by Bob Woodward One of the doyens of American journalism, Bob Woodward of the Washington Post – played by Robert Redford in All the President’s Men - has chronicled numerous US presidents, but few of his books have been as eagerly awaited as this one, due in September. One former official told Politico: “It’s gonna be killer. Everyone talked with Woodward.”