In the middle of a manicured garden tucked away in a courtyard within the Royal Academy, Brian Catling has his fingers in his mouth. “I can give you a bit of, well – something,” he says to the photographer, around the digits – and begins scrabbling at his fleshy cheeks, teeth gnashing and eyes rolling. His gigantic hands pull at the jowls with such force that his arms begin to shake, as if his very skin can no longer contain him. The camera snaps. Two ladies drinking Campari nearby watch all this something with great interest. “Are you Brian Catling?” one of them asks. The enormous hands let go; suddenly the monster is gone and just the man is left, beaming as he straightens his suit. A bit of face-squashing is all in a day’s work for Catling. Whether it is sculpture, performance, painting, poetry or novels, his work has always possessed an otherworldly weirdness not unlike someone pulling a grotesque face, as if reality has been scooped up and plonked a step to the left, where everything is familiar but shows a different aspect. His innocuous appearance – besuited, sixtysomething, white guy – is a tool he uses, often to confrontational, alarming effect. His performance Mr Rapehead saw him enter a gallery, disguised to the chattering crowds as just another bloke perusing the art – until he began strapping (and setting off) rape alarms on his face. In other shows, he has wandered around busy galleries while wearing a convincing cyclops prosthetic, prompting a ripple of flinches from unsuspecting art lovers. A decade ago, Catling was quietly respected in the art world. Then he began writing what he thought would be an 150-page novella; it turned out to be The Vorrh, the first volume of a 1,500-page fantasy trilogy. Heaving with biblical myth (and Old Testament levels of blood and gore) as well as art and science, the novel is named after the sentient, semi-tropical African forest that looms at the heart of the trilogy. Picking up just after the first world war, the story begins as colonisers hear tales that the forest is home to the Garden of Eden. Too bad that its also home to cyclopses, angels, and Adam and Eve – bestial creatures who roam the trees. Oh, and almost everyone who ventures in goes mad. “I thought The Vorrh would be a book that someone finds on a shelf in 10 years’ time, brushes the dust off and says: ‘Oh, this is quite an interesting thing.’ Because they’re the only books I read!” Catling says, wheezing with laughter. But The Vorrh, while rich with esotericism, was not that book. One critic likened it to “Gormenghast, reimagined by Alan Moore on opium”; Moore himself has called it “a phosphorescent masterpiece”. And when it came out in 2012, it won raves from the likes of Michael Moorcock, Tom Waits and Terry Gilliam, making Catling an acclaimed debutant at the age of 61. Two sequels followed: The Erstwhile, which left Africa to venture down the dark alleyways of east London, Catling’s childhood home. And now the finale: The Cloven, which sees the forest, displeased with years of pillaging, take on the incoming Nazis. Everyone thinks I’m up to my neck in drugs, but I have enough trouble with my imagination as it is Catling, by his own admission, has always been a weird guy. But not many oddballs have the imagination to create a world with entirely new branches of biology, ecology and religious myth, while also imbuing this with an earthiness that makes it all almost believable. “The imagination is a muscle, one that increases with exercise. You have to tell it, ‘That’s not good enough, you’ve got to go further,’” he says. “I’ve always wanted more than one life. Inventing fiction, performing, they’re all ways of being someone else. I feel so stupid that it took me this long to realise that I could do this in words, too. I can redefine gravity, simply because I say so.” He recalls meeting the main character of his next book: a girl called Mia, who approached his bed one morning and showed him her teeth, which were made of frozen saliva. “Of course, that never happened. I didn’t see her,” he says, then sits forward, eyes bulging. “But I did! That’s what happens when you push the imagination far enough. That’s why I’ve never done drugs.” Really? “Everyone thinks I’m up to my neck, but I have enough trouble with my imagination as it is. Losing or amplifying it scares the life out of me. Alcohol is like wearing an overcoat on your head. I’ll save drugs for old age.” His voice is simultaneously gravelly and breathy, philosophical and gruff. Afterwards, when he sneaks me into the Royal Academy’s summer show, he becomes almost bashful when we find a stream of stickers indicating sales next to one of his prints. (“Don’t know what they’re doing there,” he says, giving the wall a rap of his knuckles.) When people approach him, he says, many are unable to pair the affable man in front of them with the twisted mind that could create visions such as the trilogy’s opening scene, where a man fashions a bow from his dead wife’s spinal cord. Even he’s not too sure. “That’s about as nasty as it gets,” he says when I bring up a scene in The Vorrh that stars a reanimated aborted foetus. I had a nightmare about it, I admit, and he looks thrilled. “Did you?” he beams, sitting back as if ingesting a particularly rich meal. “How wonderful, how wonderful,” he murmurs. Catling speaks with a stammer; when he is stuck on a syllable, his face freezes in a rictus not far from one of his own performances. He also has dyslexia and was adopted, a set of trials he calls “the full set”. His working-class adoptive parents, despite opposition from relatives, encouraged him to go to college. “But still, there has always been this other thing driving it all,” he says. The “thing” is his natural affiliation with the grotesque, the shocking, the bizarre: “There is nothing to explain my imagination. I assume it is hereditary, I just don’t know what else it could be.” He never looked for his parents. “It was only curiosity and I don’t think that’s enough to knock on someone’s door and say, ‘Hey! Guess who I am!’ But maybe it all came from that – you don’t know who you are, so you invent it. And if you can invent one life, you can invent two.” After finishing at the Royal College of Art in his 20s, he made a concerted decision to not “make a living” from art and went into teaching instead. He is now an emeritus professor at Oxford’s Ruskin School of Art. “I wanted to have the freedom in my life to experiment,” he says. “I made installations that only existed for the run of the show, and then they’d go in a skip. People couldn’t believe I wasn’t selling them. It wasn’t a moral or political stance, I just wanted to make things that only existed in people’s memory.” If he’d become a commercial artist, he would have felt trapped, he says. “Art has not provided me with a living, because I haven’t let it.” Hollywood may soon provide an extra boon: Gilliam is currently attempting to get The Vorrh on screen. “The problem is, film producers want you to sum it up in one page,” Catling groans. “They haven’t got patience to read the thing. They say, ‘What is it? What does it do?’ Those questions are a blank wall to me.” In the meantime, he continues to work at such a rate that even he barely knows what he’s got on the go. A quartet of wild west stories. A novel due out next year called Earwig (already being adapted for film). A novel called Hollow, which he describes as “Sam Peckinpah meets Bruegel”. And three books about London. Isn’t living with his imagination, constantly needing to find avenues for it, exhausting? “No. Perhaps I’ve been waiting. Sixty-one is pretty late to start writing prose. I feel like I don’t have enough time left. I’m talking about things I’ve not even started on. It’s just there,” he says, waving one of those huge hands vaguely at his forehead. “I think I’m lazy most of the time. I should be writing more. The work is coming out of me in all different ways – but it always has. And apart from being run over by a bus, it is just going to go on.” • The Cloven is published by Coronet, priced £20, and is available from the Guardian bookshop for £17 including free UK p&p. • Brian Catling will be talking about The Cloven at Foyles Charing Cross Road in London on 3 September.