Is the thong as underwear reaching the end of its natural life? Granny knickers are in the ascendant, associated by the young not with the existential inside/outside crisis of Bridget Jones, but rather the sexy-in-themselves image of the Kardashian-Jenner sisters and their big Calvin Klein pants in an advertising campaign last January; the regular brief has made a comeback. Sales of the G-string, meanwhile, have been down since 2016, Marks & Spencer, pant-vendor to all right-thinking people, reporting only one in 10 sales being a thong. In record time, the thong has become a niche, retro sign, which means the only point of wearing it is if people can see that you are. See the parade of thong swimwear on this year’s Love Island, where the mantra is very much: if you’ve got it, flaunt it. This is the very opposite of what the thong was supposed to be all about. A constant fixation of 80s and 90s girls’ literature (Bliss, Just 17) was the VPL (visible panty line). Over time, there evolved gradations within that, such as: which particular bit of the panty’s line could be seen? M&S used to have gigantic stickers on its undies saying, “side-seam free”, the way you might promote eggs that weren’t battery farmed. The answer to this self-imposed VPL shame was a thong – there was nothing to see because there wasn’t anything there. Which then led to all kinds of questions, such as: “Why wear underwear at all?” The more modest or self-conscious teens (ie, all of them) hated thongs, while feeling under the most intense pressure to wear them. The evolution to the full pant is partly driven by tech – materials are now so flexible that you can’t see anything under anything else and the top-end has been comprehensively knocked off (Hanky Pankys, which the Wall Street Journal described, a bit ickily, as “like lace butter” in 2004, now have a perfectly serviceable Primark equivalent). You are much more likely to get a visibility issue from your thong poking over the top of your jeans in that unmistakeable whale tail than you are to see a side-seam. Steadily, too, the urgent necessity of wearing jeans so tight you can count your change through them has given way to the high-waist, the boyfriend cut, a raft of trouser that could be loosely grouped under the philosophy of “the point of clothes isn’t necessarily to prove how thin you are”. This is part of a greater curve, away from hiding everything, shaving everything and de-smelling everything, towards having a shape in three dimensions, pit hair and a lusty, vivid, unabashed inhabitance of the world. For this green shoot of hope, I say all hail the VPL.