The debate about children and technology has increasingly captured public interest over the past year, and has been raging for many more. As with anything of this nature, the public conversations about screen time have gradually become more heated and divisive. And in turn, it increasingly feels as though scientific evidence has become a casualty in the process. Just this week for example, we have seen the resurgence of scaremongering stories claiming that social media is leaving children “unable to communicate with each other”. Such claims are pushed into the spotlight in the complete absence of anything that vaguely resembles supporting evidence. The academic teams working on providing the science to inform this debate are most often overlooked. This is not surprising as science itself does not have keen PR teams or spare time to contact editors to correct flawed press coverage. And while it is true that science may be self-correcting, in practice this is a process that moves at a glacial pace. It is therefore of greater importance than ever that parliament is reaching out to scientific experts for input. Over the past few months, the UK government has been collecting written and oral evidence to complete a parliamentary inquiry about the effects of social media and screen time on child well-being. Many distinguished colleagues have spent much time providing written evidence for the committee to consider. The entire process has driven us to think more about the factors which underlie why the public discourse around technology is so dysfunctional. Here we outline three of the most prominent ones making existing dialogues unhelpful at best and toxic at worst. Importantly though, most, if not all, of these factors aren’t just focused on debates around the effects of technology – they speak to wider debates around science and evidence-based policy. Getting an overview of evidence, especially in a complex and heated debate, is difficult. Academics, public servants and other stakeholders alike need to recognise that plugging in a few terms of interest into a search engine will give an inherently skewed view of the actual state of the field. Much of the current coverage on screen time effects - if in the media or in public policy documents – could quite easily have stemmed from someone typing in key words like “social media”, “depression”, “cyberbullying”, “addiction”. Yet Google does not sort search output by quality; it ranks search input by popularity. The most scaremongering evidence, picked up by the most media outlets, will pop up first. Very recent evidence, that might use much better quality data or methods but that has not received much coverage, will not be featured. Yet one piece of high quality evidence might be worth 500 pieces of low quality evidence that populate the search output. We need to rethink the way in which we train people to critically appraise evidence. In 21st century life, finding evidence is not the most important skill anymore. Instead, it is recognising which evidence should be considered and which should be ignored, based on objective markers of quality. Is the information you are using from an unverified website, or from a published scientific paper? If it’s a research paper, who conducted the study? Do they have any conflicts of interest? Was the study run properly, and can the data and materials be found on the internet? These are the sorts of questions we should be using to interrogate any piece of evidence provided to us, regardless of the source. Until this is addressed, moral entrepreneurs and doomsayers will dominate discourse with dire yet never fully substantiated claims. One major issue making the current debate both unclear and misguided is the flawed way we think about technology use. Commonly used but poorly though out concepts like “screen time” make it seem like technology use has a consistent active ingredient akin to medications, where every additional gram has a very clear effect on each person. Screen time, however, couldn’t be less like that. Technology use is incredibly diverse, and while pretending it is a unitary concept may be convenient, it makes meaningful understandings or interventions impossible. Ten minutes of talking to a grandparent over Skype will not have the same effect as watching ten minutes of YouTube videos or spending 10 minutes catching up on celebrity gossip. This is further complicated by the fact that the effects of any one use of technology will depend on the user, their history, motivations, attitudes and much more. So we need to be wary of any question which frames screen time as a simple number – questions like ‘how much screen time we should be engaging in?’, or ‘should we impose limits or bans on screen use?’ oversimplify a very complex concept to the point of becoming meaningless. For a topic that crops up in the news so often, there is a chronic lack of high quality evidence concerning the effects of technology use. There are lots of reasons for this – for example, it’s difficult to get research funding to run high quality studies (which themselves take a long time), and the rate at which technology improves vastly outstrips the rate at which we can do good science about it. When pooled, existing data could be a powerful tool to answer the pressing questions that we’re currently trying to grapple with. And yet, if not used properly these datasets can also be dangerous. If they are used incorrectly – say, by using a wide range of flexible analysis techniques, and then only selectively reporting results that fit a certain narrative – then they become no more useful than anecdotal stories. Using pre-registered analyses, registered reports or other ways of dealing with researcher degrees of freedom is a key way of addressing these issues. It would be best if we could already provide society with the evidence it needs at such a critical time - but we cannot. Just because the evidence isn’t there yet doesn’t mean that robust and objective studies won’t be published in the future. But being trapped in this situation, we believe that pointing out the current lack of evidence loudly and clearly is vital; basing policy on low quality or biased evidence would be a fiasco for both policy and science. Like debates about the effects of playing Dungeons and Dragons, listening to rock‘n’roll, and reading comic books, we risk repeating past mistakes when discussing the place of screens in our everyday lives. We are not, on balance, optimistic the wider debate about technology effects can substantially move on until these issues are taken seriously. If we do not have evidence, and communicate this evidence honestly and efficiently, well-meaning people will fund, publicise, and support misguided campaigns that have no chance of accomplishing their stated goals. But we absolutely have to find a way if we want to break out of the seemingly endless cycle of moral panics around the latest social craze. Fundamentally, the worries that we have around technology are important and understandable. The quality of evidence, and the way that evidence is presented in public, need to reflect that.