A web designer who killed his date in a speedboat crash on the Thames has launched an appeal despite being on the run. Jack Shepherd, 30, has been in hiding since he was convicted of the manslaughter by gross negligence of Charlotte Brown, 24. He failed to attend his Old Bailey trial in July and was sentenced to six years in his absence, having skipped bail. An arrest warrant was issued and an international manhunt is ongoing. Scotland Yard confirmed that Shepherd was “still outstanding”. Responding to speculation he may have fled the UK, a spokesman said: “We are pursuing a number of lines of inquiry.” A court of appeal official confirmed on Thursday that Shepherd’s lawyers had lodged an appeal against his conviction and sentence. Brown, from Clacton in Essex, died in December 2015 after being thrown from Shepherd’s speedboat after the two, who were drinking champagne, went for a late-night boat ride past the Houses of Parliament. It was their first date after meeting on a dating website, and they had enjoyed a meal at the Shard when, the court was told, Shepherd suggested the boat ride in an attempt to impress her. After handing Brown the controls, the boat hit a submerged log near Wandsworth Bridge and capsized, flinging her into the cold river. Shepherd was rescued after being found clinging to the upturned hull. Brown was recovered unconscious and unresponsive. The prosecutor, Aftab Jafferjee QC, told the jury it was “sheer madness” to take the boat out that cold, dark night. Lifejackets had been tucked away, the kill cord was not connected and the boat had a number of defects including faulty steering, jurors heard. Shepherd, originally from Exeter, who lived on a houseboat in Hammersmith, west London, had denied manslaughter on the basis that he had “no duty of care” toward Brown. He had informed his lawyers in mid-May that he did not intend to attend the July trial, but the Crown Prosecution Service only found out a week before proceedings were to begin. He was in telephone contact with his legal team throughout the trial. At his sentencing, Shepherd’s lawyer, Stephen Vullo QC, said his client could not face the Brown family in the dock and his decision not to come was made out of “cowardice”. He said Shepherd had married a childhood friend shortly after the crash, and that he had a two-year-old child, but the relationship had since broken down. The trial heard Shepherd had entertained up to 10 women on the 1980s speedboat he bought from the online classified ads site Gumtree, and had been warned by police about speeding on the river. Brown’s family said they were devastated at his failure to face justice, and appealed for him to return and “take responsibility for the devastation he has caused our family”. In a statement after the trial, Charlotte Brown’s sister, Katie, said: “We cannot allow Charli’s passing to be in vain – her legacy will be to highlight the appalling lack of legislation and safety measures on our waterways. “Charli died because she thought she would be safe taking a journey on Jack’s speedboat – a speedboat we now know was unsafe and that he bought with the sole purpose of seducing young women.”