Donald Trump rattled global markets on Friday after threatening to pull the United States out of the World Trade Organization, at the same time as talks between Canada and the US to revamp the Nafta trade agreement reportedly soured.. In an interview with Bloomberg published on Friday, the president railed against how the international trade body had treated the United States. “If they don’t shape up, I would withdraw from the WTO,” he said, describing the agreement to establish the body as the “single worst trade deal ever made”. He did not address his own administration’s attempts to seek help from the WTO, over retaliatory tariffs from China, the European Union, Canada, Mexico and Turkey. Trump alsoindicated he would move forward with a plan to impose tariffs on $200bn of Chinese imports once a public consultation period ends early next week. Global stocks weakened following his WTO comments, even though the treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, later dismissed the idea as “an exaggeration”. In July, the commerce secretary, Wilbur Ross, said he considered talk of withdrawing from the WTO “a little premature”. US markets opened slightly lower on Friday, while MSCI’s gauge of world stocks was down 0.25%. European markets were hit harder, after Trump said the EU needs to do much more to come to an agreement with the US on trade. The FTSE 100 closed 1.11%, or 83.61 points lower at 7432.42, while Germany’s Dax and France’s Cac both dropped by around 1%. Joshua Mahony, a market analyst at online trading group IG, said: “Global markets have staged a remarkable turnaround over the second half of the week, as the optimism about the US-Mexico deal on Monday faded into a more pessimistic phase where traders have to worry about a potential further breakdown in US relations with China, Canada and the World Trade Organisation. With markets awaiting an announcement from talks between the US and Canadian trade representatives, there is certainly a degree of risk aversion which is pushing traders to reduce their positions into the weekend.”  With just hours left on Washington’s deadline of revamping Nafta by the end of the week, the US and Canada met again on Friday morning. “We’ve all had a night to reflect, and I’m looking forward to hearing what Ambassador [Robert] Lighthizer has to say this morning,” Chrystia Freeland, Canada’s foreign minister, told reporters as she headed into a meeting with the US trade representative. Canada, she added, was not just looking for any deal. “And we’ll only agree to a deal that is a good deal for Canada,” said Freeland. “We’re not there yet.” She and Lighthizer met late Thursday night, with Freeland telling reporters that she had a “couple things to say”. The meeting lasted just five minutes. On Friday, the Globe and Mail reported on concerns voiced by Canada’s trade team that a pact may not be reached on Friday, citing a source close to the negotiation. The sticking point is Canada’s demand to retain an independent trade dispute mechanism within Nafta – an issue Lighthizer reportedly refused to budge on, despite repeated offers of concessions from Canada, according to the report. The need for a trade dispute mechanism in the pact – long described as a red line by Canadian officials – could take on a greater importance for Canada amid Trump’s threat to abandon the WTO, as doing so would leave Canada and Mexico will few options to mediate any potential trade disputes. Still, Trump this week expressed confidence that Canada and the US will be able to strike a deal, hinting that there may be some flexibility in Washington’s deadline. “Canada’s going to make a deal at some point,” the president told Bloomberg. “It may be by Friday or it may be within a period of time.” Canada hurried to Washington earlier this week after the US announced it had struck a bilateral deal with Mexico. The news left Canadian officials scrambling, suggesting they had just days to secure a spot in the pact or risk Trump imposing tariffs that could wreak havoc on Canada’s auto industry. Trump set a deadline of Friday for the revamp of a 24-year-old accord that accounts for more than $1tn in annual trade. The tight timeline – coming after more than a year of renegotiations – is designed to accommodate a 90-day waiting period required in the US and push the deal through before an upcoming change in Mexico’s government.