US authorities are investigating how a “suicidal” airline employee was able to steal a plane from Seattle-Tacoma international airport and fly for more than an hour before crashing the aircraft, in a major security breach. F-15 fighter jets were scrambled to pursue the rogue aircraft after it took off at 7.30pm on Friday evening and circled south of Seattle for just over an hour. The plane crashed on Ketron Island in the Puget Sound waterway about 25 miles south-west of the airport, with video footage showing smoke rising from the crash site. Video footage showed the Horizon Air plane doing large loops and other dangerous manoeuvres. In recorded comments to air traffic controllers, the man had indicated he intended to crash the plane. The pilot has been named as 29-year-old Richard Russell, a Seattle-area resident who had been working as a ground services employee with Horizon Air, a subsidiary of Alaska Airlines, according to The Seattle Times, citing multiple sources. Rick Christenson, a former co-worker, told the newspaper Russell was “a quiet guy” who “seemed like he was well liked by the other workers”. The FBI declined to name the pilot, who is believed to have been killed in the crash. Investigators believe the airline employee used his security clearance to steal the Q400 turboprop plane from a maintenance area. He had been credentialed to access to planes as part of his work, which included cleaning and towing aircraft, as well as baggage handling. He underwent a background check when he was hired by Horizon in February 2015 and had been subjected to biennial reviews since. Local police officials described the crash as a suicide unrelated to terrorism. Paul Pastor, the county sheriff, said there was no indication the person flying the plane had intended any harm to others. Pastor said the man “did something foolish and may well have paid with his life”. The man can be heard on audio recordings telling air traffic controllers that he is “just a broken guy”. Horizon Air CEO Gary Beck said it was not yet clear how the man learned to start, taxi and fly an aircraft. “We don’t know how he learned to do that,” Beck said during a Saturday press conference. “Unlike a car, there’s not a key that you stick in and turn,” he said. The emergency shut down the airport, known as Sea-Tac, and the surrounding skies. Flights were grounded with some passengers tweeting that their plane stopped abruptly on the runway. The Sea-Tac control tower recognized that an unauthorized takeoff was occurring as the plane taxied to the runway. The worker apparently backed the plane up in order to reach the taxiway, and then proceeded to the runway. Air national guard fighter jets based in Portland, Oregon, rushed to the area within minutes of the unauthorized takeoff. Arriving ahead of sonic booms, they tailed the airliner over the Chambers Bay golf course, which hosted the US Open in 2015, before the pilot began turning barrel rolls over the Puget Sound. “It was unfathomable, it was something out of a movie,” witness Royal King told The Seattle Times. “The smoke lingered. You could still hear the F-15s, which were flying low.” On Saturday morning, the White House press secretary, Sarah Sanders, said in a statement that Donald Trump was monitoring the situation. Debra Eckrote, a regional chief with the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), described the wreckage of the aircraft as “highly fragmented”. “The wings are off. The fuselage is kinda positioned upside down,” Eckrote said Saturday morning during a press briefing. “With the daylight, the fire’s out, we’ll be able to identify the parts and pieces of the wreckage and focus on the areas that we’re looking for,” she continued. Eckrote said fighter pilots and the air traffic controllers worked to bring the plane down without loss of life. The Washington state governor, Jay Inslee, praised the fighter pilots, tweeting: “Those pilots are trained for moments like tonight and showed they are ready and capable.” Video of the stolen Q400 out of @SeaTacAirport being chased by an F-15 pic.twitter.com/L2RhTJnpga The plane crashed in a wooded area of Ketron Island, a speck in Puget Sound believed to be home to 12 people. Firefighters and police boarded a ferry to extinguish the resulting blaze, which burned into the night. “Our hearts are with the family of the individual aboard, as well as all our Alaska Air and Horizon Air employees,” Horizon Air chief operating officer, Constance von Muehlen, said in a video statement. Security concerns raised by the crash would likely be part of a months-long investigation into the incident. “The greatest threat we have to aviation is the insider threat,” Erroll Southers, a former FBI agent and transportation security expert, told the Associated Press. “Here we have an employee who was vetted to the level to have access to the aircraft and had a skill set proficient enough to take off with that plane.” Alaska Airlines CEO Brad Tilden said the company will be reviewing its security procedures. “It’s natural to ask yourself what procedures were there,” Tilden said during a Saturday press conference. “In terms of improvements we might make as a company or an industry … it’s too early to say.”