Ollie Pope is all set to become the third 20-year-old to play Test cricket for England this summer. But while the swirling wind around the Nursery Ground could easily have blown some of the wispy hair off his upper lip, Surrey’s middle-order batsman appeared very much unfazed by his first outing with the senior side. Indeed, scoring a neatly chipped goal in the their football warm-up to cheers of “Yes, Popey” was an ideal start among his new teammates. So too was an assured performance in front of the TV cameras in which the right-hander – called up to replace Dawid Malan following the 31-run win at Edgbaston – spoke with the maturity that Ed Smith, the national selector, hopes will see this summer’s golden form transfer to the highest level. “I feel confident in my game and ready for the next step,” said Pope, who made his Championship debut for Surrey less than a year ago but must now, amid a season in which he averages 85 in Division One, take on the world’s No 1 side, India. Informing this outlook is the impact of Sam Curran, the county teammate who is five months his junior but fresh from picking up the man of the match award in Birmingham. With Somerset’s Dom Bess also showing youthful elan during his two Tests against Pakistan, it is little wonder Pope replied to a query about his age with “if you are good enough, you’re young enough”, before quickly correcting the saying. As well as being a product of Surrey’s much-vaunted academy and the set-up at Cranleigh School, the redhead’s rapid rise to the verge of becoming England cap No 687, despite only 15 first-class matches to date, owes much to playing grade cricket for Campbelltown-Camden in Sydney last winter. It was a trip paid for by the England and Wales Cricket Board’s overseas placements scheme and one that resulted in his impeccable contribution to the club, both on and off the field, being brought up in the New South Wales parliament by MP Chris Patterson (who also happens to be the club’s vice-president). Self-reliance, while living in a flat in the garden of the club secretary Jason Ellsmore, appears to be the biggest takeaway for Pope himself, who averaged 63 with the bat as the Ghosts, as they are known, claimed their first Minor Premiers title in 33 years. Pope said: “I was on my own two feet a little bit, especially with regard to my cricket, both technically and finding someone to train with me. I didn’t really have a coach, I just had to ask people to throw balls at me midweek. But the wickets were flat, so I got time in the middle that I needed. “That’s a massive thing for a young lad to do when you’re just finding your way in the game, getting to know strengths and weaknesses, learning from your dismissals and the games you play well in and score runs in. It just made me know my game a bit better and learn about myself as a person too, I think, so it was a pretty invaluable experience.” It is with some regret, therefore, that the ECB has frozen such winter deals for promising youngsters amid ongoing budget cuts – the bumper new TV deal does not kick in until 2020, even if planning for The Hundred continues apace – with Pope, though new to the spotlight, neatly side-stepping a controversial take. Pope said: “I’m surprised [they have been discontinued] but hopefully counties keep doing it. We’ve got a lad [at Surrey], Will Jacks, who is off to Perth, so hopefully the counties keep supporting it because it was a top drawer thing for me to do.” More pressing for Pope as he prepares for a debut, with England mulling whether Moeen Ali or Chris Woakes should replace Ben Stokes, is the challenge of facing India and in particular the threat posed by Ravi Ashwin given, by his own admission, much of his first-class cricket in this breakthrough summer has come against seamers. Hampshire’s Liam Dawson was the most threatening slow bowler Pope could name-check from a season chalking up three Championship centuries for Surrey but as regards Ashwin, whose devilish variations and accuracy picked up seven English wickets at Edgbaston, Pope has already begun devising a method. He said: “He’s not your regular off-spinner. He bowls a ball that swings away and one that swings back in. You’ve just got to watch him a bit closer out of the hand. You need to know what ball’s coming down at you – you can’t just premeditate with him. “I’ll have a closer look before the game, if picked, and I’ll have my gameplan before. Not a massive difference, just got to look a bit closer, I think.” Pope’s success this year has come from No 6 but in terms of a promotion, he brushed off any concerns. And while he plays his cricket at the Oval, he was keen to point out he has missed out on the flat ones this year but come up trumps when conditions have been against the batsmen. He may be young in years, but Pope is already talking like an old pro.