It took until Georgia Hall’s 49th hole at the Women’s British Open for a scorecard aberration. That the 22-year-old responded so strongly from her first bogey illustrated a competitive spirit that will be necessary if Hall is to win her first major title on Sunday. Hall’s dropped shot at the 13th was offset – and more – by birdies at the 15th and 16th. After handing another stroke back to the course, at the 17th, Hall again fought back; she birdied the closing hole. A third round of 69, Hall’s third sub-70 score in succession, leaves her one from the lead as held by Pornanong Phatlum with a round to play. Hall, who was third in the British Open a year ago, is seeking to become the third home winner since the tournament was afforded major status in 2001. “Today was harder than the first two days,” she said. “My long game wasn’t quite on but I putted very well. I’m in a similar position to last year and hopefully I’ll be a bit more relaxed this time.” Phatlum, who spent the day in Hall’s company, also signed for a 69 in moving to 13 under. The Thai has dropped one shot in the entire event, at the 12th in round three. She could become the third player from her home country to win a LPGA‑sanctioned event in three weeks, a statistic that endorses the strength of the game there. How will Phatlum keep calm in the frenzy? “I sing to myself,” she said. Ryu So-yeon has been perfectly open about her desire to claim a grand slam of major championships. Two of the five were already banked before Ryu was defeated in a play-off at the Women’s PGA Championship last month. The 28-year-old Korean was a factor in this tournament even before a third-round 67, which raised her to within two of the lead. Even more notable was that Ryu was two over par after four holes. “Sometimes it’s just better not to expect anything,” said Ryu of her strategy for Sunday. “I’ll just focus on what I can do, instead of predicting what’s going on. “I’m in pretty good position. If I can have this attitude tomorrow as well, I can play good.” This is quite the congested 54-hole scene. Minjee Lee, Mamiko Higa and Park Sung-Hyun sit at 10 under. A significant aspect of this major has been the lack of links wind; a scenario which appears unlikely to change. Ariya Jutanugarn’s third round of 69 means she is not entirely out of the picture at minus six. Nonetheless, the world No 1 needs heroics – and favours from those higher up the leaderboard – if she is to prevail here. Lydia Ko is a stroke better off following her 70. Catriona Matthew, the champion at Lytham in 2009, cut a rueful figure after adding a 72 to rounds of 71 and 70. “I probably played my best golf of the week,” said the Scot. “Crazy game.”