Tuneful, schlocky, and deeply offensive unless you have a take-it-or-leave-it approach to female agency, the Broadway musical Pretty Woman turns on the adorably chaste question of whether or not a boy and a girl will kiss on the lips. They will. But only after they’ve kissed everywhere else first. Not that you will see any sex. This love story about a free-spirited prostitute and her john is a family show! Get your mind out of the proscenium. Even in 1990, Pretty Woman was already a pretty terrible idea for a romantic comedy. Only the volcanic charm of Julia Roberts as Vivian, the manic pixie dream sex worker – that hair, that smile – made it watchable. In 2018, it just isn’t. The tale of a corporate raider, Edward (Richard Gere in the movie, Andy Karl here, playing a blander version of his Groundhog Day character), who self-actualizes after a week with a Hollywood Boulevard hooker (Samantha Barks, spunky, but no auburn force of nature), has aged about as well as a carton of milk left on a radiator forever. The score by Bryan Adams and Jim Vallance is perfectly pleasant, but except for a couple of riffs so macho-sounding they suggest a penis as plectrum, it is also perfectly unremarkable. Here’s the energetically acted plot: in the days before GPS, Edward gets lost a few blocks from his hotel. Enterprising Vivian, a pair of high-heeled PVC boots with a girl attached, offers directions and herself. Edward, intrigued, hires her for a night. Then a week. Call it the summer of 69. Will love bloom? Or just herpes? (Vivian obviously practices safe sex, but Edward goes through women like so many company prospectuses.) You might have thought that a musical adaptation, even one created by an all-male creative team, would have nodded to a few cultural changes or at least given its female lead a credible storyline. You might have thought wrong. No, the book credited to Garry Marshall and JF Lawton is still the heartwarming story of how sex teaches a man to feel and money teaches a woman to … shop? But now it has a middle-aged male narrator (Eric Anderson) added on. Vivian markets herself for $300 per evening. Even considering currency appreciation, that’s not much. The Pretty Woman musical, directed by Jerry Marshall is cheap, too, a perilous and revealing choice as the original film is, at its best, cutesified affluence porn. Instead we get fake palms, fake luxury, fake everything. The dance numbers seem borrowed from bar mitzvah B-roll and the shopping scene, which should be a triumph, is just no fun. The show has given a lot of thought to Vivian's curves, but not to her story arc Speaking of clothes, when not recreating the movie’s outfits, the production dresses its female actors as skimpily as possible – a crop top at a polo match, bras as shirts on Rodeo Drive, nonstop bustiers for Orfeh as Vivian’s hooker bestie. When Vivian arrives in Edward’s hotel room, she plops down on the floor, lying on her stomach, giving the whole first row a superb view of her cleavage. (No wonder they ovate.) Her every outfit is designed around a pushup bra. There’s far more engineering and care devoted to the lingerie than to the story structure. Because Edward gets to want stuff. First Vivian and then a new career where he builds stuff instead of wrecking it. But they haven’t figured out an arc for Vivian beyond landing that great guy 20 years her senior who falls asleep reading financial restructuring briefs. They’ve created a soupçon of a backstory for her, but it’s just a trailer park and a string of bad boyfriends. (They’ve also cut her funniest joke: “I screwed the debate team in high school.” Family show!) The big number closing the second act is You’re Beautiful, an Eric Clapton-esque pastiche that Edward and the chorus sing to a made-over Vivian. (The word beautiful appears in the show 20 times. Synonyms exist.) Well, that’s nice. But Vivian’s beauty has never been in doubt. It is literally her stock in trade, which Edward, who deals with stock, should know. What’s more doubtful is her own trajectory, her own desires. The show has given a lot of thought to her curves, but not to her arc. Her first act I wish song is Anywhere But Here, where we learn that unlike any other prostitute: “This sidewalk doesn’t suit my soul.” She’s less than specific about what would suit it. She does get an empowerment number in the second act, I Can’t Go Back, and she gets to sing it wearing a white pantsuit. But she’s never allowed to articulate what she’s going forward to. “Now you got me thinking / About working on a dream / I’m not quite there yet,” she sings. She should hurry up. The musical’s almost over. Tellingly, both songs are about what she doesn’t want. Does Vivian want love? Or maybe marriage? (That George Bernard Shaw crack about marriage just being legalized prostitution has never seemed more relevant.) Or would she settle for a better musical that even pretended to care about female interiority and valued a woman for something besides her beauty? A girl can dream.