The acclaimed documentary film-maker Steve James has a gift for zeroing in on the microcosms and enclaves of American culture that speak more broadly to the country’s racial and socio-economic fault lines. In Hoop Dreams, ranked the greatest film of the 1990s by the late critic Roger Ebert, and James’s magnum opus, he spent five years following two aspiring basketball players from Chicago, yielding a sports-defying tale of life on the fringes of the American dream. In the Oscar-nominated Abacus: Small Enough to Jail, he uses a small, family-owned bank – outrageously, the only one indicted in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis – as a springboard to discuss Chineseimmigrants in the US and the fundamental inequities of the justice system. Now James has done it again, this time with a subject as improbable (and yet familiar) as the Chicago public school that two of his three children have attended. In America to Me, James’s new 10-part documentary series, the film-maker spent a year at Oak Park River Forest high, a super-congested and racially diverse school in the Chicago suburb where luminaries like Frank Lloyd Wright and Ernest Hemingway once lived. Like many of James’s films, America to Me is about one thing, a high school, and so much more: those tumultuous, formative years of pubescence; the intersections between race, class and sexuality; the rich but often fraught relations of teachers and students; cafeteria banter; spoken word class; administrative oversight; homecoming and the football team; the amorphous politics of the high school food chain; and one relatively progressive school’s failure to adequately address the achievement gap between its white students and those of color. America to Me, which gets its name from a 1938 Langston Hughes poem, is one of the year’s most essential portraits of contemporary life in a country whose promises pan out for a conspicuous few, leaving others in the dust. “I knew I wanted to focus on a very particular kind of place,” says James, who expressed his desire to make a documentary about a high school in a 2015 interview that a member of Oak Park’s school board fortuitously came across. Oak Park, James says, is not like the rest of the US, but its diversity is increasingly reflected in many of the country’s suburbs. “More and more schools are going to be grappling with these questions, so I felt like it would have larger ramifications as a symbol of a liberal part of America that’s failing.” That Oak Park – OPRF for short – is “failing” its students won’t be anyone’s sole takeaway from the docuseries, although a few of the 10 episodes are more patently issue-oriented than others. These segments, however, don’t come at the expense of the series’ various recurring characters, who are as interesting and infectious as any you’ll find on scripted television. James follows a group of about a dozen students through the 2015-2016 school year, using their passions and their frustrations, shot through with sweaty-palmed teenage angst, to weave an engrossing tapestry of race relations in a high school that’s 55% white, 27% black, 9% Latino, and 6% biracial. The subjects include Ke’Shawn, a junior who’s clearly bright but has trouble applying himself. “Get this on camera,” he says at one point. “I’m doing my work.” There is also Chanti and Charles, both of whom are involved with the school’s spoken word club, which boasts NBA star Iman Shumpert as an alumnus. Senior Kendale jumps between his white friends in band and his black friends on the wrestling team, while Tiara, a sophomore who wants “to be like Beyoncé or Christina Aguilera”, gets ready for prom with her girlfriends and professes to liking lunch more than school. In one of episode five’s many tense scenes, a budding film student named Jada presents her documentary to the class, which sets off a stormy discussion among students, plus Jada and the teacher, about racial preferences in dating and her response to her classmates’ critiques. Though many of the students have been underserved by Oak Park, which is shown in the series undertaking its first comprehensive study of its racial achievement gap in 12 years, James has chosen to follow an extraordinarily magnetic, self-possessed group of kids. Without the space afforded by the docuseries format, “we wouldn’t have been able to follows the stories in as much depth, or follow as many kids, or have as much fun,” says James, who got the approval of the school board despite opposition from top administrators. “We wanted to show their lives fully: their joys, their disappointments, their triumphs.” In doing so, James engages in a bit of vérité film-making, though not so much so that the series feels unstructured. He mentions Frederick Wiseman, the master documentarian whose lengthy films – set in a mental hospital, the National Gallery, a Philadelphia high school, and Jackson Heights, Queens – are about as pure an example of undiluted, fly-on-the-wall film-making as one could hope to achieve. “I’m not Frederick Wiseman, in many ways,” James jokes, leaning into self-effacement despite a world-class body of work. “I like talking to people and I want their perspectives on their lives. But this is the most issue-oriented film I’ve done in this larger context of vérité storytelling. We couldn’t just follow people around and hear their perspectives and not engage in these more analytical sections. Sometimes vérité works beautifully, but it only works beautifully when the circumstances yield deeper understandings of what’s going on.” In America to Me, one-on-one interviews with school faculty often provide these kinds of insights, as teachers speak with remarkable candor about the system’s shortcomings and even their own. English teacher Jessica Stovall, a standout over the 10 episodes, takes Ke’Shawn under her wing, using a form of social-emotional learning to get kids to come out of their shells. But she’s frustrated too by the institutional racism inherent in Oak Park’s lackluster approach to helping its most challenged students, which puts an extra burden on its classroom faculty. Another memorable contributor is the former vice-principal Chala Holland, one of the faculty members who insisted James follow white students too, particularly so he’d more fully comprehend the correlation between race and achievement. “Two of my three kids were in the school and having very different experiences because of the tracks they were in and what it meant to be in that school and who was in their classes,” James says. “The higher track was overwhelmingly white. The lower track was overwhelmingly kids of color. The community had been wringing its hands over inequities in achievement between white and black students for a long time. I thought, ‘Is much changing? It doesn’t seem to be. What must it be like to be a black kid in this system?’” By letting its subjects speak for themselves – and refusing to condescend to or pathologize them the way documentaries about race often do – America to Me answers that question to the extent that it can. “America never was America to me,” goes the Langston Hughes poem James settled on after filming finished. “That says so much about what kids, and so many people of color, are going through in America,” he adds. “Our mission is to show America through their eyes. There’s an intimacy to the title: not you, but me.” America to Me starts on Starz on 26 August with a UK date yet to be announced