John McCain will no longer receive treatment for brain cancer, the Arizona senator’s family said in a statement on Friday. McCain, the 2008 Republican nominee for president, was diagnosed with glioblastoma, an aggressive form of cancer, last year. He has been absent from the Senate. The McCain family statement said: “The progress of disease and the inexorable advance of age render their verdict. With his usual strength of will, he has now chosen to discontinue medical treatment.” McCain’s wife, Cindy McCain, said on Twitter: “I love my husband with all of my heart. God bless everyone who has cared for my husband along this journey.” His daughter Meghan McCain, an analyst for ABC, wrote: “My family is deeply appreciative of all the love and generosity you have shown us during this past year.” Even in his absence from Washington McCain, 81, has been a strong and prominent critic of Donald Trump and his administration, drawing regular fire from the president. Last week, Trump snubbed McCain by not mentioning his name during the signing of a defence spending bill named in the senator’s honour. McCain has long been known as an independent-minded presence in Republican ranks. In July 2017, he made a dramatic late-night return to Capitol Hill from treatment, to cast the vote that sank an attempted Republican repeal of the Affordable Care Act. He did, however, support Trump’s package of tax cuts. On Friday, the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, said on Twitter: “Very sad to hear this morning’s update from the family of our dear friend … We are so fortunate to call him our friend and colleague. John, Cindy, and the entire McCain family are in our prayers at this incredibly difficult hour.” A navy pilot during the Vietnam war, McCain endured torture during more than five years as a prisoner in North Vietnam. Another Vietnam veteran, former senator, secretary of state and 2004 presidential candidate John Kerry, said on Friday that McCain was “a brave man showing us once again what the words grace and grit really mean”. McCain published a memoir, The Restless Wave, earlier this year. A documentary about his life, For Whom the Bell Tolls, was also released.