 “I’ve got a lot of people that care about me. It’s going to disappoint them to hear that I did this.” Those were among Richard Russell’s last words to a Seattle air traffic controller on Friday night before the 29-year-old airline employee crashed a stolen Alaska Airlines plane into a near-deserted island in Puget Sound. Russell, who was widely identified as the pilot Saturday morning, was the sole victim in the crash. Russell’s death and the dramatic moments that preceded it – a passenger plane trailed by fighter jets cutting rolls against the setting sun – left those who knew him stunned and saddened rather than disappointed. Details of the apparent suicide were still emerging on Saturday, and no evidence of Russell’s motivations had been publicized beyond statements he made to air traffic controllers trying to coax him down. Officials were quick to point out that Russell, an employee of three and a half years with Alaska Airlines’ regional subsidiary Horizon Air, passed the background checks necessary to handle baggage and clean aircraft. Russell is believed to have taken a twin-turboprop Bombardier Q400 that had been parked for the night. He lifted off from Seattle-Tacoma International Airport at 7.32pm on Friday and flew, tailed by F-15 Eagle jets, until the plane crashed at 8.47pm into Ketron Island, located 25 miles south-west of the airport. Speaking with the Seattle Times, one of Russell’s former coworkers described him as a quiet, well-liked young man. “I feel really bad for Richard and for his family. I hope they can make it through this,” retired Horizon Air operations supervisor Rick Christenson told the Times. In what appears to be his personal blog, Russell described himself as a native of Key West, Florida, who moved to Alaska at age seven. He eventually ended up in Coos Bay, Oregon, where in 2010 he met a woman he married the following year. The couple ran a bakery for three years before pulling up stakes and heading to the Seattle suburb of Sumner to be closer to Russell’s in-laws. Writing in the blog two years ago, Russell celebrated his job at Horizon Air. As an airline employee, he wrote: “I’m able to fly … at my leisure.” Russell captured some of his travels to France, Mexico and across the United States in a video uploaded to YouTube in December. “In this season of life we enjoy exploring as much as possible, whether it is a day (or so) trip to one of Alaska Airline’s destinations, or visiting a new area of Washington,” Russell wrote in the blog. Russell does not appear to have had any pilot training. Criminal and air safety investigations likely to shed light on what preparation if any he took for the fatal flight are ongoing.