The New York Times recently published, “Beyond Porridge and Boiled Mutton: A Taste of London”, in praise of four London restaurants. Travel writer Robert Draper, who had rekindled a relationship with the city after a 10-year hiatus, was pleasantly surprised by the evaporation of a once “drab baseline” and “sallow and predictable dining experience”, and applauded our “recent flowering as a culinary destination”. Let’s talk about this. London’s emergence as a restaurant destination is not especially recent (“flowering” suggests we are at training-bra stage), so why do many, often Americans, continue to peddle such a dim view of British food? As the late US food writer Laurie Colwin put it in English Food, an essay in 1992’s Home Cooking, her compatriots are “apt to sneer and tell you that it is impossible to get a decent meal in the British Isles and that the English know nothing about cooking.” Draper obviously once felt that way, garnishing his esteem for our apparently new culinary assets with a reminder of how bad our food once was. One Twitter user commented: “What is this WEIRD obsession Americans have with London having bad food? Like, seriously, boiled mutton? Was his last visit during the Victorian era?” Subsequent posts with stills of Oliver Twist holding his bowl out for more gruel, and “native guide” Dick Van Dyke, jigging around on the Mary Poppins set in his chimney sweep’s garb. Like another commenter, I’ve never eaten boiled mutton, nor have I had porridge for any meal but breakfast. So how have we got here? The land of plenty sits in stark contrast to the British food culture that developed in the 20th century, straitened by rationing, its aftermath, and curveballs like BSE and foot and mouth disease. Nonetheless, we have a rich heritage of producing high quality fruit (think apples and pears, the darlings of rhyming slang), cold climate vegetables (roots, tubers), and stellar dairy products that are worthy of more acknowledgment. In her essay, Colwin waxes lyrical about our incomparably thick double cream, the most delicious thing she has ever eaten, stuff about which “lovers of English food dream … at night”; and with titans like cheddar and stilton up our sleeves, who can deny the British cheese-making prowess? For anyone in doubt of UK’s legacy of edible biodiversity, look at Slow Food UK’s Ark of Taste, a celebration of Britain’s forgotten foods. In a 2001 New Yorker article about the changing face of British food, the British journalist (and adoptive New Yorker) Rebecca Mead referred to her homeland as lacking “a strong national cuisine”, making us susceptible to “the food of globalisation”. She is right that we spent many years looking abroad for culinary influence – we virtually venerate Italian food, love tapas, and still refer back to the French canon, not to mention having longstanding love affairs with Chinese and Indian cuisines (curry is by many seen to be as much a national dish as fish and chips). With her Mediterranean-facing cookbooks, even food-writing deity Elizabeth David encouraged us to look overseas for edible inspiration. But it’s no wonder this happened, surely, when good fresh produce was in short supply. And, to boot, if your native dishes, however delicious, are variations on shades of beige (from old faithfuls like Lancashire hotpot, pie and mash and Yorkshire pudding to laverbread, pease pudding and dripping toast) – the enemies of art direction but friends of the palate – it’s not surprising they’d become eclipsed by dishes from warmer climes. It had never occurred to me that food in Britain was bad until I heard the likes of Draper lambasting it. My parents like food, and though they never spent much money on it and relied on supermarkets for provisions, my mother, particularly, knew her onions enough to transform lacklustre ingredients into something we enjoyed. I object to the faulty knowledge – like Brat's pork being ‘from the village of Tamworth' (it's a breed of pig) For my generation (I was born in 1985) and older, a British person’s formative experience of British food relies on whether someone in their immediate family knew how to cook when they were growing up. Arguably everyone knows someone that can cook, but good cooks aren’t as ubiquitous as elsewhere in Europe. Somewhere along the way in Britain, cooking was demoted as a life skill (or maybe it was never really promoted). While in France – as the Oxford scholar Theodore Zeldin points out in his book France 1848-1945: Intellect and Pride – a burgeoning restaurant culture began to flourish, British chefs remained invisible, in private kitchens, faceless and nameless caterers to the aristocracy. This perhaps lies at the root of why career cooking was held in fairly low esteem until the 1990s, when the chef Fergus Henderson rose not only to restore old-fashioned British things to menus – faggots, potted pork, rice pudding and eccles cakes – but inadvertently to trigger, I think, a revolution in how we perceive the kitchen as a career path. Which brings me to our restaurant scene, once sorrily referred to by Italian writer Natalia Ginzburg as “wretched” and derivative (“They often give [their restaurants] foreign names to make them more attractive – ‘Pustza’, ‘Chez Nous’, ‘Roma’, ‘Le Alpi’ … [where] a mournful silence reigns”), now up there with the world’s best, boasting as diverse and vibrant an offering as any other leading world city. I don’t object to the favourable reviews of the restaurants in Draper’s piece, but to the outdated stereotype and sometimes faulty knowledge – like Brat’s pork being “from the village of Tamworth” (Tamworth is a breed of pig). British food started changing longer than a decade ago, and it has shifted so drastically that, as we have seen, the Twitter gannets will have anyone who references its “drab” and “sallow” past, even anecdotally, for breakfast, lunch and dinner. Probably boiled – with a side of porridge. • Mina Holland is deputy editor of Guardian Feast