If that elegantly moulded vase features an image of a large motorbike, a rude teddy bear or beautifully incised swearwords, then that could be a clue: the Turner prize-winning potter Grayson Perry knows he made a lot of stuff in the 1980s and early 1990s – he just doesn’t know where it is. The artist, and the Holburne Museum in Bath, which plans a major exhibition in 2020 of Perry’s early work, if curators can find it, have put out a joint appeal for anyone who remembers buying from a mop-haired Essex biker, or his alter ego, the daintily ribboned and bowed Claire. The public has been asked to turn out sideboards and attics for any of the pieces he made between 1983 and 1994. “I was very excited when the Holburne Museum proposed a show of my ceramics from the 80s and early 90s as it would also be an opportunity to find and record the beginnings of my career,” Perry said. “My record-keeping hasn’t improved much; I recently moved house and found five pots in the loft which had been unseen since the 80s and a dozen plates from the early 90s in a cupboard under a sink!” His wife, the psychotherapist Philippa Perry, recently revealed on Facebook that she had accidentally sent two of her husband’s drawings to Oxfam in a bundle of old clothes. The charity shop phoned to check if the gift was intended, and the artist not only said they could keep the drawings, but agreed to sign them. Perry, who in 2003 became the first potter to win the Turner prize, said many of his early pieces were similarly casually treated, never photographed or recorded. “When I started out making ceramics at evening classes, part of the reason I enjoyed it was that I could make artworks relatively quickly. In my first decade of exhibiting, I would often show over 60 or 70 works, often made over the course of a few months. I sold these works for modest sums and often gave away what was left.” The director of Holburne Museum, Chris Stephens, said it was effectively calling on the public to crowdsource an exhibition. Catrin Jones, the curator, called it a Grayson Perry treasure hunt. “We already have works from Perry’s own collection and others promised for the exhibition – but we know there are lots more out there.” Most of the pieces were exhibited and sold in London, though Perry also had shows in Paris, New York and Texas over those years. Anyone who suspects that they might have one is invited to contact the Holburne by emailing curator@holburne.org – the museum will then check for Perry’s distinctive potter’s marks to confirm authenticity.