Mohsin Hamid appears to have a preternatural ability to summon up the spirits of his time. He finished writing his latest novel, Exit West, which was published early last year and shortlisted for the Man Booker prize, well before Trump and Brexit brought questions of borders and national identity to the forefront of the global narrative. The novel was in part a response to the migrant crisis that was unfolding in various corners of the world as Hamid was writing, but it also predicted with almost uncanny prescience the rise of nativist paranoia and racial intolerance, which have become such features of life in 2018. The novelist Kamila Shamsie, a friend of Hamid, told me another story about his proleptic powers. “On September 9 or 10, 2001, I was having dinner with Mohsin in London and he told me about the book he was working on,” Shamsie said. “It was about a young Pakistani man doing very well in the corporate world in New York. Despite all his success, one day he found himself listening closely to a speech by an extremist Muslim – it wasn’t the religious content of the man’s words that caught his attention, but the political content. I saw Mohsin again on September 12, 2001. ‘Mohsin, your novel… ?’ I said. ‘I don’t know,’ he replied. ‘I think I have to go on writing it.’ ‘Of course you do,’ I said.” That novel, Hamid’s second book, became The Reluctant Fundamentalist and was seen by many as the definitive literary response to 9/11. Certainly it was far more successful both critically and commercially than the attempts of more established authors to address the twin towers. John Updike, Martin Amis, Don DeLillo – the great and good of Anglo-American letters queued up to respond to the attacks, but it was Hamid’s protagonist Changez, bursting with charisma and ambition, who spoke with the greatest clarity and authority about what might have driven the terrorists to act. Shamsie suggests that the very reason for the novel’s success may have been precisely because it wasn’t an attempt to seize upon 9/11 as a subject, but rather that Hamid was “a writer already looking at the world, and the conflicts shaping within it, and turning his imaginative attention to them before those conflicts became headline news everywhere”. I speak to Hamid in early August. He is in London as part of an extended holiday with his family. He’s been away so much over the past 18 months promoting Exit West, he says in a voice that has something of the New Yorker’s pace and inflection, that he wanted to spend the summer relaxing with his wife Zahra Khan and their two children. Their vacation has taken in the Greek islands, which he fell in love with as a 21-year-old backpacker; his favourites are Naxos and Santorini. They also spent time in Amsterdam and Berlin. I ask him about the ability of novels in general – and his novels in particular – to engage not only with their own times, but also to take prophetic leaps into the future. “Novels don’t simply look,” he says, “they also exist. Just as in looking on something we change what is being observed, novels and the arts more generally, in looking at what may come, are also shaping what may come. It isn’t an entirely passive position.” Exit West is largely set in a near-future dystopia of unfettered migration. Saeed and Nadia, the protagonists of the story, journey through a series of Narnia-like portals that take them from the unnamed city in which they have grown up to a camp on Mykonos, thence to a darkly repressive London, and on to a life in California that carries echoes of the first settlers to strike out for the west. At the very end of the novel – and I don’t think this is a spoiler – we move further forward in time and end on a note of optimism, with Hamid painting a picture of a very different world, but one that might almost be called a utopia. I ask him about this upbeat conclusion. “What I’m trying to do is not just to say: ‘What is the middle of the probabilistic distribution? What is the 50th percentile of what humanity’s likely to look like in the future?’ But rather to lean on that a little bit and to say: ‘What happens if we look with a degree of optimism towards the future?’ That’s very important. I’ve come to the belief that pessimism is a deeply conservative and reactionary position. It tends to lead towards deference, towards the strong and powerful, towards powerlessness and a kind of surrender.” The end of Exit West feels like a kind of blueprint for humanity, a path out of our nightmarish political squabbling and towards a more socially balanced future. “Putting forth an optimistic vision like that makes that vision, in some small way, more likely to come true.” Hamid is exceptionally well placed to write about a world of porous borders and perpetual mobility. He has lived in his birthplace – Lahore, Pakistan – for the past nine years, but before that moved between Pakistan, the US and the UK, seemingly equally at home in each. His father was an academic at Stanford University during Hamid’s childhood. There was a return to Pakistan for high school and then Princeton, a spell at Harvard and a law firm, and some time in London as a management consultant. I ask him what caused him to return to Pakistan. “When we moved back in 2009, it was two months after our first child, our daughter, was born,” he says. In the lead-up to the birth, he and his wife had been discussing commonplace questions about schooling and childcare and realised that, if they didn’t move back to Pakistan then, they perhaps never would. Hamid’s wife, Zahra, also from Lahore, studied abroad like her husband and then returned to star in a popular Pakistani TV drama. She went to London with Hamid but, like him, felt an urge to return. Hamid recognises that it took a degree of bravery to make the move home. “Pakistan had a slightly frightening reputation in the news,” he says, “so we thought let’s go back, so our parents could enjoy their grandchildren, and so that we don’t become so alarmed by what life in Pakistan is like that we never make that choice and end our lives wondering what might have been. But we’re both British citizens, so moving to Pakistan didn’t end up feeling like an irrevocable decision.” I ask him whether they ever regretted the decision. “The experience has been a very mixed one,” he says. “In terms of the children having time with their grandparents and us having time with our siblings, it’s been wonderful. But Pakistan, politically, has been a tumultuous place. There have been moments when the law and order situation or the terrorism situation have been alarming.” Now, following a contested election and allegations of widespread manipulation of votes by Imran Khan’s Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf party, the political backdrop in the country seems more problematic than ever. “I think there has been a severe disruption of the democratic process in Pakistan,” Hamid says. Notwithstanding this, many of Hamid’s friends appear to be happy with the election of the former cricketer. “I suppose their reasoning is, you know, was the open, civilian, political space of recent years particularly great? Not really.” He maintains optimism by focusing on the energy and hunger for change he perceives in young Pakistanis. “What I see is that each subsequent generation in Pakistan seems to be significantly better educated than in the past. In cities like Lahore, there are all kinds of interesting things happening, whether that’s at university level, or in the arts. Is Pakistan improving? In some senses yes. In some senses it’s much more polluted and dangerous than when I was a child. But in some ways it’s much more dynamic.” In the end, the thing he clings to is “the sense that in Pakistan the number of people who will not stand for this bullshit is growing”. Hamid still works occasionally for New York-based brand consultancy Wolff Olins – he’s listed as their chief storytelling officer. “I find that the consulting is really wonderful,” he tells me. “To get on the phone with someone every so often in San Francisco, or London, or Chengdu, and talk about issues that concern them – to every so often meet up to discuss some shared project – it’s an important antidote to the horrific solitariness of my chosen profession. I do not think that being a novelist is a good profession for anyone’s mental health.” I wonder, though, how he manages to keep up with the world of business as well as the arts. Actually, he says: “I have the opposite problem, which is not how to stay in touch with developments in literature or business or politics, but how does one achieve the distance required from this so that one can look at the world with one’s own eyes and not become obsessed with the media entertainment machine? The course I’ve taken more recently is actually to detach myself from the news.” Since Trump came to power, Hamid has stopped reading newspapers or watching the news. He also shies away from social media. When I look for him online, I find a couple of tweets from 2015-16 and a mothballed personal Facebook account. There is a more active Facebook profile, but this, he tells me, is maintained by his publisher. “I was totally going to go on social media about two or three novels ago and was on Twitter for a few months and I found it to be a kind of addictive and bizarre experience. Not only is it addictive in that it has been designed to be an experience that is addictive – micro-rewards, constant feedback – it’s sort of heroin in terms of its design. But it’s pernicious in terms of how it makes one comport oneself. I wasn’t particularly good at it and I certainly didn’t enjoy it, and I became deeply suspicious of myself on it – and therefore of it as a whole – and I got the hell off.” Reading Hamid’s biography, there’s the sense of someone who has risen with ease to every one of life’s challenges. He didn’t even know that Princeton offered creative writing before he went there. He enrolled as a student of international relations – “It was the class that allowed you to take the most classes in other subjects” – and then found himself selected by Toni Morrison as the only one of her students to read his work to the whole university on graduation. Morrison also read the first draft of the novel that was to become Moth Smoke and gave him extensive feedback on it in her “beautiful handwriting in fountain pen”. He wrote seven drafts of the novel, many of them while studying at Harvard Law School, before he (and his mother – he showed her the second draft and she said: “Mmm… I don’t like this much”) was satisfied with it. Moth Smoke, the riotous tale of an out-of-work Lahore banker who falls into a spiral of drugs and crime, was a huge hit in south-east Asia and won critical admiration and awards across the world. Subsequent novels – The Reluctant Fundamentalist, How to Get Filthy Rich in Rising Asia and Exit West – attracted further praise and prizes. The Reluctant Fundamentalist was turned into a film by Mira Nair, while Exit West has been optioned by Joe and Anthony Russo – the latest directors of the Avengers franchise. Whether in business or literature, everything Hamid touches turns to gold. I ask him whether he recognises himself in this portrait of a man who has enjoyed seemingly effortless success. “I think it is very difficult for me to think of myself as having succeeded,” he says with a chuckle. “Even to the extent that many of the things that I’ve tried have gone off quite well, I think that part of the reason that many people push themselves is because of an inability to feel that what they have done is good enough. Now I think that there is a real problem to this. It’s very important to savour the moment, to feel a sense of contentment, not to live one’s life gazing towards the future and what one might do next and instead to concentrate on the present moment, which is all that life consists of. So I’m working on that kind of thing. I try to root myself in the present.” Lila Azam Zanganeh was one of the judges on the panel that shortlisted Exit West for the Man Booker last year. In an email, she said the judges “admired Exit West both for its spareness – stylistic, narrative – and its breadth. Mohsin writes at the heart and centre of the 21st century: he tackles war and migration. Exit West, in essence, is a story of migration told through a kaleidoscope of angles; a story that reads like a fabulist’s ‘prolegomenon’ for this century.” The book, she said, “is not about Pakistan, but about the universal experience of loss, and the meaning of ‘home’. It explores how we never cease to conjure new identities for the express and urgent matter of survival.” Exit West employs a narrative device that has presented itself in each of Hamid’s works to date: anonymity. No characters other than Saeed and Nadia are named; the city from which they set out, even the country, also remain unnamed. While the lack of proper nouns is not as extreme as in How to Get Filthy Rich in Rising Asia, where the only names are those of continents, the nonspecific locale does intensify the allegorical atmosphere of the novel. Hamid tells me he wanted to explore a question: “To what extent can a story speak to humanity as a whole? The best examples of the stories that do this for me are children’s stories. And children’s stories very often operate in a world of significantly reduced name specificity.” Saaed and Nadia’s home town is based on Lahore, Hamid says, but he couldn’t bring himself to give it a name. “I didn’t wish to write the demise of Lahore. It felt to me too horrifying, because it’s not impossible. But I don’t think it’s likely. I think the narratives of Pakistan’s Talibanisation etc are very unlikely narratives and I didn’t want to be peddling a story of Pakistan’s collapse.” The coming months hold a return to Pakistan for Hamid and his family, and the beginning of work on a new novel – in itself a daunting task. “As far as the novels I’ve written so far,” he tells me, “each of them has done what I wanted them to do as well as I was capable of doing it at the time. I’m happy with all of them. But none of them does what I now want a novel to do. What I now want a novel to do, I don’t know how to do – and I’m not sure that I can.” Hamid will miss the National Youth Theatre’s Edinburgh performance of The Reluctant Fundamentalist, although he has corresponded with Stephanie Street, who is adapting it, and has heard that it’s an extraordinary production. Above all, Hamid says he is concentrating on maintaining his hard-won optimism, a position at once personal and political: “I have to work at being an optimist, but it’s worth that work. And as a parent, it’s my job to be optimistic about the future, at least while my children are under my care. ‘You will go to school and come back safe.’ That’s an optimistic position, but a position you have to adopt if you’re going to do your duty to your children properly.” • Exit West by Mohsin Hamid is published in paperback by Hamish Hamilton (£8.99). To order a copy for £7.64 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99 • The National Youth Theatre presents The Reluctant Fundamentalist at Edinburgh festival, Summerhall, 14-26 August