From the Yangtze river to Ladbroke Grove, the six stories shortlisted for the Guardian and Fourth Estate BAME short story prize offer a whistlestop tour of the contemporary world, taking in environmental disaster and the aftermath of the Grenfell Tower blaze. Three hundred stories were submitted for the prize for work by black and minority ethnic writers, which is now in its third year. Former shortlistees include Guy Gunaratne, whose debut novel In Our Mad and Furious City was last week longlisted for the Man Booker prize. In her story Spam, Manchester-born Savannah Burney brings a keen comic sensibility to the the redemptive story of an encounter between a grouchy B&B owner – with a lifelong spam sandwich habit – and a young girl made homeless by the Grenfell fire, who cannot decide if Pot Noodles are halal. A more exotic cuisine animates the imagination of Mai, protagonist of Kit Fan’s City of Culture, who helps out in her granny’s Chinese takeaway in a northern English seaside town as she prepares for a school Brexit debate. Two of the shortlisted stories are set in China. Yiming Ma’s Swimmer of the Yangtze follows a young man from a rural village to Paralympics victory and back again during the Cultural Revolution. Jason Deelchand’s Something Buried in the Ground spins a chilling fable of environmental betrayal around a girl and her storytelling father. But there is room for more whimsical worldviews. In Gurnaik Johal’s The Piano, an elderly widower takes a creative approach to grief by leaving his dead wife’s piano out on the street for young lovers to play. In Bus Stop, the writer and editor Varaidzo centres a surreal coming-of-age story on an adolescent whose uncertainties about gender and identity spin her off into a parallel world. Fourth Estate commissioning editor Anna Kelly, who chairs the judging panel, said that all six were “really exciting and compelling new voices who stood out from the rest and I’m looking forward to seeing their careers progress over the coming years. I expect to see many of the shortlisted and longlisted writers signing with agents very soon.” The winner, who will receive £1,000, an exclusive one-day publishing workshop and online publication here on the Guardian website, will be announced on 12 September. Anna Kelly on Spam by Savannah Burney Spam is a funny, sparky story about a little girl in need and a stubborn and prejudiced man so stuck in his ways that he can’t see the needs of others around him, even in an extreme situation. Burney imagines her characters brilliantly and her story stood out for its humour and warmth. Sarah Shaffi on Something Buried in the Ground by Jason Deelchand Something Buried in the Ground is a beautiful, evocative piece of writing that combines the story of an environmental disaster with folklore and history. I loved the sense of place, and the way it evoked strong emotional reactions. Deelchand is a writer to watch. Alex Reads on City of Culture by Kit Fan City of Culture is a fantastic story – so poignant, visceral and beautifully crafted that it has no choice but to makes you remember what it means to lose someone close to you. To lose the power to speak, to not be able to find the words to articulate yourself, at a time when so much is required of you. Fan expertly writes in the voice of a teenage girl, and I look forward to his further writings. Anna Kelly on The Piano by Gurnaik Johal A moving, tender story about grief, loneliness and community, The Piano explores how people’s lives are interconnected and intertwined. Written with beautiful control, it’s told through a chain of different characters’ perspectives and displays enormous imagination, empathy and talent. Claire Armitstead on Swimmer of the Yangtze by Yiming Ma An impressively controlled and deeply melancholy story of an isolated rural community who look on in bemusement as one of their number is snatched from their midst to become an international sporting hero in an event that is beyond their comprehension. Elise Dillsworth on Bus Stop by Varaidzo An intriguing and imaginative portrait of a friendship between two girls on the brink of adulthood and an exploration of identity, sexuality and gender. The collision of reality and folklore delivers an unexpected and thought-provoking story from a striking and contemporary new voice.