Brazil has re-opened its border to Venezuelans fleeing economic and political turmoil, just hours after a judge ordered the frontier to be closed amid a growing regional migration crisis. Within 48 hours, three different courts issued contradictory rulings on the border, as Brazilian authorities struggle to deal with the growing humanitarian emergency in the north-western state of Roraima. According to the UN, thousands of Venezuelans are crossing into neighbouring countries every day to escape rampant crime and political violence, a cratering economy and severe shortages of food and medicines. Under the late Hugo Chávez, who ushered in Venezuela’s socialist revolution in 1999, a new constitution and numerous elections placed nearly all government institutions under the control of the ruling Socialist party. This concentration of power was aided by a feuding opposition which carried out ineffectual campaigns and electoral boycotts. After Chávez died of cancer in 2013, he was succeeded by Nicolás Maduro who is even less tolerant of dissent. Growing political authoritarianism has coincided with greater state dominance over the economy. But expropriations, price controls and mismanagement have led to a 40% contraction of the economy in the past five years. Oil accounts for 96% of Venezuela’s export income but many foreign companies have been driven out and production has dropped to a 30-year low. The resulting fiscal crisis has prompted the government to print more money, which has led to hyperinflation and a collapse of the currency. It also means that the government can’t import enough food and medicine to meet demand. Maduro has rejected economic reforms out of loyalty to socialism and because many government officials are allegedly getting rich off the economic distortions – through exchange rate scams and by selling scarce food on the black market.  Nearly 57,000 Venezuelans have requested refugee status or residency in Brazil since 2015 and 11,000 have become residents, according to figures released in June by the federal police. Tens of thousands have settled in Roraima, where the influx has overwhelmed social services. Around 3,000 to 4,000 Venezuelans are sleeping on the streets of Pacaraima, a town of 12,000 people, said the Rev Jesus Bobadilla, a Catholic priest in the town whose church gives breakfasts to thousands of Venezuelans five days a week. “The situation is very confused. They come hungry – and motivated by hunger,” he said. The legal battle over the border began in April, when Roraima’s governor, Suely Campos, launched a suit at Brazil’s supreme court requesting the closure of the border. On 1 August, Campos issued a decree ordering Venezuelans to show their passports before accessing health and security services – and police to deport any migrants who committed crimes. Her decree was challenged by local prosecutors and the public defence office, but in agreeing to their request, a federal judge also ordered the border shut on Monday. That ruling was in turn overruled on Tuesday, and the border was opened once again. Adding to the confusion, a supreme court judge rejected Campos’s request late on Monday night – but did not revoke the order to close the border. Bobadilla said Campos’s campaign to close the border was politically motivated: she is standing for re-election in October, and the migration crisis has fed growing animosity towards incomers in Roraima, Brazil’s most sparsely-populated state. “There is a lot of xenophobia,” said Bobadilla. His church serves breakfasts to up to 1,800 Venezuelans a day, holds classes for indigenous Venezuelan children and offers help with documentation. “We help as we can,” he said. But shelters across the state are overcrowded. Socorro Lopes, the coordinator of a shelter for indigenous migrants in Pacaraima, said that it has capacity for 250 but sleeps 400. “It is not ideal, but we have a structure,” she said. “The town has big structural problems in education, health and social assistance,” she said. “People have stopped believing that things will improve until the flow [of migrants] is reduced.” Ten shelters in Roraima’s capital Boa Vista house around 600 Venezuelans each – and all are overcrowded, said Ricardo Baumgartner, local coordinator for Catholic non-profit group Fraternidade, which runs three shelters. He said the influx of migrants had increased crime and made it harder to access health services. “A part of population does not accept this,” he said. “Another part wants to welcome them.” Human Rights Watch welcomed the supreme court ruling. “The Brazilian authorities have made significant efforts to respond to the intense flow of Venezuelans fleeing a humanitarian crisis and political persecution,” HRW said in a statement. “They can’t turn their backs now.” Oliver Stuenkel, a professor of international relations at the Getulio Vargas Foundation in São Paulo, argued that the order to seal the border was largely symbolic, given that much of Brazil’s extensive land borders are not even policed. “There is no way Brazil can close the border,” he said. “Many migrants frequently go into and out of Brazil without passing the regular check points.” Countries across South America have struggled to cope with the region’s worst migration criss in decades. More than a million Venezuelans have headed west to Colombia, where the outgoing president, Juan Manuel Santos, signed a decree last week granting residency and work permits to 440,000 undocumented migrants. Additional reporting by Joe Parkin Daniels in Bogotá