Andy Murray was left sobbing on court after a marathon victory over Marius Copil at the Citi Open in Washington, and later criticised scheduling that meant Murray sealed progress to the quarter-finals at 3.01am local time. Murray sat courtside sobbing into a towel for several minutes after coming from a set down to win 6-7 (5), 6-3, 7-6 (4), reaching the quarter-finals of a tournament for the first time since Wimbledon in 2017. The former world No1 is scheduled to face Australia’s Alex de Minaur, but suggested in his post-match comments that he “potentially” could consider withdrawing. “Finishing matches at three in the morning is not good. It’s not good for the players. It’s not good for anyone, I don’t think, involved in the event. It’s not good for fans, TV. Nobody,” Murray told the Associated Press after the game. “I’m giving my view right now as someone who’s just come back from a very, very long injury layoff. I don’t think I should be put in a position like that, when you’re expected to come out and perform the next day. I don’t think it’s reasonable.” Murray, attempting a comeback after prolonged injury problems and hip surgery in January, has now played a trio of three-set matches, each lasting over two hours, within four days. Victory over Copil marked his latest ever finish to a match, after rain caused play to be delayed for more than three hours. Asked how he felt physically, Murray replied: “It doesn’t feel great, just now. I don’t know how you are expected to recover from that.” “By the time you’re done with all your recovery and stuff, it’s going to be six in the morning. I’d obviously try and sleep as late as I can, but with the way your body clock is and stuff, you know, you might get a few hours’ sleep. It’s not good. And it’s basically like playing two matches in a day.” Murray had fought hard to outlast Kyle Edmund in the last 32, and his task was even tougher here after Romania’s Copil fought back from 5-0 down in the first-set tie-break to win it 7-5. Murray rallied in the second set, breaking the current world No 93 twice to take it 6-3 and force a decider as the clock ticked towards 2am in the US capital. Murray then broke in the deciding set to lead 4-2 but Copil broke back to force a tie-break. Murray dug deep to win it 7-4 and reach the last eight, before being overcome by emotion. Asked about his tears after the match, Murray said: “Just the emotions coming out at the end of an extremely long day, and a long match.” If he is able to continue, the tournament presents an unexpected opportunity for his first ATP Tour final since winning in Dubai 18 months ago, with Russia’s Andrey Rublev the only seed left on his side of the draw.