In Phoenix from the Ashes, his book of the 1981 series, the England captain Mike Brearley perfectly captured Ian Botham’s irresistible fusion of ambition, self-belief and talent. “The sky was not his limit,” wrote Brearley. “It was his target.” The description could have been custom made for Virat Kohli. He has set stratospheric standards since taking over as India’s Test captain during the 2014-15 tour of Australia. When India collected the Test Championship mace after moving to No 1 in October 2016, Kohli took the opportunity to demonstrate his ferocious ambition. “I’m confident we will continue to win matches at home as well as abroad in the coming seasons,” he said. “I want this team to be remembered as one of the finest Test teams ever.” India extended their sequence of series wins to a record-equalling nine, yet all the while they were in a kind of triumphant limbo. No one disputed their No 1 ranking – they are now a whopping 19 points clear of South Africa in second place – but most accepted the historical greatness Kohli craved could only be achieved away from home. For India, that phrase means something a little different. It’s surely more relevant to judge modern India sides by their performances in favourable conditions (everywhere in the subcontinent and the West Indies) and unfavourable (South Africa, England, Australia and New Zealand). A look at the data shows the extent of the challenge Kohli gave his team. Since 2010-11, when India’s old guard drew 1-1 in an epic series in South Africa, their Test record away to those four countries is W2 L18 D5. Their performance at home to the same teams is almost the opposite: W19 L3 D4. India’s schedule meant no Tests in those four countries from January 2015 to January 2018, during which they thrashed all-comers elsewhere. The tour of South Africa this year was the start of a legacy-shaping period that includes this tour of England and a four-Test series in Australia starting in December. India lost 2-1 in South Africa, despite playing some excellent cricket at times. They probably need to win in both Australia, where no Indian team have won a Test series, and England, to satisfy Kohli’s ambition. This is an ageing team – eight of the starting XI at Edgbaston were 29 or over – and for many the chance will not come again. It doesn’t sound like hyperbole to say that this week’s match at Lord’s could be a defining Test for this generation of players. India’s greatest Test team, captained by Sourav Ganguly and then Rahul Dravid in the 2000s, were consistently competitive in alien conditions. Kohli has certainly made some difference to India’s away performances, and not just off his own bat. Their defeats have all been fairly close , and they have not crumbled in matches or series as they often did under MS Dhoni. They showed immense character to avoid a 3-0 whitewash in South Africa by winning the final Test on a vile pitch. But the record books don’t include asterisks, or notes that say “played well, bit unlucky”, and those details will count for little if they keep losing the big series away from home. It used to be that India lacked the bowlers to win overseas. Not any more. This team have an unusual weakness for an Indian side: a lack of runs. Their scores in South Africa and England this year have been 209, 135, 307, 151, 187, 247, 274 and 162 – and that’s with Kohli batting like a lord. In those four matches he averages 61; the rest of the top seven average 15. It is failure on an industrial scale, and in most cases representative of their careers. The majority of India’s batsmen have hideous Test records in those four countries where the pitches offer pace, movement and bounce. As ever, Kohli sets the standard: he averages 51 in Australia, South Africa, New Zealand and England, only just below his average of 56 everywhere else. Most of the rest have mental scars that may never heal. Kohli, restlessly hunting for a winning team, is likely to chop and change again for Lord’s. It has become a ritual of touring that Shikhar Dhawan, who looks a walking wicket against the moving ball, is dropped mid-series; he may be replaced by Cheteshwar Pujara. If the Lord’s pitch is as dry as expected, India will surely want a second spinner – either the mystery of Kuldeep Yadav or the reliable Ravindra Jadeja. The obvious person to omit is the all-rounder Pandya, though he seems like Kohli’s protégé and it would not be a surprise if one of the specialist batsmen is left out instead. There is still plenty of hope for India. They almost won at Edgbaston despite having one batsman; conditions at Lord’s should resemble those in which they trounced everyone from 2015-17; and in the last few years England have been allergic to a 1-0 lead. India could still win in England and Australia, but they are close to the point where next time there will be no next time. If India lose at Lord’s, even Kohli may have to accept the sky is beyond reach. • This is an extract taken from The Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.       