It’s a worrying time for fans of Enable, as her connections spent the weekend talking about the possibility of her skipping York this month and waiting for Kempton’s September Stakes to make her reappearance. The filly hasn’t raced since landing the Arc 10 months ago and her return was delayed by the swelling found in a knee in May. Cautionary notes were issued two days after Enable did a bit of work on the Al Bahathri gallop last Wednesday. Lord Grimthorpe, who speaks for her owner, Khalid Abdullah, said: “It was nothing very serious but she showed a good action and attitude as well, and she’s taking little steps towards a comeback run. York would be a nice option, but we will certainly not push her to get there just for that race.” He elaborated in comments reported by the Racing Post: “She’s not going to be pushed to get to York. If she’s screaming to go there she’ll probably go, but it’s not like she has to. “Both races at York [the Juddmonte International and the Yorkshire Oaks] look like they’re going to be quite hot and she’d want to be going well to go to York, there’s no question about that. She’s done one piece of work and John [Gosden] will move on with her, but he’s not going to put the gun to her head. She just wants to be in good form wherever she goes, and that includes the September Stakes and the Arc.” Having been 7-2 for the International at one time, Enable is double those odds with most bookmakers now and has traded above 40-1 on Betfair. She might face Poet’s Word and Cracksman in that race, while Sea Of Class lurks in the Yorkshire Oaks, so you can see why connections might prefer an easier reintroduction. But another delay to her comeback would hardly encourage with regard to her Arc chance. We’ll see how it plays out and perhaps she may yet show up at York in fine condition but I must admit that I’m looking at her Longchamp rivals and wondering which of them might now be worth a bet. Punters are altogether more positive about Sheepscar Lad (3.30), a 7-4 shot for a sprint handicap at Ripon today. Four times a winner over the past year, this four-year-old came up short by just a head at Pontefract eight days ago and gets to run from the same mark. He comes from the in-form yard of Nigel Tinkler. Sheepscar Lad needs a bit of a cushion in the ground and I’m hoping there’s enough at Ripon, which has had 50mm of rain over the last 11 days, though the good to soft has dried out of the going description this morning. Earlier, Mikmak has come out of the 10-furlong handicap, which makes me feel better about Racemaker (3.00), although it seems to have shortened the odds of all the fancied horses except him and he’s fairly priced at 9-2. Andy Crook’s runner is two from four since blinkers were fitted and his run style suggests an extra two furlongs will be fine, for all that he didn’t cope with it as a younger horse. Tajdeed (5.00) is of interest at 11-2. A Mark Johnston debutant, he’s a half brother to five horses that won on their debuts for Johnston. On the other hand, most of them did so as juveniles; the fact that Tajdeed has not raced until the late summer of his three-year-old year suggests, for a horse of his pedigree, that all has not been plain sailing. Still, I’ll happily chance him at that price in a race in which he has two serious rivals, one of whom seems limited after two races. Al Kherb is the predictable favourite but he’s got a 7lb penalty for a short-head success and isn’t certain to want this mile and a half. Ripon 2.00 Royal Destiny 2.30 Life For Rent 3.00 Racemaker 3.30 Sheepscar Lad (nap) 4.00 Seen The Lyte 4.30 Eyecatcher 5.00 Tajdeed Newton Abbot 2.20 Bold Image 2.50 Saffron Prince 3.20 Drovers Lane 3.50 Sword Of Fate 4.20 Celestial Path 4.50 Massini’s Lady 5.25 Lochinver Windsor 5.30 Poucor 6.00 Dreaming Of Love 6.30 Daschas 7.00 George Villiers 7.30 Whitlock (nb) 8.00 Ceramist 8.30 Spin Top Carlisle 5.40 Our Place In Loule 6.15 Admirality 6.45 Revenge 7.15 Island Song 7.45 Dasheen 8.15 Rubenesque 8.45 Mitcd Tips by Chris Cook