In my 40s with a failed marriage, then a relationship ending more recently, I realise now that I gave you the wrong signals and this is entirely my fault. But I met my match in you: a good-looking, older, charming and wealthy flirt. A real man. I don’t deny that there is chemistry there, and I initiated contact with you – a married man. I am younger, pretty, sassy and available, so you swooped on me on the off-chance I could become your mistress, grooming me at every opportunity. I seriously deliberated over it. I don’t have to answer to anyone. Why should I care about morals? I am not doing anything wrong. I am single. I can choose who I want to meet or sleep with – when and where. I am guilt-free. And there’s the thrill of the chase, and the appeal of the spoil. Selfishly, this could be very lucrative for me. Once-a-week-sex in a posh hotel, perhaps some sexy lingerie, or a skimpy dress or earrings. A dirty weekend away, or a meal at a nice restaurant and some expensive vino. Good company and the guarantee of sex. Perhaps you would fall in love with me and leave your wife. My father was a serial adulterer. He moved in with the other woman when I was a kid, then came crawling back to my mother. A few more flings over the years. I remember it all very well. In the end, he abandoned her completely for another woman. A younger version – just like me. Unlike your wife, my mother always knew. Perhaps your wife does know that you are downstairs watching porn, or chatting erotically to someone like me, but chooses to turn a blind eye. Perhaps she finds you repulsive because you are like a dog on heat all the time – a randy, dirty old man. Perhaps all of that pestering over the years has put her off sex completely. Or perhaps she obliges you and you have a great sex life – you are just so greedy. I’ll admit, the chase has been very addictive. I have been flattered by the attention you have given me. But having now reflected on the proposal on a more serious level – the ramifications, potential detriment and deceit – I can come to only one conclusion. I am ending this now before it gets out of hand. I have to respect your wife and children. I also have to respect my mother and myself. • We will pay £25 for every letter we publish. Email family@theguardian.com, including your address and phone number. We are able to reply only to those whose contributions we are going to use.