In the summer of 2014, I bought my new iPhone and took it down to Bondi beach, where sand got caught in one of the buttons on the side. As a result some mechanism broke, disabling the ring. In four years it hasn’t rung or vibrated. It’s constantly on silent. I have to be staring at the screen, which brightens slightly, if someone calls. And when it “rings”, I feel such a wave of animus and fear that I am unsettled for the rest of the day. Usually I don’t answer it. This week I was on a tram when someone called my phone. The screen lit up slightly and I tensed. It was a landline, an unknown number from Ringwood (on the screen under the number it said “Ringwood”). This freaked me out. I let it ring, unsure whether to answer it, while racking my brain – who would call me on a landline? WHO DO I KNOW IN RINGWOOD? Did I owe someone money in Ringwood? Had I made an appointment there? Did someone I know work there and have access to a landline? And if they had a landline why didn’t they text me first to warn me they would be ringing me from a landline? My phone kept “ringing”, my anxiety grew, and as the tram turned into Collins Street my instinct was to throw the phone onto the tracks. I had a bad feeling about the call. Who is this monster that would call me from a landline? Who would be barbaric enough to want to TALK ON THE PHONE? No good has ever come from speaking to a number withheld It went to voicemail – an abyss of hundreds of unchecked messages. I’m currently reading The Trauma Cleaner, an excellent book about hoarding, and my voicemail reminded me of the people that stack up newspapers going back to the 1990s in their hallways. There are things going back years in my voicemail. The messages pile up on one another like dirty plates, and to go through them would be to discover warnings and missed opportunities; the call back for the job interview I missed, the cheque undelivered, the court summons or the friend unexpectedly in town after 20 years. The worst is when I accidentally pocket dial “101” (surely a number more associated these days with evil than 666) and some robotic female voice says: “You have 1,045 unchecked messages.” A week before the Ringwood landline call, I got a call from “number withheld”, which I decided to answer because if I didn’t, it would trouble me for the rest of the day. It was my mother. “WHY YOU NUMBER WITHHELD ?” I screeched. “WHY YOU DO THAT??” I knew that would be the last time I would speak to my mother on the phone – which was sad, but I never usually answer “number withheld”, as no good has ever come from speaking to a number withheld. We have now migrated our communication to nonverbal forms – text and WhatsApp. Calling someone from a withheld number or an unknown landline seems like an aggressive act – like FaceTiming them in the early morning. It feels like an ambush. And phone conversations themselves are often awkward - with people talking over the top of each other and desperately trying to end things politely (“I better let you go” is a favourite.) The polite thing is to text first and say, “can we talk on the phone” and “what is a good time to talk?” That way the person is mentally prepared to take the call. If you have to impart a whole lot of info that is too cumbersome to text, the WhatsApp voice message is an excellent walkie-talkie style thing. On WhatsApp, over 200 million voice messages are reportedly sent every day. WhatsApp messages are better than 101, because you know who is calling you and the message is just like a lazy person’s text message or a very short podcast made by a friend. Phone calls are tedious time sucks – with banks, with your energy provider. You’re on hold, you’ve been put in a queue, you have to pick from a menu, you have to enter your banking ID on the keypad, you have to enter your date of birth, you have to remember your password, you have to speak to someone far away about your internet modem. To speak on the phone is to endure the ignominy of being shunted around a dozen different teams and put on hold. And talking on the phone to friends is like being half there. Increasingly when I do talk to friends on the phone, they are doing something else while they are talking. They are cooking dinner or doing the shopping or cleaning the house or browsing on the internet. I hear the click of the keys in the background, as they say “uh-huh, uh-huh.” The only time that talking on the phone is fruitful is for the pure discussion of ideas. Running something by an editor or refining a concept is hard to do by text and laborious by email. Better to hash things out with voices so that an idea becomes infected with the different perspectives. Of course face to face is the best. But it’s time we phased phone calls out the way we did handwritten letters. They served their purpose. And now they are obsolete and terrifying. • Brigid Delaney is a Guardian Australia writer and columnist