We’ll need to get DNA samples from your family members, the genetic counsellor says. An appointment with a counsellor is a compulsory part of our IVF process. Imagine, I say to E, having to get a whole family involved to conceive a child! We laugh. But we’re not imagining it. Pre-implantation genetic diagnosis testing (PGD) identifies specific genes in cells from five-day-old embryos – in our case, the gene for Lynch syndrome. To pinpoint exactly where the Lynch gene sits in my DNA, in order to identify it in our embryos, the lab requires not just my DNA and E’s, but also samples from my closest genetic relatives – my mother, siblings and my father’s sister. My family is far-flung, in California and Texas and Scotland. May I have your DNA? I ask them, over the phone and by email. I feel awkward, invading their privacy, but they all agree to swab their cheeks and send the results to the lab (in my sister’s case, this requires a trip to a UPS depot on a remote Scottish farm). It warms my heart to think that if E and I have a baby it will be thanks in part to this team effort. Carrying an autosomal dominant gene like the one for Lynch syndrome gives your offspring a 50% chance of inheriting it. That’s why we go back for a second round of treatment: getting just two embryos from our first round meant that our odds weren’t great, especially because pregnancy from an embryo transfer is far from guaranteed. Some days I think about how if PGD testing had existed 30-odd years ago I would not have been born. I think: is this necessary? But then I think about what would happen if I fell ill and had a child with Lynch syndrome who also fell ill (in rare cases, Lynch syndrome causes cancer in children) and E was left to look after us both, or – worst of all – left alone. I think about how I have the power, as the only carrier of the gene in my generation of my family, to ensure that none of our descendants will have it in the future. It’s a very loving thing to do for your children, one of my friends says to me, and her certainty convinces me. The second round of egg retrieval and fertilization takes longer, with higher doses of hormones. By the end of it I am miserable and 20lb heavier, but it is far more successful: it yields five testable embryos, which means that we have a total of seven, and we’re ready to send them to the lab. Each round of genetic testing carries an additional price tag of thousands of dollars, so the hospital batches embryos from multiple rounds so that they can be sent to the laboratory – a private, external business – as one round. After PGD testing, we agree that we’ll do pre-implantation genetic screening (PGS), too: this uses the same cell sample to look for common chromosomal abnormalities that would cause miscarriage or birth defects. To save money, we’ll do the PGS testing after the PGD results come in: PGS is charged per embryo, so we won’t use it on the ones that test positive for Lynch syndrome. The lab confirms that the DNA samples have been collected and that they’re ready to set up the probe. Then we wait. I call the genetic counsellor once a week or so, for updates: the lab is running behind, she tells me, and then they set up our probe and find that it is only 95% accurate, as opposed to the 98% accuracy that is ideal. We wait some more. I spend time getting the Lynch cancer screenings that I have once or twice a year in anticipation of not being able to get them during pregnancy: an endometrial biopsy. A colonoscopy. Thankfully, they’re clear. At last, one afternoon, my phone registers a voicemail from the genetic counsellor. When I pick it up and press play, I feel sick. This is incredible, says the genetic counsellor: all seven of your embryos are negative for the gene. I clap my hand over my mouth in shock. I listen again. I call the genetic counsellor back, just to hear it live. Then I calculate the odds: it’s a 1/128 chance, as if I’ve flipped a coin seven times and gotten heads every time. I call E. They’re all OK, I say, possibly screaming. I say: this is unbelievable, but they’re all OK. Does this mean that E and I could conceive a child without Lynch without intervention? Maybe. Maybe not. There’s no research. We’ll never know. I try not to linger too much on the thought that this whole process may be over-cautious: instead, I send my approval and credit card details for the seven embryos to be sent for PGS testing. Three of them are ‘normal abnormal’, which means that they would not yield viable pregnancies. And then there were four. I allow myself to feel real hope. This week I learned Miscarriage is commonly caused by aneuploidy, which is when an embryo has extra chromosomes, rather than the usual 46 – and the risk of aneuploidy increases dramatically for women who are, like me, over 35.