Mark Miodownik is the science communicator’s science communicator. His last book, Stuff Matters, won the 2014 Royal Society prize; in 2017 he was awarded the Michael Faraday prize for his “excellence in communicating science to UK audiences”, and convincingly argued in that year’s Faraday Lecture that a proper grasp of materials science might help us avoid a global human catastrophe. As a writer, his tone combines exactly the right proportions of geeky wonder at the brilliance of, say, wave formation or a ballpoint pen, and patient didacticism to inspire fellow scientists and enthral the general reader. In this book, he aims to convince us that liquids are “exciting and powerful … anarchic and slightly terrifying … delightful and dangerous”. And he succeeds. Liquid brings together wildly different substances such as peanut butter, adhesives, contrails, soaps and saliva, while leaving out many others. But Miodownik understands that all humans love a story, and the one he uses as the mixer in this bizarre cocktail is about a flight he took from London to San Francisco. His fellow passenger, Susan, plays a non-speaking role, as he spins off from moments in the journey to think about the discovery of kerosene by the ninth-century Persian physician and alchemist Rhazes; the way that wave formation leads to the joy of surfing and the horror of tsunamis; and why the smell of the stress hormones in women’s tears lowers testosterone levels in men. Throughout the book, photographs and hand-drawn diagrams of molecular structures help to explain how it all works. Miodownik is a professor of materials and society, though, and like many of the best science books Liquid is about people and relationships as much as it is about atoms and bonds. At one moment, he is scaring the daylights out of the reader by describing the tens of thousands of litres of aviation fuel in the aircraft, “10 times as powerful as the explosive nitroglycerine”; the next, he is explaining how the in-flight safety briefing is really a “ritual … a trust ceremony”, performed to persuade nervous humans to cede control to an unseen collection of engineers. In a chapter about liquid crystal displays comes a moving digression about art: “Static images like paintings and photographs allow us to contemplate ourselves, and how much we’ve changed from viewing to viewing,” he argues. Whereas “magical liquid screens … are dynamic, and offer us a vivid window into another world. They let us escape ourselves”. In describing the useful fluid that is human saliva, he hypothesises that table manners are so important in most cultures because “the process of eating is never too far removed from feelings of disgust”. His gloriously pedantic description of how to make a good cup of tea is about the mineral content of the water and the temperature of the boil, but also about sophistication and comfort and home. He has written a book much like the substances it describes: exciting, anarchic, surprising and delightful Nor does he shy away from naming the effects that all these material innovations are having on the world. From global climate change to the $100bn industry producing liquid soaps full of environmentally damaging palm oil, to an average rise in night‑time temperatures of 1°C in urban areas because of air conditioning, our demand for technology that makes our lives easier will inevitably lead to harder times all round. One particularly alarming chapter describes the effect of “post-glacial rebound”, whereby parts of the Earth’s crust will “bounce up” when the ice sheets that have been weighing them down melt. If Greenland’s ice sheet melts first, the North American continent will rise and sea levels there will fall. If the Antarctic ice melts first, “the whole east coast of North America will be under water”. Nonetheless, Miodownik seems optimistic that coming innovations will save us. A final chapter describes current research projects, from self-cleaning windows to a molecular sieve that would make seawater drinkable. “My bet is that at the end of the 21st century we’ll look back at lab-on-chip medical diagnostics and cheap water desalination and hail them as major breakthroughs that made possible longer life expectancies, and prevented mass migrations and conflict,” he concludes. The best thing about Liquid is this sense of delight in innovation – such as when Miodownik explains the workings of a ballpoint pen. Its ink, invented by László Bíró, is a type of fluid called “non-Newtonian”, which becomes more or less viscous when impact is applied to it. Impact causes some non-Newtonian fluids to behave more like solids, which is why you can walk on custard, whose molecules behave like commuters trying to exit a packed train in a hurry. Others become more runny, such as ketchup in a bottle whose bottom is smacked. Biro ink is the latter type – and the minimal impact of the tiny steel ball in the nib of the pen is enough to make it run on to the page, before seeping into the paper fibres and drying as its solvents evaporate to leave a permanent mark. “Genius!”, as Miodownik gleefully points out. Once again, he has written a book much like the substances it describes: exciting, anarchic and surprising. Like the sea, it covers a lot of ground. And like a perfectly made cup of tea, it is warm, comforting and very refreshing. • Liquid is published by Viking. To order a copy for £14.44 (RRP £16.99) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.