Netflix is testing adverts for the first time, while promoting its original programming between episodes of other series, including Shameless, Frasier and Parks and Recreation. Viewers trying to binge-watch shows on the streaming service will now find their viewing interrupted by the interstitial commercials, which air after the end of one episode, before the next automatically begins. Some users had even reported that the adverts weren’t skippable until a certain portion was viewed, mimicking YouTube’s ad format – but Netflix has said that that was in error. The company admitted to the test, which saw many users complain on social media. In a statement, Netflix said: “In this particular case, we are testing whether surfacing recommendations between episodes helps members discover stories they will enjoy faster. It is important to note that a member is able to skip a video preview at anytime if they are not interested.” A spokesperson also told technology site Ars Technica that a subsection of users around the world has been shown the adverts and that it would be monitoring “chatter on social channels” to see how the trial was received. Like many technology firms, Netflix regularly tests new features, large and small, by switching them on for a subset of its users and recording the reaction. This practice, called A/B testing, has even allowed the company to create different versions of a show’s logo to show to different audiences: for instance, viewers who like romantic films can be shown artwork for Good Will Hunting that focuses on Matt Damon and Minnie Driver, while viewers who like comedies are shown artwork that focuses on Robin Williams. Sometimes, however, the tests have resulted in such a negative response that the company pulls the feature. That happened in March this year, when the company tested “content patches” on children’s TV shows. Those badges rewarded kids for watching new shows, or for watching more episodes of old shows, but were widely criticised for encouraging binge watching among children, leading the company to pull the test. While Netflix and its competitors shy away from paid-for adverts in their streaming services, the company is not the first to experiment with cross-promoting its own shows on the service. Sky’s Now TV service, for example, has long run similar adverts between episodes of other shows.