“They’re going to throw me out, I think they’re going to throw me out,” said Kepa Arrizabalaga in an interview in 2016. Born in Ondarroa, a fishing village of 10,000 people in the heart of Spain’s Basque country, the young man who has become the world’s most expensive goalkeeper was not quite so sure of his talent as a unassuming teenager, despite being called up to Athletic Bilbao’s first team squad by Marcelo Bielsa. Concerned no one on the coaching staff had attempted to correct his mistakes after one training session, Kepa convinced himself his days at the club he had joined just before his 10th birthday were numbered. He need not have worried. Having been named on the substitutes’ bench for the league matches against Getafe and Málaga in 2012, Kepa made his debut for Bilbao Athletic – the club’s reserve side – before being loaned out to second-tier sides SD Ponferradina and then Real Valladolid in 2015. Little more than a year later, he made his La Liga debut in a 1-0 win against Deportivo La Coruña, following in the footsteps of Ondarroa’s most famous son, José María Bengoetxea. The former striker had been responsible for scouting Kepa and three of his friends from their home village in 2002, watching on with pride as the young goalkeeper progressed through the various age groups with club and country over the next 15 years. “He was small in relation to other children,” remembered Luis Llopis, who is now goalkeeping coach at Real Sociedad and first trained Kepa at Athletic’s Lezama base. “But I saw him jump around a bit in the goal and said: ‘Woah, this is a goalkeeper.’ If everything goes normal, he will be a goalkeeper of his time.” It was Llopis who recommended Real Madrid should meet his €20m buyout clause in January as the European champions continued their protracted search for a new No 1, only for Zinedine Zidane to veto the deal despite Kepa already having passed a medical. “Kepa is very talented,” Zidane said, “but I did not want a goalkeeper in the middle of the season. I don’t regret not signing him.” The feeling was clearly mutual, even if Kepa admitted the saga had been a huge distraction for a player who had yet to make 50 appearances for Athletic: “I do not hold a grudge against Zidane, I do not have to resent anyone. I do not regret everything I’ve lived in these months. Few players have the option of living something like this. It has been a soap opera but with a happy ending for me. I am satisfied and happy.” A new contract worth €4m a season with an €80m release clause was swiftly signed and, for a few months at least, life returned to normal. Kepa has previously spoken of his passion for birds, having spent his childhood searching for goldfinches with his father, training them to sing and taking part in competitions. “Since we were little we have had birds,” he has said. “At the beginning I did not miss a contest and then I could not go to so many because of the fact that the games are on weekends. But I did not want to leave them behind. Every time I go home, it’s full of birds. It’s very healthy.” He was named in Spain’s squad for the World Cup having made his debut for Julen Lopetegui against Costa Rica in November. Six months before, he had starred for the under‑21 side as they reached the European Championship final in Poland. Despite losing 1-0 to Germany, his performance in the semi-final win over Gianluigi Donnarumma and Italy underlined his status as one of the best young goalkeepers in the world, although he and Llopis have both acknowledged there is still plenty of room for improvement at such a tender age. “Kepa is always well placed behind the defence,” he says. “He manages well in circulating the ball thanks to his technique with his feet. He reads the game very well and interprets the passing options of the opposing strikers when they attack him to go out to intercept. He does not make many mistakes.” “Kepa’s biggest asset is his head,” adds Nika Cuenca, former editor of the Bilbao edition of Spanish newspaper AS. “He is still very young but he is very strong mentally. He takes the same approach whether he is playing at the El Madrigal or Bernabéu. He has made a real impression with all the teams he has played for and I’m sure he will just take this all in his stride.” Yet even he must have been taken by surprise at the speed Chelsea have acted. The refusal of Thibaut Courtois to attend a meeting with the Chelsea manager, Maurizio Sarri, this week ultimately forced their hand, with the Italian deciding against a move for Stoke’s England goalkeeper Jack Butland despite several inquiries over the summer. “It is a shock because people thought that he would be at Athletic for several years,” says Cuenca. “We know Chelsea are an important club but everything happened in 24 hours and, at this moment, everyone is surprised. The transfer policy of only signing Basque players means it is rare for Athletic to sell because it is very difficult to sign replacements. Kepa was the most important player in the squad and was an inspiration for all the young players at Lezama, although Álex Remiro could be a good replacement for him.” Now it is up to Kepa to show he is ready to fly the nest.