Violette Leduc’s novels are works of genius and also a bit peculiar. It is not surprising that Jean Genet was one of Leduc’s early admirers, as were Simone de Beauvoir and Albert Camus. According to Edmund White’s autobiography My Lives, Genet and Leduc even made an amateur film together, a re‑enactment of a baptism in which Genet, who was an orphan, played the child and Leduc the mother. Both writers were illegitimate, born at a time – Leduc in 1907 – when such things mattered. The theatre of baptism with its narratives of belonging, of being ordained and claimed, must have been very potent to stage. The mind whirls at the thought of what they might have got up to. What a shame the film has been lost. If, as White points out, both Proust and Genet “were dismantling all received ideas about the couple, manhood, love and sexual roles”, I would include Leduc in the rearranging of the social and sexual scaffolding of her time. I don’t think she set out to do this. It was just that her life wasn’t quite bourgeois or stable enough to do anything else. Leduc can make this reader laugh out loud at her grand themes: loneliness, humiliation, hunger, defeat, disappointment – all of which are great comic subjects in the right hands. Samuel Beckett could do this, too. It requires a sensibility that is totally unsentimental, a way of staring at life and making from it a kind of tough poetry created in part by not having led an existence that makes one believe that the so-called compassionate and tender have any pity. Leduc does not saniti​​se and flatten a perception and make it more literal than it is; she accepts its own language However, it is female love and desire that are Leduc’s main subjects. She herself stated that she wanted to express “as exactly as possible, as minutely as possible, the sensations of physical love”. In The Lady and the Little Fox Fur it is the sensation of hunger, of loss of a future, of everyday connection to the rhythms of busy Parisian life that concerns the old lady of the title. “She was breathing the oxygen meant for people who had spent their day working. To cry out that it was impossible to begin her life all over again would be useless.” Leduc’s starving old woman isn’t really old by today’s standards. Nevertheless we are told she “was handling her sixtieth year as lightly as we touch the lint when dressing a wound”. It is because Leduc profoundly understands how mysterious human beings are that her attention as a writer is always in an interesting place. Her old lady gazes at a calf’s tongue in a butcher’s shop window and asks herself: “What was there on a calf’s tongue?” It reminds her of fine sand on the petals of a yellow rose, which makes her think of painting sunsets in her younger days. Her paintings were her equivalent of “altars and sacred wafers”. Leduc does not sanitise and flatten a perception and make it more literal than it is; she accepts its own language. Life, like language, is coherent and incoherent, and Leduc knows the only way to do justice to this dynamic is to fold into the texture of her narrative the strange in-between bits of experience. She is incapable of coming up with a boring sentence. There may be a gushing sentence now and again, perhaps, when she forgets to take a breath and hyperventilates on the page. But even that’s quite exciting. Evelyn Waugh’s definition of fiction as “experience totally transformed” or Hanif Kureishi’s astute observation in My Ear at His Heart that writing is often a substitute for experience, a kind of day dreaming, are fair enough but not completely true for her. Writing for Leduc is a concentrated form of experiencing. She is a present-tense sort of writer, and like Virginia Woolf she seeks to record “the atoms as they fall upon the mind”. When her old lady wakes up thirsty one summer morning in Paris she wants to find an orange to suck. So she rummages in the bins and discovers a reeking fox fur in a box labelled tripe. Instead of an orange she had found “a winter fur in summer”. She picks it up and takes it home. What does she do with it? “She kissed him, and then went on kissing him, from the tip of his muzzle to the tip of his brush. But her lips were cold as marble: in her mind these kisses were also an act of religious meditation.” I laughed at these lines. You are really crazy, Violette, I thought to myself. And then I read the next few lines, where I learn the writer laughs, too. “She looked him up and down, then burst into her first fit of uncontrollable laughter: the amusement he filled her with was no less sincere than the love she felt for him.” Precisely. The amusement Leduc fills this reader with is no less sincere than the admiration she feels for her. Literary provocateurs have always written rather peculiar books, and great publishers have always published them. Much to the delight of readers across a number of generations, Leduc wrote her way out of isolation and invisibility and into the canon of 20th‑century literature. As the old lady remarks at the end of this gentle, bittersweet novel, her “world consisted of nothing but what she had invented” • 