Next weekend sees Europe’s biggest carnival return to Notting Hill. I hope to take the children to revel in the sounds of steel drums and calypso music and have their tastebuds tantalised by the smells of the Caribbean cooking wafting over Ladbroke Grove. If London is a trek, or the thought of so many people puts you off, simply have a mini-carnival at home: get a crowd round, put on the stereo, light the barbecue and do your own jerk cooking – it will be hard not to have fun. The lovely, warming chilli heat can be tailored to taste. If in doubt, halve or leave out the chilli in the burgers and hand around hot sauce at the table. Or, go the other way and add freshly chopped green chilli to the salad. Prep 20 minCook 15 minServes 6 For the jerk½ tsp ground allspice¼ tsp ground cinnamon¼ nutmeg kernel, grated1 tbsp thyme leaves, finely chopped4 spring onions, roughly chopped½ thumb ginger, peeled and chopped1 garlic clove, roughly chopped1 scotch bonnet chilli, deseeded and roughly chopped½ small bunch coriander, leaves and stems2 tbsp soy sauce500g minced lambSalt and black pepper For the sweetcorn saladJuice of 2 limes60g mayonnaise2½ tbsp olive oil½ small white cabbage, shredded3 spring onions, finely sliced8 radishes, finely sliced4 sweetcorn cobs To serveRelishes, pickles, hot sauces Put all the jerk ingredients apart from the lamb into a food processor, and season with half a teaspoon of salt and lots of freshly ground black pepper. Blitz into a paste, stir in the lamb mince, empty out on to a board and mix well with your hands. Shape into six patties and put in the fridge to rest while you make the salad. Whisk together the lime juice, mayonnaise and two tablespoons of oil and season to taste. Stir in the cabbage, spring onion and radishes, check the seasoning again – it may need more with the addition of the vegetables – and put to one side. Heat up a barbecue or griddle pan. When hot, rub the sweetcorn with the remaining oil and put over the heat. Grill, turning regularly for eight to 10 minutes, until charred and just cooked. Cool for a few minutes, then use a sharp knife to slice the kernels from the cob. Add these to the salad and toss well. Now grill the burgers for about three minutes each side (depending on how pink you like them). Leave to rest for a few minutes, then serve with the sweetcorn salad and whatever relishes, pickles and hot sauces that take your fancy. The sweetcorn salad makes a delicious filling for a jacket potato – just add a little crumbled feta for a mouthwatering meat-free supper. The jerk paste makes a great marinade for chicken or lamb – just blitz in two tablespoons of vegetable oil and rub all over the meat, then leave overnight before grilling on the barbecue.