The United Nations has urged European countries to “do the right thing” and take in some of the 150 refugees and migrants who have been trapped for days on an Italian coastguard ship after the government refused to let them disembark. “The time has come to end the back-and-forth that has seen countries competing in a race to the bottom on who can take the least responsibility for people rescued at sea,” the UN’s high commissioner for refugees Filippo Grandi said in a statement on Saturday. “I urge European states to uphold [their] principles, to do the right thing and offer places of asylum for people rescued from the Mediterranean Sea in their time of need.” The crisis over the 150 people effectively held prisoner in the Sicilian port of Catania on the Diciotti, a ship less than 100 metres long, has now lasted almost a week. Matteo Salvini, Italy’s far-right interior minister, refused to allow them to disembark from the coastguard vessel that rescued them from the Mediterranean until other EU member states agreed to take in some of the group. Almost all come from Eritrea, a country with one of the world’s worst human rights records, and so are likely to have a strong claim for asylum. On Friday they launched a hunger strike to protest against their situation, which violates the European convention on human rights. That requires the release of any asylum seekers held for more than 48 hours. Italian prosecutors in Sicily have already launched an investigation against “unknown people”, looking at the possible illegal detention of those on board. They have sent a team from the regional city of Agrigento to Rome to question officials. But Salvini hit back at the local officials in a broadcast on Facebook live. “I heard that the prosecutor’s office in Agrigento has opened an investigation,” he said. “I also heard that the suspects are ‘unknown’ at the moment. But I’m not unknown. My name is Matteo Salvini, I’m the minister of the interior. Come on, try me too, I’m here.” The deputy prime minister has also hit out against critics in Europe, threatening to suspend the country’s financial contribution to the EU if Brussels did not intervene to redistribute the people on board. The European commission called the threats unhelpful. The Diciotti rescued 190 people from an overcrowded boat off the Italian island of Lampedusa on 15 August. Thirteen were evacuated for emergency medical treatment, and after the boat was turned away by Maltese authorities, it was allowed to dock in Sicily. But Salvini said he would not allow those on board to disembark until he was assured all would “go elsewhere”. He later let 27 unaccompanied children off the boat, but has said the others must stay until “Europe steps in”.