You may not hear people saying “you really must get down to Folkestone” a lot, but after much investment and regeneration, this seaside town offers a great day out for all tastes and budgets. The harbour arm boasts an array of pop-up eateries with great views, music and a converted lighthouse that is now a champagne bar. For families, the water fountains, the beach with its funicular railway, and the Lower Leas coastal park are a must. Hidden among the Mediterranean gardens is a huge, well-maintained adventure play park with large slides, sand pits and diggers. The cultural quarter is bustling with restaurants, artists’ workshops and galleries and inviting independent coffee shops. A BBQ on the beach in the evening is a winner.Amanda Every week we ask our readers for recommendations from their travels. A selection of tips will be featured online and may appear in print, and the best entry each week (as chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet) wins a £200 voucher from hotels.com. To enter the latest competition visit the readers' tips homepage Recently featured as Lockwood Manor in Jurassic World: Fallen Kingdom, National Trust-maintained Cragside has an even bigger claim to fame. It was the world’s first house powered by hydro-electricity. The industrial heritage is best explored on the Armstrong trail through the gardens, including the spectacular Iron Bridge, and the curious gadgets in the house itself. Don’t miss the nerve-racking, rocky drive to Nelly’s Moss car park: you will be rewarded by stunning scenery, a brilliant labyrinth and an adventure play area. There are plenty of scenic picnic spots all over the estate, and kayaking on the lake from £7.50.• Family (garden and woodland only) £32.50, with house £45, nationaltrust.org/cragsideWiebke Howey Two lovely beaches have ice-cream vans sited between them. The Scottish Seabird Centreis on a headland with cafe and cameras on nesting birds on the Bass Rock and other islands. There are Boat trips to the islands, some landing (from adult £22, child £11). Great fun for all generations and 25 miles from Edinburgh.SharonK A fantastic family day out in nature with stunning walks, cycle trails for all abilities, adventure playgrounds, beautiful streams to splash in, picnic area and delicious food at the Forest Cafe. The place is very inclusive, with excellent facilities and access for disabled people. Dalby Forest also holds special events like interactive theatre displays and art installations. At £9 per car in high season it’s a bargain.• forestry.gov.uk/dalbyforestRobert Caley A great unsung, mainly shingle, beach within reach of London and near Brighton, great for swimming and a spot of fishing. There’s even the chance to hire a SUP or kayak at £10 for 45 mins (Skipper Watersports – if it’s too windy they sometimes relocate to Cuckmere down the coast). There are plenty of places to eat and even a creperie on the promenade. There’s a campsite close to the beach, too. Nearby is beautiful Cuckmere Haven and the dramatic Seven Sisters chalk cliffs and country park. A perfect day out for all the family. Free parking and easy access to buses and trains.Ali Batchelor This extraordinary town is great for a family day trip. It’s full of eclectic shops, and a walk up the Tor will tire out everyone, so coffee and cake before the drive home in one of the many lovely cafes will go down a treat. Stop off at the White Spring “sacred place” on your way back down from the Tor – a cheaper (free), calmer and just as beautiful alternative to the popular Chalice Well.Rachel Hahn This is a National Trust site comprising a historic castle, walled gardens, tea room, ancient woodland and an iron age hill fort (Croft Ambrey). Explore the castle: children can dress up and play 1950s games in the family room. Within the castle grounds there are two play areas, one has a castle to climb, the other is a natural play area. Children can follow themed trails around the grounds. There are signposted walks through the surrounding woodland and parkland, which includes 1,000-year-old trees and interesting wildlife. One path leads to the top of the hill fort.• Family £25.85, nationaltrust.org.ukJoyce Enter another world, possibly the 1950s, as you drive under Brunel’s Hookhills viaduct to reach this lovely little spot with its sandy bay and a very Enid Blyton feel. There are pretty beach huts, boats – big and small – bobbing around on the water and you can wave at the steam trains while you’re having a paddle in the shallows as they pootle along the track laid among the green hills above the beach. Hire a kayak for a bit of dolphin spotting, have a locally made ice-cream at the tiny wooden shack (car park end), or a cold beer at the newly refurbished cafe. The food is pretty standard fare but you can’t beat the atmosphere and the view. • torbay.gov.ukLeah Owens On the outskirts of buzzing but manageable Cardiff, St Fagan’s National Museum of History offers a full day out with something for all generations and budgets (entry is free!). Buildings have been collected from across Wales and rebuilt brick by brick in acres of beautiful Welsh countryside – everything from farm to a church, a Victorian village store to a modern “passive house”. It’s brimming with activities for everyone: you can try your hand at farming, sample local produce, see live outdoor performances and get hands-on with learning about the history of Welsh life. • museum.wales/stfagansJames Downs This is one for cash-poor Londoners. Visit Walthamstow, at the end of the Victoria line. There’s great bargain hunting to be had alongside international food stalls in the street market, then – in the village – upmarket foodie treats and good pubs. God’s Own Junkyard, which has superb neon displays, is excellent for art and culture, and Vestry House museum (free) brings the rich local history alive. The William Morris gallery (also free) is dedicated to the life and work of the eponymous designer and early socialist. Surrounding it is Lloyd Park, with its lake and fine playground.Emma This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.