There have been many strange decisions by England cricket selectors over the years. Only one of them changed the world. And it happened exactly 50 years ago. On 23 August 1968 Basil D’Oliveira scored 158 at the Oval against Australia, an innings that won the Test, drew the series and made him, so we thought, a certainty for the South Africa tour that winter. Four days later the panel met to choose the touring party. The names were announced on the radio next day. The alphabetical list went straight from Cowdrey to Edrich. It took D’Oliveira a moment to grasp what that meant. It was the lowest point of an astonishing journey. D’Oliveira was born in South Africa, in the mixed-race “Cape Coloured” community, confined under the apartheid system of racial segregation to playing only on the rutted tracks of the ghettoes. In 1958, he wrote poignantly to the British broadcaster John Arlott asking if he might get a chance in England. It took three years and many travails but it happened. He progressed from the Lancashire League to Worcestershire to the England team. “Dolly” became beloved, for his hard hitting, his golden-arm seam bowling, his geniality, his bearing. He was also a symbol. Britain was a far more homogeneous country then: the England cricket team was a hierarchical alliance between the classes, not different races. But his arrival was not a problem – he was a testament to our inclusivity – until, two years after his debut, South Africa loomed. To the apartheid regime, he was a problem. If D’Oliveira toured, he would be an instant hero to the entire non‑white population, and for the white minority government under John Vorster, that would never do. To South Africa’s cricket authorities he exposed the lie behind their all-whiteness: “Aagh man, you know the non-whites never play and, hey, when they do, they’re hopeless.” Since the South Africans faced only white opposition, they never faced the brilliant 1960s West Indians. At Lord’s opinion was ambivalent. Cricket was still run by men with the old English virtues, and vices. They believed in fair play. But they also loved South Africa as the place to tour: amazing hospitality, without Australia’s combative edge. To generalise, they hated the brutality of apartheid but empathised with their friends out there. It is surprising how few seemed to notice that, in the packed pens where black spectators were confined, the cheers were for the away team. There was an obvious risk that, if chosen, D’Oliveira would be barred. In which case the tour would have to be cancelled – no question – and England would lose an important opponent. So through the summer of 1968 there was manoeuvring, anguished meetings, furtive discussions, crackpot ideas: “Basil, couldn’t you play for South Africa instead?” A mysterious businessman tried and failed to bribe Dolly to rule himself out. The problem, it seemed, might resolve itself: D’Oliveira was out of the team. Then Roger Prideaux got ill before the Oval Test. Dolly replaced him. Then came the 158. It is impossible to know what happened in that selection meeting; everyone in the room is now dead. Was the chairman, Doug Insole, being honest when he said tortuously: “I think we have got better players”? Some cricket writers thought so. But Arlott, by now the Guardian correspondent, snorted: “No one of open mind will believe that he was left out for valid cricket reasons.” Was it then all a massive conspiracy involving the MCC, Afrikaaner fanatics and maybe the Bilderberg Group, the Masons and the pope? No, there is another explanation, rarely spoken out loud. The clue lay in another omission from that squad: the rumbustious opening bat, Colin “Ollie” Milburn. In the fallout that followed D’Oliveira’s omission, hardly anyone noticed that Milburn had been displaced by the far less gifted Prideaux. Only a few months earlier, England had been in West Indies, another alcoholic tour. Ollie was master of the revels. Dolly – a teetotaller until he came to England – was a regular accomplice. This was noted in managerial reports. Perhaps the selectors feared him being sloshed in South Africa, where government agents would have lurked, offering not honey-traps but beer-traps. A drunken Dolly in the cells would have made Vorster’s year. I am confident events in the Caribbean were at the heart of the secret. One selector confirmed this to me many years later. He may have been lying, to cover up something worse, but I don’t think so. Lord’s could and should have responded differently. But I believe they sort-of meant well. They certainly never foresaw the extent of the furore. Or what would happen next. Two weeks later Tom Cartwright withdrew from the tour. And guess who was chosen instead. Insole’s explanation was again tortured: Cartwright, a bowler who batted, being replaced by D’Oliveira, a batter who bowled? Hmmm. (Cartwright’s “injury” may have been diplomatic: he was unusually radical for a cricketer and hated South Africa.) The politics would have been much harder for Vorster had D’Oliveira been in the original squad. But now he seized the ball, making a vicious speech banning him from entry (he was reputedly rat-arsed himself at the time). The MCC cancelled the tour. In the short run Vorster won. In the very long run he sealed South Africa’s fate. England did not play them again until 1994 and in the meantime the sporting boycott proved a major factor in throttling white rule. Next month, seven years after his death, D’Oliveira will be made a Freeman of Worcester. Vorster is a posthumous pariah. Justice is done.