Australia’s embattled prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, has survived a leadership challenge from his hardline home affairs minister, but could face a further attempt to unseat him within days. On a tumultuous and chaotic day in parliament in Canberra,Turnbull defeated Peter Dutton by 48 to 35 in an internal Liberal party vote that took place amid a backbench uprising, as opinion polls showed the government on course for a heavy election defeat. Seeking to safeguard his leadership of Australia’s main rightwing party, Turnbull had called on his MPs to back him or risk losing the next election to Labor. “We know that instability undermines the ability of any government to get anything done. Unity is absolutely critical,” Turnbull told reporters in Canberra. A social liberal and multimillionaire former merchant banker, Turnbull ousted Tony Abbott as PM in a party coup in 2015, citing poor polling figures. He then led the Liberals, in coalition with the National party, to a single-seat victory in an election in 2016, riding an early wave of popular support, but his standing has since diminished significantly. His attempts to occupy the centre ground of Australian politics have repeatedly been thwarted by policy shifts under pressure from the right of the party. Dutton, who was the minister in charge of the country’s notoriously harsh immigration and refugee programmes, will head to the backbenches after losing the leadership challenge. But the level of support shown for him was substantial enough to fuel speculation of an imminent second strike, and that Turnbull could call a snap election. The man who could be Australia’s next prime minister is adored by the right and loathed by the left – and those feelings are very much mutual. Peter Dutton, a former police detective from the state of Queensland and possibly the nation’s most divisive member of parliament, upset Australian politics this week by challenging moderate PM Malcolm Turnbull for the leadership. Until 21 August Dutton had been the unsmiling home affairs minister, responsible for and – totally unapologetic over – the nation’s punitive border control policy. Dutton was the ultimate arbiter of whether someone could come to Australia. In March, a 10-year-old refugee boy who made repeated attempts to kill himself while held in a detention camp on the island of Nauru had been ordered to be moved to Australia for care. Dutton’s department fought the injunction. It was just one of many instances where Dutton fought against humanitarian transfers, often to be overturned by courts. While progressives in Australia despaired, Dutton’s fans on the right of the Liberal party praised his “strong views and good values” and his “conviction”. His position as the unofficial figurehead of the conservative wing of the Liberal party goes hand in hand with his history of antagonising the left. Dutton boycotted the historic 2007 apology to the stolen generation​. He told chief executives to stop using shareholders’ money to campaign for marriage equality. He claimed white farmers in South Africa were being “persecuted” and living in “horrific circumstances” and suggested they could be given fast-track Australian visas. As a result, he has been called a “racist” and a “fascist” by the Greens and likened to a potato by others – criticisms he shrugged off, saying “crazy lefties” in the media were “completely dead” to me. Dutton’s support among the conservative elements of the Liberal party – including former PM Tony Abbott – helped him to mount a challenge to Turnbull. The prime minister managed to hang on on 21 August with a vote of 48-35 in his favour, but is considered politically to be a dead man walking, while Dutton – relegated to the backbenches – continues his campaign for the leadership with a determination that has been the hallmark of his time in office. Dutton told the Guardian in April that he wanted to be prime minister “one day”. That day might come sooner than he, and the country, had imagined. Ben Smee and Helen Davidson In a press conference, Dutton accepted the party’s verdict but refused to rule out another challenge. Listing his achievements in his job, he told reporters he stood before them able to “show a smile and show a different side”. “I have served on the frontbench for 14 years under four leaders of the Liberal party with integrity and loyalty,” he said. The former police officer is a polarising figure whose hardline approach to asylum seekers has incorporated sending back refugee boats and incarcerating asylum seekers, including children, in offshore detention camps. In 2013, Dutton walked out of an event to mark the formal apology to the Stolen Generations, a historic moment when the government said sorry to Indigenous children and parents who were forcibly separated by government policies. He has reportedly since said he regretted his decision. Turnbull has made a series of U-turns in recent weeks as he attempted to appease disgruntled members of the party’s right, of which Dutton is a key member. However, his capitulation to the right this week on climate policy – first flagging moving emissions reduction targets from legislation to regulation then suspending plans to legislate the targets – only prompted further criticism. Chief among the snipers was Tony Abbott, who has rarely refrained from attacks on the prime minister since Turnbull unseated him. Turnbull’s “attempts to continually shift ground … to accommodate the angry conservative wing of his party have left him mortally wounded”, ABC’s veteran political correspondent Laura Tinge wrote. The unrest was met with fury by coalition MPs. Nationals MP Damian Drum said colleagues undermining the leadership were “a fucking disgrace”. Turnbull was taunted by opposition MPs during question time in parliament on Tuesday. Several ministers and assistant ministers offered their resignations, but by Tuesday evening Turnbull had accepted only Dutton’s. In her resignation letter, the minister for international development and the Pacific, Concetta Fierravanti-Wells, stated the party was “moving too far to the left”. “Our conservative base strongly feel that their voice has been eroded,” Fierravanti-Wells said. Several coalition MPs openly questioned what chances a party led by the hardliner Dutton would have in the more liberal Victorian and New South Wales seats. Speaking to the ABC, the deputy leader, Julie Bishop, refused to engage in speculation she could be an alternative option for leader, should Dutton be unpalatable to colleagues. Australian politics has developed a reputation for instability. Earlier this month, Turnbull became the longest serving prime minister since John Howard, after a stint of about three years. Not one prime minister in the last 11 years has served a full term without challenge.