Police are investigating after a family in Greater Manchester had racist graffiti sprayed on their new home. The Kaseses were having a barbecue to celebrate their move to Milnrow, Rochdale, when they heard the sound of spraying. The family reported seeing two white men cycling away from the property, leaving the words “no Blacs” and a word that appeared to be “niggas” on their window. Speaking to the Manchester Evening News, Lilian Kasese, 24, said it was important racism was reported. “I have spoken to one or two black people in the area and they said they have experienced similar things. It needs to be told,” she said. “We moved in that day. We were having a barbecue with some family. It was a normal day. My little brother heard some spraying going on. He went to check and said someone was outside. We looked out and we could see two white guys on bikes getting away. “They couldn’t even spell properly. The community helped clean it up, we didn’t want them to but the police were taking forever to come.” Thank you flo, this is so awful, literally been in this house for one day and this is the welcoming we get, it's so awful and disgusting, we are looking to move right away. https://t.co/M9xC8geRTi Kasese said the family, who recently moved to Rochdale from Essex, would be moving out as soon as possible because they did not feel safe. “This is the first day we moved to Manchester. We have lived all over the UK,” she said. “My brother is 18. He is more shaken. There seems to be some young boys who have done it. He feels like he is in danger. “We have been in this country for so long, but it feels like back in the day, like it was in the 1930s. It is shocking.” Police said they were treating the incident as a hate crime and confirmed that they were called to the address shortly after midnight on Sunday. “Officers attended and found racist graffiti had been sprayed on an address by two offenders,” said a spokesperson.Insp Rob MacGregor, of GMP’s Rochdale district, said: “This is an absolutely sickening crime that has deeply upset not just the victims, but residents who have seen what was written. Thousands of people live together across Greater Manchester, from different walks of life, and those who write hateful messages will be dealt with accordingly.” He asked that anybody who had information about the crime get in touch with the force.