Argentina has hiked interest rates to 60% as it takes dramatic steps to restore confidence in its plunging currency, in the latest sign of turmoil among emerging market economies this year. The Argentine central bank raised the cost of borrowing by 15 percentage points on Thursday in an attempt to shore up the peso, which has plummeted in value. The peso dropped amid intense speculation from traders on foreign exchanges, falling by more than 10% in the most severe drop for the currency since it was floated in 2015. One dollar (77p) is now worth about 37 pesos, having been worth about 18 pesos at the start of the year. The Turkish lira fell by more than 4% against the dollar amid increasing concerns over economic crises in developing nations. So far this year the Indian rupee and the South African rand have also come under pressure as concerns grow that the countries will struggle to pay their dollar-denominated debts following a rise in US interest rates. With Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, the Turkish president, dealing with US sanctions imposed by Donald Trump, the lira has already seen a depreciation of about 40% against the dollar this year. Financial markets around the world sold off sharply on Thursday as fears over the fallout from the crises unfolded, while there are also concerns over the impact of the White House’s various trade disputes around the world. The FTSE 100 was down more than 0.7% in afternoon trading, while shares on Wall Street opened lower. The latest developments come as the US dollar gathers strength this year with the Federal Reserve raising interest rates, reminiscent of the early 1990s when tighter monetary policy under the former Fed chairman, Alan Greenspan, triggered a series of crises across the developing world. Having approached the International Monetary Fund for emergency support amid an unfolding economic crisis, Argentina asked the Washington-based lender of last resort earlier this week to accelerate the release of the money to bolster its finances. Argentina’s president, Mauricio Macri, has said a lack of trust from the markets had forced him to ask for help as the peso weakens and inflation runs at 30%. The country has asked to borrow $50bn from the IMF to restore confidence in its finances amid high levels of government debt in dollars, which have become more expensive to pay off as the dollar strengthens.