Amid mounting criticism after he revoked the former CIA director John Brennan’s security clearance, Donald Trump threatened to similarly punish a current official and is reportedly preparing to do the same to others who have criticized him. The president’s remarks and the report from the Washington Post escalated worsening tensions between the White House and the intelligence community. Trump discussed his intention to revoke security clearances while speaking to reporters Friday before he left the White House for a fundraiser on Long Island. The president suggested that his first target would be Bruce Ohr, a largely unknown justice department official who has become a frequent target of criticism by Trump and the rightwing media. “I think Bruce Ohr is a disgrace,” Trump said. “I suspect I’ll be taking it away very quickly.” Ohr’s wife, Nellie, was employed during the 2016 campaign by Fusion GPS, the firm that commissioned an infamous dossier on Trump’s alleged ties to Russia that was authored by Christopher Steele, a former British spy. Also on Friday, the Washington Post, citing anonymous sources, reported that the the White House had already drafted documents to strip a number of other prominent intelligence community figures of their clearances. The Post’s list of targets includes the former director of national intelligence James Clapper, the former FBI directors Michael Hayden and James Comey, the former national security adviser Susan Rice, the former acting attorney general Sally Yates, the former FBI deputy director Andrew McCabe, and the former FBI agents Lisa Page and Peter Strzok. According to the Post, a White House official acknowledged that the revocation of Brennan’s clearance had been prepared in July, but was released this week to distract attention from media coverage of the former Trump aide Omarosa Manigault Newman’s scathing memoir about her time at the White House. The source said that White House communications officials have similarly discussed plans to release the other revocations as a distraction to unwelcome news coverage. The cancellation of Brennan’s security clearance continues to draw harsh criticism from bipartisan leaders in the intelligence community. A joint letter released Thursday by 12 former senior intelligence officials called Trump’s action “ill-considered and unprecedented” and said it “has nothing to do with who should and should not hold security clearances – and everything to do with an attempt to stifle free speech”. The letter was signed by six former CIA directors, five former deputy CIA directors, and Clapper. Speaking to reporters Friday, Trump responded to the criticism that he was attempting to use his power to silence his critics. “There’s no silence. If anything, I’m giving them a bigger voice,” Trump said. “Many people don’t even know who [Brennan] is, and now he has a bigger voice. And that’s OK with me, because I like taking on voices like that. I’ve never respected him.” On Friday evening, another group of 60 former intelligence officers released their own letter criticizing the use of security clearance as a political tool. “It is our firm belief that the country will be weakened if there is a political litmus test applied before seasoned experts are allowed to share their views,” the former CIA officers wrote. Senator Mark Warner, a Democrat from Virginia, announced Friday on Twitter that he planned to introduce an amendment “to block the president from punishing and intimidating his critics by arbitrarily revoking security clearances”. Sabrina Siddiqui, Joanna Walters and agencies also contributed reporting