Kim Kardashian West has been roundly teased by the internet for tweeting her discovery of this great new podcast called Serial. She is on episode four and is “dying to know what you guys think? Is he guilty or innocent?!?!” It’s a question under consideration by Maryland’s highest appeals court, and a forthcoming Sky/HBO documentary series called The Case Against Adnan Syed, which have had the four years since Serial first appeared to consider what they think. I look forward to 2022, when Kim lets us know she has given up on the second season as it is too much like hard work. Serial was such a cultural phenomenon in 2014 that Saturday Night Live did its own spoof version, with Amy Adams, but Kardashian West was also busy in 2014, getting married to Kanye West and breaking the internet with her bottom and a glass of champagne. She might be forgiven for not spending several weeks immersing herself in a gritty true-crime podcast. “So what I’m 4 years late I just heard about it!” she later posted, after a torrent of responses mostly with the tone of people who say things like, “I prefer their early vinyl-only singles”. There are so many must-see (or must-listen) podcasts, TV shows and films that the hype machine can be overwhelming. There is a curve of acclaim that productions with the most fuss around them seem to follow: low-level rumblings that something is good, mass consensus that something is good, backlash based on the mass consensus building hype to unreasonable levels, and then a sweet period of relief, when all the chatter has died down and it is possible to watch something for the first time without worrying it is going to disappoint. I started watching Peaky Blinders  in its fourth series and saw the first Incredibles film in December 2017. I am pleased to let you all know they are both good. It took me more than a year to watch La La Land, but I found it more charming than annoying, without the internet shouting at me about it. I am dying to know what you guys think?!