A Māori Niuean man is suing a Queensland tour company after he was allegedly handed a sunscreen canister that was labelled “Black Guy Repllent [sic]” having earlier asked his employer to install a sunshade at work. But Rainbow Beach Adventure Company says that while the incident did happen, it did not constitute discrimination because it was intended as a practical joke between good friends. McDuff Tupetagi is seeking damages from the Fraser Island business and two of its employees, Mervin O’Neill and Joel Mahon, over the alleged discrimination, which was first reported by Fairfax Media. Documents filed this month in the Queensland Industrial Relations Commission allege that Tupetagi had “frequently been made the butt of ‘black jokes’ and referred to with words to the effect of ‘where is the black fella?’” since he started at the business in 2014. Tupetagi, who has a dark brown complexion, says that in 2016 he had asked his boss, Mervin O’Neill, for a sunshade to be installed so he did not have to work in the open sun. That request was refused, he says. Three months later, when he approached O’Neill’s manager, Byron Rush, to repeat the request, he alleges Rush told him it was refused, saying “words to the effect of ‘because you’re black’”, according to the statement of facts seen by Guardian Australia. “By Byron’s words, Byron imputed to the complainant that he was less or not susceptible to sunburn and skin damage from the sun because of his skin colour,” the statement says. On 8 November 2017, Tupetagi was told by his coworkers that there was a “present in the car”, he said. There, he found an empty canister of sunscreen wrapped in fluorescent yellow tape with the words “BLACK GUY REPLLENT [sic]” and “CAUTION! ONLY USE ON BLACKS” written on the tape in black marker. Tupetagi said that he reported the incident to O’Neill, who replied “that looks like something that Joel [Mahon] would do”, told Tupetagi to go home, and said he would sort out the issue. Tupetagi says in the statement of facts that receiving the canister of sunscreen made him feel like an “unwanted creature or pest”. He remains absent from work, and needs “extensive and ongoing psychiatric intervention including psychoactive pharmacology for a number of diagnoses including severe depression and agoraphobia”. A claim was accepted by Work Cover, despite being disputed by his employer. Court documents filed on Friday for Rainbow Beach Adventure Company, Mahon and O’Neill by DLA Piper litigation lawyer Sophie Devitt O’Neill say that the sunscreen canister incident “would not have made the complainant felt likened to an unwanted creature or pest as it was a practical joke between good friends”. Mahon says the commission should consider the “close personal relationship” between himself and Tupetagi, “in which practical jokes and banter, including referring to one another by reference [to] their skin colour, was commonplace”, a “lack of malicious intent”, that he and O’Neill had tried to resolve the issue in good faith, and that he continues to feel remorseful. O’Neill says that a week after the incident with the sunscreen canister, he held a meeting with all employees in which he said such behaviour would not be tolerated and would constitute a fireable a offence in future. He says he was unaware of the sunshade conversation between Tupetagi and Rush. He also says he’s unaware of the request being refused “as a sunshade has now been installed over the work area”. O’Neill and Rainbow Beach Adventure Company say they are unaware of any other employees making comments about Tupetagi, and Mahon says that Tupetagi would “refer to himself as the ‘token black guy’”.  “This is one of the most serious [such] cases we’ve seen, and we’ve been doing this a long time,” Tupetagi’s industrial advocate, Miles Heffernan of Supportah Operations, told Guardian Australia. Rainbow Beach Adventure Company is owned by Website Travel Group, Fairfax reported. Guardian Australia contacted Website Travel Group for comment. Website Travel Group’s general manager, Barry Downes, earlier told Fairfax: “We value all our employees and are supporting the proceedings.” He told Guardian Australia in a statement: “We find the actions of the employee concerned to be abhorrent and totally unacceptable, the employee has apologised for his offensive behaviour. His conduct in this matter in no way reflects the culture or beliefs of our company, managers and staff. We promptly addressed the matter with the employee and he deeply regrets his actions. While it’s disappointing that the damage has been done to what was previously a close and long standing friendship between these two employees, the matter will be before the Commission in the comings weeks and it would be inappropriate to make further comment”