Jeremy Corbyn has apologised for speaking at an event where the actions of Israel in Gaza were compared to the Nazis. The Labour leader acknowledged he had appeared with people “whose views I completely reject” when he hosted a Holocaust Memorial Day event in 2010, while he was a backbench MP. He apologised for the “concerns and anxiety” it had caused. The main talk at the event, called Never Again for Anyone – Auschwitz to Gaza, was given by Hajo Meyer, a Jewish surviver of the Auschwitz concentration camp. He repeatedly compared Israeli action in Gaza to the mass killing of Jewish people in the Holocaust. Corbyn said: “The main speaker at this Holocaust Memorial Day meeting was a Jewish Auschwitz survivor. Views were expressed at the meeting which I do not accept or condone. “In the past, in pursuit of justice for the Palestinian people and peace in Israel/Palestine, I have on occasion appeared on platforms with people whose views I completely reject. I apologise for the concerns and anxiety that this has caused.” The Labour MP John Mann said it was “extraordinary” for an MP to have hosted such an event. “It breaches any form of normal decency. I am not sure how he go himself into that situation but I am pleased he apologised,” he said on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. Talking about broader issues over antisemitism, Mann said Labour under Corbyn should now adopt in full the definition of antisemitism accepted by the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (IHRA). Debate in the party has focused on the party’s new code of conduct on antisemitism and the fact it features the internationally accepted definition but does not replicate in full a list of examples of antisemitism published by the IHRA alongside its definition. Ann Black, who is campaigning for re-election to the Labour party’s National Executive Committee, backed Mann’s call. She said: “Barry Gardiner [the shadow international trade secretary] has said that you take the IHRA working definition as a starting point. If it’s necessary to add to it to make clear that it does not stop party members defending the rights of the Palestinians, or criticising certain sections of the Israeli government, then that is fine. “But that is the starting point and I believe Jeremy Corbyn has the ability and the authority to do it and I hope he does so.” She added: “I do not believe Jeremy Corbyn is in any way racist or antisemitic.” A party spokesman said: “Labour has adopted the IHRA definition, which is reproduced word for word in our code of conduct, and the examples are expanded on and contextualised to produce legally robust guidelines that a political party can apply to disciplinary cases. “IHRA says its text is not legally binding and therefore there is no basis to legally challenge the code of conduct.” Mann also called for Peter Willsman, an activist on the Momentum-backed “JC9” slate for re-election to the NEC, to stand down after he suggested Jewish “Trump fanatics” were behind accusations of antisemitism in Labour ranks. Willsman has apologised, acknowledging the “offensive nature of my comments”, and has referred himself for equalities training. He said: “I recognise the offensive nature of my comments and that in diminishing the experiences of those who face antisemitism in our party and society I showed a lack of the sensitivity required for discussions around racism.” The Campaign Against Antisemitism (CAA) referred the party to the Equality and Human Rights Commission and made a complaint to Labour about comments by Corbyn and his hosting of the event in 2010. “We charge that the party has, through years of deliberate or reckless dereliction of its duty to enforce its own rules, created an atmosphere in which Jewish members and/or associates are discriminated against,” the CAA’s letter to the equality watchdog said. The organisation also issued a fresh complaint – its third – to Labour about Corbyn. As well as the 2010 Holocaust Memorial Day event, it highlighted comments made by Corbyn in 2012 when appearing on Press TV, the Iranian state-owned broadcaster, in which he linked a massacre of 16 Egyptian policeman to Israel. Gideon Falter, the chair of the CAA, said: “The evidence shows beyond all doubt that Jeremy Corbyn is an antisemite and the Labour party has become institutionally antisemitic. The problem is not one man but an entire movement which has hijacked the anti-racist Labour party of old and corrupted it with a racist rot.” A Labour party spokesman said: “Labour is committed to rooting out antisemitism from our party and society. False and partisan attacks like this undermine the fight against antisemitism.” An EHRC spokesman said: “We have received the complaint and will consider it to see what, if any, action is needed.” The shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, has said he wants the party’s approach on antisemitism to be resolved soon. “I thought we had got to a position where we are able to move on. We’re not. We’ve got to resolve that by September,” he told the Independent. “The discussion is taking place I think that will enable that to happen.”