Boris Johnson has been told by Conservative party chiefs to apologise for his claim that Muslim women in burqas resemble letter boxes and bank robbers. The Tory chairman, Brandon Lewis, said he had asked the former foreign secretary to say sorry for his controversial remarks in an attempt to draw a line under the Islamophobia row. It came after Alistair Burt, the minister for the Middle East, who worked under Johnson, described the comments as “offensive” and said he would never have said anything similar. I agree with @AlistairBurtUK. I have asked @BorisJohnson to apologise. https://t.co/RFExXO4LOR The former Conservative party chair Sayeeda Warsi has accused Johnson of “dog-whistle” Islamophobia and criticised the lack of action by the party on the issue. In June, Lewis said diversity training would be offered to all members and local associations would report back on how complaints were handled. He added: “A single case of abuse is one too many, and since becoming chairman I have taken a zero-tolerance approach.” Lewis’s intervention makes him the most senior Tory to publicly criticise Johnson, and will put Theresa May under pressure to condemn the inflammatory remarks. Johnson’s comments, in response to Denmark’s introduction of a ban on burqas in public places, prompted an angry reaction from Muslim organisations and MPs, who accused him of stoking Islamophobia for political gain. The former former secretary, who is believed to be on holiday in Europe, could not be reached for comment. Earlier, Burt told the BBC that Johnson had been defending Muslim women’s right to wear the religious dress. But he added: “I would never have made such a comment. I think there is a degree of offence in that, absolutely right. “What he was trying to make a serious point about is that the UK government will not enforce any kind of clothing restriction on anyone. I wish he hadn’t accompanied it with a comment that I certainly wouldn’t make and I think many people would find offensive, yes.” Fiyaz Mughal, the founder of Tell MAMA UK, which campaigns against anti-Muslim violence, said Johnson’s comments “clearly” amounted to Islamophobia. “These are the kind of comments we have seen that have been made by extremist far-right groups and people who have been maliciously attacking Muslims, so clearly it does fit that bracket,” he said. Mughal criticised the “sheer flippancy” of Johnson’s comments and criticised Lewis for not doing more to tackle Islamophobia in the party. He suggested the Muslims needed reassurance from Downing Street. “That reassurance should be coming quickly and effectively. It’s now 24 hours that have gone by, the message that members of the Muslim community get is their concerns are not taken into account,” he said. In his column for the Telegraph on Monday, Johnson said Muslim women wearing burqas looked like bank robbers and that schools and universities should be entitled to tell students to remove them. He said it was “absolutely ridiculous” that wearers should “go around looking like letter boxes”, and he would expect his constituents to remove them in his MP’s surgery. However, Johnson said he did not support a blanket ban the face veil in the UK. “You risk turning people into martyrs, and you risk a general crackdown on any public symbols of religious affiliation, and you may simply make the problem worse,” he wrote. Denmark introduced a burqa ban last week, with fines of around 1,000 krone (£120), after similar moves in France, Austria and Belgium.