Born in Dublin, Jonathan Rhys Meyers, 41, was spotted by a casting agent as a teenager. In 2006, he won a Golden Globe for his portrayal of Elvis in a CBS mini-series, and from 2007 to 2010 he starred as Henry VIII in The Tudors. His films include Bend It Like Beckham and Woody Allen’s Match Point. He stars with the late John Hurt in the award-winning Damascus Cover, in cinemas now. He is married to the actor-producer Mara Lane and has a son. What is your earliest memory?Forked lightning across the rooftops of the housing estate that I was living in. I must have been three. What was your most embarrassing moment?I’ve had lots – being questioned by the police for being drunk is incredibly humiliating and embarrassing. Property aside, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought? My collection of paintings. I have some by William Burroughs. What do you most dislike about your appearance?I’d like to be taller. I’m 179cm [5ft 101/2in]. Who would play you in the film of your life?Tilda Swinton. What is your most unappealing habit?Drinking. I am sober 95% of the time and fall down 5% of the time. What is your favourite word?Benign. Which book changed your life?Brave New World by Aldous Huxley. I’m lucky enough to own one of his signed first editions. Which living person do you most despise?Anybody who abuses children. What is the worst job you’ve done?Two days as a labourer in my 15th summer. What has been your biggest disappointment?Relapsing. I usually spend eight, nine, 10 months sober, then I’ll spend a day relapsing and I get disappointed. But it never lasts too long. I get back up and try again. If you could edit your past, what would you change?The public mistakes I’ve made. Most recently, I tried to light an e-cigarette on an aeroplane and was told to put it out. I completely forgot I was on a plane. I’d had, like, three drinks, but it only takes three. I stopped as soon as I got off and I got straight back into my programme, because that’s what I do. If you could go back in time, where would you go?I would be in the army of Alexander, so I could see the greatest adventure ever made. How do you relax?I play the guitar. As an actor, you have to find other outlets when you’re not shooting. What is the closest you’ve come to death?I’ve been in six car accidents – none of them while I was driving. What keeps you awake at night?Wanting to be better: a better actor, a better father. What song would you like played at your funeral?An incredibly long one – maybe the entire St Matthew Passion – just so everybody would have to sit in the church for hours. How would you like to be remembered?As a complex and brilliant man. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?That if you really want to do something, you have to do it yourself, but nobody achieves anything on their own. Ask for help.