Injury was added to insult for England on a demoralising third day of the third Test against India in Nottingham when Jonny Bairstow sustained a fractured finger that looks set to rule him out of the final two Tests of the series. Despite reaching the close on 23 without loss in their second innings, Joe Root’s team still face the prospect of having to bat out six more sessions at Trent Bridge to avoid a heavy defeat after they were kept in the field by India for all but nine overs of a day during which they set a world-record target of 521 to win. The sullen mood in the home dressing room was not helped by the injury to Bairstow, the wicketkeeper who sustained what England described as a “small fracture” on the middle finger of his left hand going for what appeared a regulation take in the 44th over of India’s second innings. The ball, bowled by Jimmy Anderson and left by the batsman Cheteshwar Pujara, caught the 28-year-old on the end of the finger and he immediately fell to the floor writhing in agony. After several minutes of treatment, an ashen-faced Bairstow was led from the field with his England cap covering his left hand. After being taken to hospital for X-rays, England confirmed the break – a hairline fracture – which is likely to take at least three to four weeks to heal. While publicly England confirmed Bairstow is “likely” to bat during his team’s second innings, privately team sources indicated the Yorkshireman has no chance of being fit for the fourth Test in Southampton next week and is almost certain to miss the final match of the series at the Oval starting on 7 September. Jos Buttler, recalled to England’s Test team at the start of the summer as a specialist No 7 batsman after losing his place as the Test wicketkeeper to Bairstow in late 2015, filled in behind the stumps for the remainder of India’s innings, which lasted 110 overs in total. He is now likely to assume that position for the final two matches. Whenever Bairstow comes to the crease during England’s second innings he will have to take painkillers – and possibly a cortisone injection – to get through the innings. Yet, according to Paul Farbrace, the England assistant coach, it at least appears unlikely that batting will risk any further damage to the finger. “There is a fracture in the tip of his finger, and the doc’s been working on him this evening to relieve a bit of pressure in the nail, so hopefully when needed he’ll be OK,” Farbrace said. “I’m no expert on broken fingers but because it’s not a displaced break, then he should be OK, and it’s just a case of managing the pain level as opposed to doing any further damage. There will be a big bit of plastic stuck over his glove. Let’s see how he goes over the next couple of days. If there was a risk of making it worse, he wouldn’t bat.” On Bairstow’s prospects of playing in the rest of the series, Farbrace said: “A lot will depend on how the next few days go, and the soreness in terms of catching balls on a consistent basis. We’ll have to see how he goes.” Bairstow said of his injury: “It [the ball] wobbled and I just copped it on the end. It is part and parcel of this job. We are going to see how it is in the morning. It is a fracture but it’s not displaced and that is a big thing. We are hopeful a bit more ice overnight and some protection will help.” While India are fully in the driving seat this Test, the tourists have an injury concern of their own. Ravi Ashwin appeared to be in some discomfort when bowling two overs late on - he picked up a hip problem on day two - and cut a downbeat figure following additional treatment at the team hotel after stumps.