Late-night hosts on Tuesday discussed Paul Manafort’s trial and Donald Trump’s relationship with North Korea and Iran. “I feel like it’s Christmas morning because all year long Robert Mueller and his team of legal elves have been busy in their workshops making all the indictments for the bad little boys and girls,” began Stephen Colbert. “And the magical day we’ve been waiting for is finally here.” Noting that Manafort has been accused of tax evasion and bank fraud, among other crimes, Colbert said that “prosecutors painted a picture of Manafort’s extravagant spending, telling the jury that Manafort once got a $15,000 coat made from an ostrich.” “Manafort’s team,” the host continued, “shifted the blame in their defense to the Ukrainian oligarchs that Manafort worked for, explaining that, yes, Manafort was paid through secret foreign accounts, but it wasn’t his idea!” “Now, Manafort, he’s a tough guy. But I’m sure he’s a little worried,” Colbert said. “One person who is apparently not worried about Mueller’s investigation is Donald Trump.” The Trump legal defense team, the host said, have increasingly resorted to saying collusion is not a crime at all. The host then read aloud a tweet from president Trump in which he wrote: “Collusion is not a crime, but that doesn’t matter because there was No Collusion (except by Crooked Hillary and the Democrats)!” “Okay, so collusion isn’t a crime, but it doesn’t matter because he didn’t do it anyway, Hillary did,” said Colbert. “It’s really going to complicate the chants at his rallies. Lock her up, but collusion’s not a crime. So what are we locking her up for? I am confused.” Meanwhile, The Daily Show’s Trevor Noah did a rapid-fire reading of the week’s news. “I’m going to be honest: there is a lot of news,” he began. “Almost too much news. Luckily, though, too much news is just the right amount of news for a segment we call, ‘Ain’t nobody got time for that.’” Noah began by discussing Zimbabwe’s presidential elections, the first since Robert Mugabe was ousted in November. He followed that with news of LeBron James’ new elementary school in his hometown of Akron, Ohio, where 240 third and fourth graders will be attending. “But we don’t have the time to talk about all that because the situation between Iran and the US just took a unexpected turn,” Noah said, noting that after ripping up the Iran deal and threatening Iranian president Rouhani on Twitter, Trump is now willing to meet with him with no preconditions. Beyoncé’s Vogue cover control, Zimbabwe’s first post-Mugabe elections, Lebron’s I Promise School, and North Korea’s new missile development. So much news, so little time! pic.twitter.com/TSBxvmQTym “Wow, Iran,” the host said. “I know Iran seems extreme but I get why they’re not eager to meet with Trump. You got to admit, he blows hot and cold like one of those psycho boyfriends.” Mocking Trump, Noah went on: “Iran, you will suffer consequences the likes of which few throughout history have suffered before. I’m sorry, Iran. I haven’t had my Big Mac today. Can we meet?” “I understand why Iran would think a meeting with Trump would be unproductive,” Noah added. “But if they took a page out of North Korea’s book, Iran might be able to use that to their advantage.” The host then explained that, after promising to halt its nuclear activity, US intelligence suspects the North Korean governments is working on construction of one or possibly two liquid-fueled ICBM’s on the outskirts of Pyongyang. “So, Kim Jong-un made a promise to Trump and then did the opposite,” Noah concluded. “Which basically means Trump is getting a taste of his own medicine.” Jimmy Kimmel also addressed Kim Jong-un’s about-face. “You know how president Trump said North Korea is no longer a nuclear threat?,” he asked. “Well, oops.” “According to US intelligence, not only isn’t North Korea curtailing their nuclear activity, they may be building new intercontinental ballistic missiles,” said Kimmel. “Kim Jong-un, as you may recall, said he would not build any more missiles,” the host continued. “But it turns out in Korean ‘would not’ means ‘would’, just like in Trumpian.” “Absolutely shocking,” Kimmel added sarcastically. “I mean, Kim Jong-un gave Donald Trump his word. They shook hands on it.” “It’s like, who can you trust anymore?” Kimmel joked.