When Andy Murray returns to Grand Slam tennis at this week’s US Open, he won’t be the only one with big-day nerves, as Amazon looks to ace its first exclusive broadcast of a sports event. Amazon has pulled out all the stops to make its $40m (£34m) bet on the UK rights to the US Open – setting up a studio at Flushing Meadows and drafting in former players including Jim Courier, Greg Rusedski, Annabel Croft and Mark Petchey, as the company looks to prove it can match traditional broadcasters and become a credible home for live sport. On Monday Amazon will step into the shoes of Sky, which dropped its coverage of the US Open in 2016 after 25 years, well aware of the tarnished reputation of streaming services in the live sport arena. During the World Cup, YouTube proved that even being the world’s largest video-sharing platform does not mean live streaming comes easy, as its $35-a-month subscription service suffered an embarrassing outage during England’s semi-final clash with Croatia. In Australia, streamer Optus, which held exclusive World Cup rights, had to allow public broadcaster SBS to air games after its service failed. In May, Formula One refunded subscribers after its new streaming service ran into trouble during the Spanish Grand Prix. And last month DAZN, the streaming service controlled by Warner Music owner Len Blavatnik, apologised to customers after its first crack at delivering Serie A Italian football coverage failed during the opening game of the season. “Amazon will absolutely want to be seen to be producing to a level consummate to what Sky have historically. They are taking it very seriously as they did for Queen’s [tennis tournament] earlier in the summer,” says Graham Fry, managing director of IMG Productions, which produced Amazon’s coverage of the Wimbledon warm-up event. “They are putting a lot of resource into it. Streaming services are learning in an environment where people now want instant results. We are entering a phase of change [with streaming companies] happening quicker now than any time in my TV production career.” The UK has become Amazon’s test market for a foray into whether exclusive live sports can supercharge its Prime Video TV offering, and ultimately expand the 100 million-strong customer base who pay £79 a year for its Prime subscription service of perks, from free music streaming to one-day delivery. Alex Green, who heads Amazon Prime Video’s sport push in Europe, says that given the company handled an average per-minute audience of more than 300,000 streams for its Thursday night NFL game broadcasts, it can manage the tennis. “Of course we’re prepared, we’re no stranger to large-scale live events,” says Green, who formerly worked at BT. “It’s the biggest live event we’ve covered in the UK. We’re confident we can service demand.” Facebook has also upped its sports strategy recently, striking deals for La Liga Spanish football broadcast rights across the Indian subcontinent and Champions League matches in South America, and it’s expected to reveal Premier League deals for Thailand and Vietnam in the coming months. Live sport is the major driver of pay-TV subscriptions – Sky built its business on the Premier League while BT needed sport to successfully break into the TV market – and Silicon Valley companies snapping up rights threatens pay and free-to-air broadcasters alike. Amazon and arch-rival Netflix offer low-cost TV services, which subscribers mostly choose to bolt on to their main, more expensive pay-TV subscription. But some analysts believe that sport could be a key factor in getting viewers to abandon traditional TV in larger numbers. “Sport is the missing ingredient,” says Tim Mulligan, analyst at MIDiA Research. “Services like Amazon and Netflix are seen as additive: they need to be seen as a real substitute for pay-TV. A cornerstone of traditional TV is sport and there is a perception among mainstream TV users that you have to have sport and news. To make the economics work they have to appeal to mainstream consumers in the same ways traditional TV does.” The competition to become a serious live sports broadcasting player is set to intensify next year, following a deal that will see Amazon become the first streaming service to exclusively broadcast Premier League matches. Amazon UK will also become the exclusive home of the men’s ATP tennis World Tour for the next five years, another former Sky property. “We look at lots of sports opportunities. We’ll keep listening to our customers, trying things and learning,” says Green. “We are going to produce the best possible coverage of those events, see how our customers react and take it from there.”