Julia Gillard has warned Australia could be headed for an “ugly” election focused on questions of race and ethnicity, amid an ongoing political crisis in Canberra that may see Peter Dutton elevated to the prime ministership. As a defiant Malcolm Turnbull refused a request from the former home affairs minister for a leadership spill on Thursday, Gillard told an audience in Melbourne that the current political crisis in Canberra should be viewed in a global context. “When we see events like this in Canberra, it’s easy to think: ‘This is all about Australia. It’s all about us. It’s all about a few personalities,’” she said. “But I actually think it’s connected to some big trends in global politics that are worrying and need to be thought through for the future.” She declined to offer advice to leadership aspirants including Peter Dutton, only joking that they should “make sure you eat some veggies, get some sunlight”. “It’s very easy to be in Parliament house for days at a time and never get outside,” she said of the current crisis in Canberra. But the nation’s first female prime minister did raise concerns about the tenor of the upcoming federal election campaign. “I think we could be heading for a federal election that would be quite ugly around questions of race,” Gillard said. “There’s been no secret that there will be campaigning on law and order questions, putting to the forefront people’s race and ethnicity rather than the crime. “I think it’s sort of incumbent on all of us when emotions get worked up around those things to be voices of reason, pointing methodically to the evidence rather than getting swept up in it. That in some ways sounds passionless … but over time I believe reason tells.” Gillard made the comments when asked what Australians could do to push back against the current instability in Canberra and the rise of inflammatory rhetoric on race exemplified by Fraser Anning’s recent “final solution” speech. Asked about the instability in Canberra, the former Labor leader, who became prime minister after challenging Kevin Rudd in 2010 but then lost the position three years later to the same man, pointed to a wider fracturing on the conservative side of politics between “small l” liberals and those sceptical of globalisation, such as Donald Trump. “It’s come to Australia and it’s come to Australia with some force and that’s what we’re seeing in Canberra, and have been seeing in Canberra for some time.” Gillard said anxiety in the community was also “feeding this hankering for a strongman”. The former Labor leader appeared at RMIT with the former Victorian attorney-general, Rob Hulls, to mark the fifth anniversary of the university’s centre for innovative justice. She said she had been conscious to step back from politics after losing the leadership, which had “required some biting of my bottom lip”, and recalled a phone call from the former prime minister, Paul Keating, one day after she lost the leadership. “‘We all get taken out in a box, love,’” Gillard recalled Keating telling her. “I thought: ‘If that’s supposed to make me feel better, Paul, I’m not sure you’ve quite hit the mark.’”