In summer, there are few things I love more than cooking over coals. But of all the things you can barbecue, there is a special place in my heart for a butterflied, grilled leg of lamb. Lamb sits happily with so many global cuisines and I am often pounding exotic lamb marinades with influences from the Levant, Africa, India and, of course, Mexico. This one is inspired by a particularly good lunch I had in Oaxaca a few years ago. If you can’t find ancho chillies use Spanish nora or guindilla instead. Prep 10 minMarinate 1 hr Cook 50 minRest 20 minServes 4 6 large ancho chillies (about 50g)1 small cinnamon stick6 sprigs rosemary, stalks discarded, leaves finely chopped6 fat garlic cloves½ tsp black peppercorns1 tsp dried oregano120ml red-wine vinegar80ml olive oil 2 tbsp redcurrant jellySalt1 leg of lamb, butterflied For the salsa1 bunch coriander (leaves and stalks)3 handfuls spinach leaves1 green chilli, seeds in, roughly chopped1 small garlic clove, roughly choppedJuice of 1 lime80ml olive oil Remove the stems from the chillies and discard the seeds. Tear the flesh into a few flattish pieces. Toast in a medium-hot frying pan for 30-40 seconds on each side, until the skin softens – this brings out their flavour. Transfer to a small saucepan, cover with boiling water and simmer gently for 10 minutes, until soft. If you are short of time, skip the toasting and just simmer the chilli pieces until soft. Blitz the cinnamon stick to a fine powder in an upright food blender. Add the rosemary, garlic and peppercorns, then blitz again. Now drain the chillies, keeping back half a cup of their soaking water. Add this, the oregano and chillies to the blender, and pulse again. Finally, pour in the vinegar, bit by bit, blitzing all the time, finishing with the olive oil and redcurrant jelly. Add a teaspoon of flaky sea salt (or half a teaspoon of fine salt) and taste. Add more salt or jelly to adjust the balance of flavours. Rub the ancho paste all over the lamb so that it is well coated, and leave to marinate for at least an hour – even better, overnight. An hour before you want to eat, light a barbecue. Once the flames have died down and the coals are hot, grill the lamb for 15-20 minutes a side, depending on the heat from the coals and how pink you like your lamb. Allow to rest, covered, somewhere warm for 15-20 minutes. Meanwhile, blitz the coriander, spinach, green chilli and garlic in a food processor until coarse, then add the lime juice. With the motor running, slowly pour in the oil until you have a glossy, green puree. Season to taste. Serve thin slivers of the lamb with the coriander salsa, a new potato salad or rice, some tortillas or flatbreads and a tomato salad. This marinade keeps in the fridge for up to a fortnight, and freezes well. It is delicious on mutton and beef, and works brilliantly mixed into minced meat to make feisty burgers. The coriander oil is great on grilled chops or mackerel.