Broken in and cunningly ripped, my favourite jeans fit loosely. They’re designed to look as if I borrowed them from my guy. Hence their name: “destructed boyfriend jeans”. My jeans may have been cut to ape the lines of men’s denim, but they fail in one major way: the front pockets are only 5.5 inches (14cm) deep – too small for my hands, hardly big enough for my tiny wallet and certainly too snug for my iPhone Plus. My boyfriend jeans have pockets that would make a man laugh. If my boyfriend jeans were made for an actual man, their front pockets would be about 9.1 inches deep, or so says The Pudding, who recently did the hard work of measuring the pockets on 80 pairs of men’s and women’s jeans. The pockets on women’s jeans average just 5.6 inches; moreover, “the pockets in women’s jeans are 48% shorter and 6.5% narrower than men’s pockets”, making women’s jeans pockets miniature versions of their brethren, regardless of jeans style. I look at that pocket disparity and wonder about all I could carry in that extra space. And then I wonder why jeans manufacturers won’t give it to me. Fashion’s refusal to give women’s clothing pockets is tantamount to putting female form over human function Functioning pockets make women very excited. This is a sentence that shouldn’t need to be written in 2018. Women are busy, and we need to carry our stuff with the same ease as men do. Still fashion resists giving us what we want, when what we want is more, bigger, better pockets. It’s neither hard nor expensive to make women’s pockets functional – after all, fashion does it for men – so what’s the deal with women’s pointless pockets? The answer is a heady mix of sexism and patriarchal fear. In 2016, the white suit that Hillary Clinton wore to accept the Democratic party’s presidential nomination prompted me to write a piece on the sexist, political history of pockets. “Men have pockets to keep things in, women for decoration,” Christian Dior pronounced in 1954, and writers have long noted that fashion’s refusal to give women’s clothing pockets is tantamount to putting female form over human function. But while many writers acknowledge the sexism, most have overlooked the ways that politics – the dirty deeds of voting, the nitty-gritty of sedition, or the blood of revolution – have played into the design of women’s clothing. The colour of Hillary’s white suit echoed the clothing of the suffragettes, yet her suit’s apparent lack of pockets did not. For suffragettes, pockets were a political issue. A 1910 fashion show at New York City’s Hotel Astor featured a “suffragette costume” that boasted “two pockets in the front and two behind” with a total of “seven or eight pockets, all in sight and all easy to find”. So integral to the suffrage movement were pockets that The Old Lady With a Hundred Pockets was the title of a fundraising event in 1908. A New York Times article describes a life-sized dummy with pockets “all over a brilliant red skirt”. Attendees at the woman suffrage bazaar would pay to pick the lady’s pockets for a grab bag, with the proceeds going to benefit women’s voting rights organisations. Women voters weren’t alone in understanding the connection between pocket power and political power. A serialised 1913 newspaper cartoon depicts a man dressed in a frilly nightgown, pulling out the pockets in a woman’s skirt and looking nervously over his shoulder at his sleeping wife. It’s captioned “When Wifie Dons Suffragette Pockets”. Such is the terrifying potency of the female pocket. A century has passed. Women have the vote. But pockets? Not so much. Contrarians will argue that women who want to carry things have handbags. We can, and we do. But in addition to having to carry a bag, women have to buy the bag. And because of this, handbags function as a kind of “pink tax”, the price added to everyday objects and services that are sold specifically to a female audience. More germane to the pocket point, a bag is always endangered. Pockets can get picked, but only bags can be snatched. It’s one thing to lose your keys, for your phone to be boosted from your hands, or to have your purse stolen. It’s quite another to lose everything at once, and that’s the anxiety of carrying a handbag. The patriarchy may enjoy looking at a streamlined female form, but culture likes it when women feel imperilled and powerless. We pocket-loving women aspire to freedom. The dream of having pockets big enough to carry your phone, your keys, your purse and your lipstick is a dream of independence, a dream of walking unencumbered yet able to reach your necessities, and a dream of holding nothing on your shoulder. What women want is no mystery. We want to have one hand in our 9-inch pocket – and the other one giving a peace sign. • Chelsea G Summers is an ex-academic and former stripper who writes about sex and fashion