Tennis is often lauded as the most gender equitable of sports: a contemporary reality that owes everything to a guerrilla past. With the birth of professional tennis in 1968, Bille Jean King appeared in the Wimbledon Championships alongside Rod Laver, expecting to receive an equal pay cheque. Instead, she took home £750, while he earned £2,000. Just a couple of years later, things were worse, not better. Men were being paid 12 times women’s wages, while many tournaments banned women from competing at all. “We were in big trouble if we wanted to keep playing tennis,” said King of the time. As history and even film has recorded, King and eight other rebel women (the “Original Nine”) thus took justice into their own hands: signing US$1 contracts and breaking away to form their own circuit and union – the WTA. Ridiculed and told they had no hope of going it alone, they were quick to earn independent sponsorship and public support, and by 1980 had raised a total of $7.2m in prize money for their 250 professional members. Sport worldwide is littered with examples of the establishment mistreating women, but not all have had the courage to go it alone. After Gillon McLahlan confirmed last week that the AFL was considering shortening the 2019 AFLW season – despite its looming expansion – the players and wider AFLW community would do well to heed the lessons of those nine women who were brave enough to say “no” to the inadequate conditions on offer and take the game back to the grassroots, and the people who have its best interests at heart. Such a move would not be made lightly. Women have fought for teams and leagues of their own since as early as 1880. The AFLW was supposed to be the pinnacle of that battle: a national league to provide women and girls with some of the infrastructure, coverage and resources they deserved. As a result, many of its players have stayed silent as the AFL lurched from one misstep to another: afraid to rock the boat now that big brother had finally, seemingly, wrapped an arm around those it had exiled or ignored for so long. On Friday, however, something shifted. One by one, players jumped onto social media to express their outrage at the mooted changes. One of the faces of AFLW, Mo Hope, asked at length if it was “all worth it” in an Instagram post, citing the fact that she could earn more on Centrelink, but continues to “make more life sacrifices than I ever have to just kick the footy at the club I love with the girls I call family”. She also mentioned the toll of bullying on social media, while Meg Hutchins weighed in on the sexism and homophobia that continues to be directed at players in print and elsewhere. Georgie Parker, meanwhile, highlighted that a six-week season would mean moving across the country and leaving family behind for a pre-season twice as long as the actual fixture, while Cecilia McIntosh drew attention to the fact that many demand unrealistic standards of AFLW players given most work full-time and take unpaid leave just for the privilege of playing. Suddenly, the players were finding voice. Privately, more players have confided that, on this issue, they are united: a shorter season is their final straw, an absolute “no go zone” that has riled them more than a number of issues they are also aggravated by, including rule changes, the absence of women coaching at the highest level, a lack of certainty on contracts, and a lack of clarity around any number of other important logistical issues, including the season’s start and end date, draft and trade rules and more. Behind the scenes they are rallying, and will seek guidance from the AFL Players’ Association, but it may be that they are ultimately best served with a players’ union of their own. In the meantime, they have acknowledged that radical action might be necessary: including protests or even a strike. Hope’s post concludes with a call to arms for future generations of women and girls: “It’s not about me, it’s about the future and I will stand for the future of the game.” For the sake of that future, the AFLW players and community must continue to find voice – and say no to the AFL when it refuses to play fair. The detractors will tell them they can’t sustain it financially, but they need look no further than the WTA for proof it works. The women’s football community trusted the AFL with AFLW, and now they should consider taking that same leap of faith with their own product and community to support them to stand alone.