In a season already defined by tiny margins between Lewis Hamilton and Sebastian Vettel, this weekend’s Belgian Grand Prix may define which driver carries a potentially championship-winning edge to the title run-in. The glorious blast through the forests of the Ardennes is rightly a favourite with the drivers but it will also present a battle royale for the engineers as Mercedes and Ferrari enter a horsepower head-to-head at Spa. Hamilton leads Vettel by 24 points in the world championship, a gap not indicative of how close their fight has been. The lead has changed hands six times this season and the British driver’s advantage comes on the back of wins in Germany, where Vettel crashed out, and Hungary. Their cars, however, have been remarkably evenly matched and the expected development war between the frontrunners has been fierce. At Spa, a largely power-dependent circuit, both teams have brought new engines in a bid to steal a march – the first time they have introduced a major upgrade at the same race. Mercedes, dominant for the past four years in engine power, have now been definitively matched and even passed by the Scuderia. Since Silverstone, Ferrari have had the quickest car in a straight line and will want to maintain their advantage, especially here and in the next round at Monza, both circuits where drivers lean heavily on the throttle. For Hamilton and Vettel, locked in an intense battle, any edge could prove crucial and the Briton acknowledged the import of successful development. “Naturally every upgrade that we have and every opportunity there is for an upgrade is important,” he said. “These are two big power circuits we’ve got these next two weekends. This weekend I think they’ve [Ferrari] got a new power unit, we will have a new power unit. So, it will be interesting to see how they fare with each other but naturally I’ve got a lot of confidence.” At last year’s race there was nothing to choose between the two. Hamilton’s track position from pole proved crucial to his win but he was doggedly harried by Vettel throughout. The German stayed within a second and a half for almost the entire race. Similar can be expected again, with Spa’s high-speed challenge looking quicker than ever this year. That power will be crucial is clear on a track where 70% of a lap is taken at full throttle and the run from La Source to Les Combes through Eau Rouge-Raidillon has been comfortably flat-out for some time. However this weekend even the glorious left-handed sweep through Pouhon may be flat, with Max Verstappen appearing to do just that in his Red Bull in first practice. Last season Spa was a turning point for Hamilton – he went on to win four of the next five races – and Vettel has admitted that Ferrari failed to keep up with Mercedes’s development. This season, the German has repeatedly expressed confidence in his machinery and that it will remain competitive. He believes he can take the fight to the wire, a task that will look all the more achievable if his team emerge as winners of the power struggle in Belgium. Elsewhere battle had already been raging between Fernando Alonso and Red Bull, who became involved in a series of increasingly vehement claims and counter-claims. Alonso, having announced he was to leave F1 at the end of the season, said on Thursday that he had rejected an offer of a seat at Red Bull after Daniel Ricciardo opted to leave but the team denied any approach had been made. Alonso stuck to his guns, insisting he had offers at Monaco and this month. Red Bull have since chosen to promote Pierre Gasly from Toro Rosso and the team principal, Christian Horner, remained adamant on Friday no such approaches had been made to Alonso. “To be totally clear there was no offer to Fernando Alonso for next year,” he said. “He is a fantastic driver, a great talent. We had an inquiry from [Alonso’s manager] Flavio Briatore and from Liberty but the position in Red Bull has always been clear. We invest in youth and have a talent pool with the Red Bull junior programme. We have offered Fernando a contract in the past but that was back in 2007.” Vettel topped the timesheets in first practice in front of Verstappen and three-tenths up on Hamilton. Kimi Räikkönen was quickest in the afternoon 0.168 seconds clear of Hamilton in second with Vettel, who aborted his quick lap, in fifth.