Lena Dunham marked the nine-month anniversary of her undergoing a hysterectomy on Wednesday, by posting a series of nude photos to her Instagram. In a caption accompanying the photos Dunham, who had her uterus and cervix removed in February to alleviate chronic pain from endometriosis, said she was “mostly healed” and wanted to give thanks “for this body, which is stronger than I’ve ever given it credit for”. “Today is National Leathercraft Day, National Relaxation Day and National Lemon Merengue Pie Day,” Dunham said. “It’s also the 9 month anniversary of my hysterectomy. I’ve never celebrated the 9 month anniversary of anything and I realized last night why that number feels so funny – I won’t ever do it the way I planned to.” Dunham, who wears the professional hats of actor, writer, producer and director, underwent the procedure after years of intense pain from endometriosis. The condition, which affects 176 million people worldwide, causes tissue similar to the lining of the womb to grow outside the organ. “My body is mostly healed and every day I find a new bruise on my heart, but today I offer myself gratitude: from the most pained place, I somehow knew to choose myself. The purest glint of who we are and know we can be is always available to us, calm and true at our center,” Dunham wrote. “My friend Paul named my uterus Judy, and when she was being uppity we called her out, hence the tattoo on my ribs, which hurt like fuck even through the pain meds: #RIPJudy. Today I give thanks for Judy, for her graceful exit and for this body, which is stronger than I’ve ever given it credit for.” Dunham has been open about the suffering she has endured through endometriosis. Before undergoing the hysterectomy, she had tried a number of different medical procedures, but none worked long-term. In the 12 months before the operation she had been admitted to hospital three times, once during an appearance at the Met Gala. She announced her decision to have the hysterectomy in an essay in Vogue in February, saying she had endured severe, chronic pain and “years of complex surgeries measuring in the double digits”.