Last December, nearly a year after my husband’s death, I realised I had turned a corner: a friend mentioned this paper’s online dating service, Guardian Soulmates, and I thought, “I could do that.” Barely three weeks later, I was meeting you and your puppy on my favourite beach. I knew right away that we’d hit it off: we talked nonstop and I felt totally at ease. You had also been widowed within the past year, and although your marriage was blissfully happy, whereas mine was more complicated, we talked openly about the searing pain of bereavement. We laughed and smiled a lot, too. As your mad puppy jumped around, causing me to repeatedly move to the other side of you, I found that I kept touching your arm. We went to a nearby pub and continued to talk without pause. It was obvious that we shared a great deal in terms of values, beliefs and sense of humour. I told you I was having a lovely time, and you smiled the smile that I have since come to love and told me that you were, too. After four hours, which barely felt like one, I had to go. We walked to my car and you kissed me. I was astonished, enthralled, charmed. It was clear that this was not going to end here. We spoke that evening and agreed to meet again a week later. We spoke several times every day in the interim. I astounded myself by suggesting we spend a weekend near that same beach a few weeks later. On our second meeting, there were instant fireworks: an explosive combination of emotional connection, physical attraction and a huge liking for each other. We continued to spend as much time together as we could and, 17 days after meeting, we rather crazily booked a holiday abroad. Three months on, I am happier than I thought possible – I did not expect, in my late 50s, to feel like this. You have turned my life around. We make each other laugh all the time and your capacity for physical affection is unending. You tell me I am gorgeous and are unfailingly kind. You talk about what you see as my talents and encourage me to develop them (even at this late stage). There have been many magical moments: dancing round my kitchen in each other’s arms; walking, crying and laughing on that beach where we first met; sitting in a cafe and grinning broadly at each other at the sheer, wonderful craziness of it all. This feels like something that could last for ever. Whatever happens, you have shown me that, even after the very worst has occurred, unbelievable happiness can make a new appearance. For that, my love, I truly thank you. • We will pay £25 for every letter we publish. Email family@theguardian.com, including your address and phone number. We are able to reply only to those whose contributions we are going to use. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.