“In Spain, the dead are more alive than in any other country in the world,” the poet Federico García Lorca said in 1933, their “profile cuts like the edge of a barber’s blade”. More than 40 years have passed since the death of Francisco Franco, but in this new English-language biography, Enrique Moradiellos argues that the dictator remains “an uncomfortable spectre from the past”. Franco made his name in Spain’s dirty colonial war in 1920s Morocco; the conservative army was seething at its lost global empire and social changes back home. Modern culture and fledgling democracy were anathema to traditionalists longing for a past golden age, convinced of a “universal Judaeo-Masonic-Bolshevik conspiracy against Spain and the Catholic faith”. Franco thought that a century of liberal reform and culture had been “catastrophic”, “the negation of everything Spanish”. The election victory of a leftwing republican government in 1936 provoked a rightwing military coup, and as commander of the hardened army in Morocco, Franco was soon declared “Caudillo” of reactionary Spain. With the western allies leaving the republic to stand alone, his fascist sponsors in Rome and Berlin were impatient with a long civil war, but Franco explained to the frustrated Italians that bloody attrition was the purpose of his crusade: the “necessary purge and cleansing is preferable to a rapid rout”. On the frontline the casualties were horrific, and behind it the “ruthless crackdown” on the dissent and difference of “anti-Spain” was brutal. Violence with no military purpose other than the intimidation and murder of civilians – as with the German aerial destruction of Guernica immortalised by Picasso – became normalised, a horrifying preview of the total war that would soon engulf the continent in the years after Franco’s final victory in 1939. Moradiellos does not linger on the brutal repression that characterised those years, in which tens of thousands were murdered in a wrecked, starving Spain. He argues Franco’s stool was three-legged: as conquering general he commanded the military; as defender of the faith he was legitimised by the church as “the man sent by God”; and as leader of the rightwing “national movement”, he controlled the one party of a one-party state. Saved from the second world war by Spain’s state of ruin (Hitler thought his help would “cost more than it is worth”), Franco over the decades shifted with the winds of geopolitics: the regime’s orientation moved from fascism in the 1940s to “national Catholicism” in the cold war 1950s, to “technocracy” in the booming 1960s. In that final shift, the insularity – “Franco’s vision stops at the border of Spain” wrote an American diplomat in 1950 – and autarky that had condemned the country to backwardness was replaced with economic liberalisation, and Spain began to develop in fast-forward: agriculture’s share of the workforce almost halved in just 10 years. Yet as a new, younger Spain emerged, neither Franco nor the conservatives of Opus Dei in his cabinet would accept a more liberal politics. As Franco aged and ailed (he required hospitalisation for phlebitis after too many hours watching the 1974 World Cup on TV), modernisers and conservatives failed to find a way to square the circle of a dictatorship without a dictator: “It was impossible to prolong its existence beyond the death of the Caudillo.” Franco’s deathbed, Moradiellos argues, encapsulated the paradoxes of a changing Spain: the best modern medical technology sat alongside his cherished relics, the finger of St Teresa of Ávila and the cloak of the Virgin of Pilar. The speed of the transition to democracy after Franco’s death in 1975 overseen by King Juan Carlos – and the “voluntary amnesia” that underpinned it – showed the “anachronism” of the Franco regime: Spanish society had already moved past it. Jailed artists, judicial conservatism and police excesses in modern Spain show the limits of liberty, but its population today is impatient with lazy analogies to the dictatorship: “Franco is dead”, an El País editorial sensibly reminded readers last year. Yet even though many young Spaniards know little of him (and those abroad even less), his figure has not fully faded. Moradiellos sees the genesis of contemporary Spanish political problems in the decades of dictatorship: excessive executive power, the demonisation of difference, complacency towards corruption. Discussing history is still controversial and many scars left by the regime remain unhealed. At Franco’s enormous monument to the civil war (built in part by his political prisoners), families have recently succeeded in a long campaign to exhume their relatives from the more than 30,000 war dead buried anonymously alongside the dictator. The profiles of the dead, in Lorca’s phrase, still cut, and with Spain’s future now being hotly debated, this timely book argues that to be free of the past one must know more about it. • Franco is published by IB Tauris. To order a copy for £17 (RRP £20) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.