At the table, Andy is making a seven-cheese and meat sandwich that defies belief. In the hallway, Rhik is cracking himself up by wilfully mispronouncing Billie Piper’s name. Billy Pooper. Billy Pooper. Selina enters now, talking loudly about a colleague’s affair, as if she is on the phone, but she is not on the phone. Abandoning his book, a summery hardback about the history of slavery, Amish Tom asks if anyone wants to go for a bike ride. “Apparently, there’s a market town 50km from here.” Kate, who treats any mention of exercise as the punchline to a joke, sprays him with baguette crumbs. Going on holiday with friends is a risk. People have different musical tastes, rise at incompatible hours, follow particular diets; they have varying ideas of a good time, reasonable budgets and who it’s OK to bring back to the flat and at which hours. Holidays are when you discover that aspects of people you previously liked are quite grating after five hours. Or that they have unfamiliar sides to their character, leading to the counterintuitive feeling you know them less well than before, and a post-holiday distance emerges while you recalibrate the relationship. It’s hard going on holiday with your mates. Or at least it should be. I have been going on the same holiday, to a house in France, for nearly two decades, with the same 10 people. Advertising encourages us to think of holidays as a chance for discovery and adventure; novel experiences with high Instagram traction. Yet my holidays are identical, every time. The height of adventure is a hornet on the upstairs landing. I dimly remember the place being in an attractive patch of countryside, but could be wrong, because I never leave the house when I’m there. It’s inexplicable that I could spend this much time in company. I generally find people a bit much. Couldn’t eat a whole one. An hour is plenty, then a day off for recovery. The only reason this tradition works is that there is no itinerary, and no expectation other than that everyone be their authentic selves, for better or worse. Anti-socialness is accepted, as are unprompted bouts of grappling. The playlists are bananas, though recently we’ve settled on a zonal compromise: Yo La Tengo and Nancy Sinatra in the kitchen, Bruno Mars and Drake by the pool. Kate, a nurse, is free to talk about teratomas in eye-watering detail while serving up artichoke hearts in cheese sauce. Andy can extemporise on the human condition, but if tree surgeon Pete approaches and asks if I want to play ping pong for six hours, I won’t even sign out of the conversation; I’ll just stand up and go. I’m one of those excellent people who tends to drop his friends as soon as there’s an outbreak of love in his life. Who will disappear for six months, or three years. This place is always here when I return, as are these people. Our culture is less interested in friendship, assuming romantic and familial stories to be more intense. Yet there’s nothing to equal the warm bath of friendship, particularly this holiday variety. To be truly accepted – even as a perpetually hungover bad loser in card games, with inefficient washing-up technique. To have a group of people know you intimately, historically and decide – without the glue of shared debt or organ compatibility – that they can stomach weeks of you, embroidering the same old stories, having the same old arguments, in the same old shorts? To me, that’s beautiful. This weekend saw the launch of Vans x Van Gogh, a range of skateboard clothing printed with the tortured Dutch artist’s most famous works. I’m on board: primarily for the name. It’s like one of those jokes that occurs to you in conversation, and is so good you can’t help but make it (even if it jeopardises a friendship or upsets your boyfriend). This is the business version, in which the shoe company stumbled on a piece of wordplay so compelling, it couldn’t not make it (a lucrative merchandise opportunity). Some may find this commodification of Van Gogh’s genius banal. Proof of our narcissistic inability to appreciate art, except to enhance our own brand. That’s a good point. However, the collection looks absolutely boss. Sunflowers, Skull and Self Portrait will feature on bomber jackets, backpacks, and sneakers, with the soles replicating Vincent’s characteristic brushstrokes. Personally, I can’t wait for sports-luxe collaborations with other old masters. Pablo Adidasso? Jackson Reeboks? Toulouse-Lacoste? Great art is inextricably bound up with commerce and identity, anyway. The wealthy have always reduced it to a financial asset, or décor or – by commissioning their own portraits – themselves. You can have the Sistine Chapel in your hall, so why not Mona Lisa on a bum bag? It’ll wipe the smirk off her face. OK, maybe it is tragic, but that’s capitalism. It’s a problem that we hold artists to a higher standard than the world they have to survive in. Vincent was a typical millennial snowflake, who died penniless and overwhelmed, his special talent unrecognised by everyone around him. Why has the Van Gogh Museum, dedicated to preserving his legacy, signed up for the youth-appealing fashion range? Must be the Monet! I can’t stop laughing about the Turkish zoo accused of painting a donkey to look like a zebra. Hee-haw. Isn’t this an Only Fools and Horses storyline? Or maybe Scooby-Doo? How did it think it would get away with it? Most zebras aren’t smudged. It’s not even original: the practice originated in Gaza, where they’ve been painting donkeys’ ears for, well, donkey’s years. The best part is that, when quizzed about it, the Turkish zookeepers stickingstuck to their story, like a man with a wonky toupee. As for the zonkey, if she hasn’t been given the name Debra , someone really should lose their job.