Joe Root hailed Jimmy Anderson as a “special commodity” after the rout of India at Lord’s before calling on his players to keep striving for the perfect Test performance as they look to wrap up the series in Nottingham. Sitting 2-0 up with three to play, and a regular stronghold in Trent Bridge next up on Saturday, the England Test captain danced around early talk of a whitewash over the tourists by insisting that to look so far ahead at this stage could be taken as arrogance. What he does know, however, is that with Anderson fresh from match figures of nine for 43, Stuart Broad delivering a trademark four-wicket surge and Chris Woakes stepping into the void left by Ben Stokes with four victims and a maiden Test century, his side hold all the aces. Root said: “Obviously [5-0] would be the dream. But it’s important we don’t get complacent, arrogant or look too far ahead. This game has got a funny way of biting back. We haven’t played the perfect performance yet and that’s something we’ve got to keep striving towards. I don’t see any lack of fight from India, we’ve given them nothing.” On the evergreen Anderson, who became the first bowler past 100 Test wickets at Lord’s, and Broad’s middle‑order evisceration of India before tea, Root added: “[Jimmy] is a special, special commodity, isn’t he? There’s been chat about his longevity but at the minute he’s bowling better than he ever has before. “[Broad] didn’t disappoint – he bowled exceptionally well in those conditions. As a captain you make sure you don’t over-attack and get too giddy. But ultimately when someone is in that frame of mind, in that zone, it doesn’t really matter where you put the fielders. It’s a lovely feeling to have.” With so much uncertainty over the possible return of Stokes for the third Test – England have not committed to when their next squad will be named – the performance by Woakes, on his comeback from a lengthy injury lay‑off, provided significant comfort. Root said: “Ben is a huge part of this squad, so it’s a miss him not being here. But what it did do was create an opportunity for Chris to come in and perform – and boy, he didn’t disappoint, did he? He was outstanding. “It’s nice to see guys really taking opportunities, and that’s something we really want to harness. When you get your chance, make it as hard as possible to leave you out.”