The Turkish lira recovered some of its losses as India’s national currency became the latest focus of investors’ concerns over the strength of emerging economies. With investors fretting that Turkey’s currency woes will spread, the rupee fell past 70 per dollar for the first time. Traders in Mumbai reported that the Indian central bank may have stepped in to stabilise the currency and it is now trading at 69.89 per dollar. In Turkey, there was some respite for the lira after days of heavy losses. The currency rose 5% to 6.53 to the dollar on Tuesday morning, after slumping 20% in the past four working days. The country’s central bank stepped in on Monday by pledging to provide liquidity to its banking sector. Investors are also taking some comfort from news that Turkey’s finance minister, Berat Albayrak, will hold a conference call with investors from the US, Europe and the Middle East on Thursday, his first since assuming the post almost two months ago. Turkey’s stock market is up 0.5% after rising 2.5% in early trading, compared with a loss of nearly 4% on Monday. In another defiant speech on Tuesday, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan threatened to boycott American electrical goods in response to US sanctions, and warned that those who were waging “economic warfare” against Turkey would pay a price. Nafez Zouk of Capital Economics said: “The collapse of the lira has thrust Turkey into a currency crisis, leaving the authorities with two difficult options to prevent it from morphing into a debt and liquidity crisis: either accept an economic slowdown (and possible recession) induced by tighter fiscal and monetary policies, or resort to capital controls.” He thought that capital controls “seem more palatable than a recession”, adding: “On their own, however, capital controls won’t solve Turkey’s problems, and will only make the adjustment process more painful down the line.” In another sign that investor anxieties over Turkey’s market meltdown are easing, South Africa’s rand rose 1.8% against the dollar after sliding more than 9% on Monday, its biggest drop since the financial crisis. The Russian rouble also edged higher after hitting its weakest levels since 2016 on Monday, and the Mexican peso gained 0.8%. The MSCI EM currency index, which tracks the main emerging markets currencies, recovered 0.3% after Monday’s 0.66% drop. European stock markets rose, while the FTSE 100 index in London slipped 0.16%. Neil Wilson, the chief market analyst at Markets.com, said: “The dollar is crushing everything in its path at the moment and this is not good for emerging market or global growth. “However, the fears of contagion can be over-egged and we note that the dangers so far seem confined to countries with large current account deficits and high dollar financing, as well as some corporates, largely banks, with exposure to that debt. Nevertheless, as stimulus is gradually unwound, we are seeing the markets test countries with exposure to dollar debt in a way not seen for some years.”