Theresa May indicated she would seek to fight off any leadership challenge from Boris Johnson and suggested she would lead the Conservatives into the next general election as she repeated a promise to lead the party “for the long term”. The prime minister said she was in politics “to deliver for the British people” and told journalists on a trip to Africa she would highlight housing, healthcare and other non-Brexit domestic issues in a relaunch at next month’s party conference in Birmingham. When asked specifically if she would contest a leadership challenge from Johnson, the former foreign secretary, May said she hoped to fight on as prime minister: “I am in this for the long term. I am in this for delivering for the British people, and that’s what I’m focused on.” She appeared to suggest in a television interview that she was relieved that Johnson had resigned as minister. When asked if she had noticed how much Johnson appeared to want her job, May told ITV: “I was very pleased Boris was foreign secretary for the period that he was foreign secretary.” Johnson remains a serious threat to May at a time when much of the party’s grassroots is unhappy with her Chequers Brexit proposals, a negotiating plan that led to him quitting the cabinet, claiming that Britain would be “reduced to the status of a colony” if it was adopted. May has to face her party’s annual conference at a time when she is under pressure to demonstrate she can make progress in the Brexit negotiations and show she has the energy to take the Conservatives forward after March 2019. The prime minister said she would focus on “the domestic agenda” at the event and singled out policies “to actively increase housebuilding so young people have an opportunity to get their feet on to the housing ladder, when so many fear they are not going to be able to do that”. She said she wanted to showcase “what we’re doing in technical education to improve opportunities for young people” and “a sustainable 10-year plan from the NHS to deliver better outcomes for patients” after she agreed to boost its finances by £20.5bn a year by 2023-24. A year ago, May endured a disastrous conference in which she struggled to deliver her keynote speech because of a persistent cough. Under Conservative party rules, she could face a vote of no confidence if at least 48 of her MPs - 15% of the parliamentary party - demand one, by writing a letter to the chair of the powerful 1922 Committee, Sir Graham Brady. Her latest comments suggest she would contest such a vote. If she won, she could not then be challenged for another 12 months but, if she lost, she would be barred from standing in the subsequent leadership contest. Few at Westminster expect the prime minister to remain in power much after next March, when Britain is due to leave the European Union. “This is not what the country or the party needs or wants, and it will go down badly on the backbenches”, said one Tory MP. On her first full day in Africa, May sought to appeal to the party’s right by downplaying a controversial warning made by the chancellor, Philip Hammond, last week that a no-deal Brexit would cost £80bn in extra borrowing and inhibit long-term economic growth. A no-deal Brexit “wouldn’t be the end of the world”, she said, arguing that the UK could make an economic success of the unprecedented situation if it proved impossible to negotiate a satisfactory divorce. May also spelled out how she hoped to change Britain’s overseas aid priorities, during a speech in Cape Town. She pledged to maintain the UK’s spending at 0.7% of GDP but vowed to reorient it to crack down on illegal migration and support fragile states in the continent. She said she wanted the UK to do more to help west African countries such as Mali, Chad and Niger, which have been “waging a battle against terrorism”. May added that she wanted Britain to use its aid programme “to support a major new crack down on illicit finance and organised crime, deploying expertise in financial centres around the world” – and to counter “illegal migration, modern slavery and trafficking in people”. On Wednesday, May will visit Nigeria, before moving in to Kenya on Thursday, where she will meet the president, Uhuru Kenyatta, and see British soldiers demonstrate their cooperation with military forces in the country in countering al-Shabaab, the Islamist terror group that is based in Somalia. In Nigeria, she will unveil two projects, one aimed at returning migrants and modern slavery victims from Libya to the west African country and a second to help secure the country’s border with Niger to prevent people trafficking on a major migration route to Europe.