One of the big surprises about having a baby is how amazing I am at it, compared to the world’s most famous men. Like so many others, a fair bulk of my expectations about fatherhood came from screen portrayals of feckless dads. These posit that babies are near impossible for men to supervise for more than 45 seconds at a time, difficult to even hold without them squirming and spraying like a startled squid. You will know this if you have watched a cinematic depiction of a man changing or feeding a baby for the first time, during which you’d be forgiven for thinking it was also the first time he had ever used his own hands. You can see the montage in your head already. Tom Selleck grimaces as he opens a nappy. Seth Rogen squints in horror at the instructions for a crib and Michael Gambon ends up showered in turds while wearing a nappy on his head. All of this repeats until Arnold Schwarzenegger collapses, weeping, in a heap of talcum powder, plastic wrapping and not-yet-dried baby piss. Later, Channing Tatum’s wife returns home to find that beautiful lunk she married, passed out in the cartoonish pile of plastic bottles he’s crushed with his big, muscular arse. Her husband, Zac Efron, still holds his phone on a snoring chest, its last Google search - ‘What is a baby?’ – dimly illuminating the gentle dark. What’s important, she thinks, is that her darling Charles Laughton has done his best: he’s looked after a child for half an afternoon, and both have survived. In reality, changing and bottle feeding are neither remotely difficult nor particularly unpleasant, just repetitive and, over time, a bit boring. Depicting this stuff as uniquely and inherently difficult for men bears the implication that we are stupid and, more insidious still, that parenting really should be left to women. Neither is accurate, or more importantly, interesting. It’s not like the horrors of fatherhood are difficult to find. I cringed through the boy’s first days, dementing myself over every ill that could befall him. All the cutesy things we bought have now taken on the appearance of spinning, skin-piercing choke hazards. This is because every object on Earth is now a spinning, skin-piercing choke hazard. Buttons might as well be Stanley knives, and keys shrapnel from a hand grenade. A cousin bought a stuffed rabbit so luxuriantly soft it’s almost a gas, and I spent 20 minutes imagining its small, hard nose bursting his perfect little eye. This pattern kept repeating; me receiving a harmless item manufactured specifically for children, and reacting like I’d been posted a nail bomb dusted with Sars. I want to see Ryan Gosling, wracked with thoughts about his sleeping daughter swallowing her entire blanket and pillow set. Or Paul Rudd, unable to step within five metres of a window because he imagined his son being snatched from outside by a passing, stilt-wearing thief. Until then, screen dads will have to settle for being clueless dolts; a hapless cohort of idiots being literally, and figuratively, shat on.