The men untainted by the defeat at Trent Bridge kept England in the game at Southampton. Sam Curran irrepressibly led the way as if he did not understand the enormity of England’s plight or the confidence crisis afflicting the top order and finished with his highest Test score of 78. Meanwhile Moeen Ali’s contribution of 40, calm and considered compared with those above him, was also vital and evidence of the value of picking someone when in top form. This pair enabled England to recover from the depths of 86 for six to 246 all out on another day of torment for their specialist batsmen. This may not be a great score but for the moment it keeps England in the game, especially if the ball continues to swing as it did throughout most of the first day. Even so India, 19 for nought at the close, must have been content with their day’s work, despite the hindrance provided by Curran throughout the afternoon. For most batsmen in this series, permanence has been a problem, success an elusive dream. Currently any English batsman who passes 40 runs or a couple of hours at the crease can book himself in for a prolonged run in the side. By this measure Moeen and Curran are back for good. Their doughty partnership of 81 allowed the possibility of an Edgbaston-style contest, though for this to happen England, with their reconstituted slip cordon, will have to snatch every chance that comes their way, just as the Indian slip fielders did even if there was untidiness and one missed chance from Rishabh Pant behind their stumps. The ball kept moving on a day that grew ever greyer and that has been the pattern throughout the series. This summer the batch of Dukes balls seem darker and more eager to deviate and both sides have demonstrated that they have the bowlers to exploit such attributes. Even Ravichandran Ashwin could not resist delivering an unusually high proportion of swingers during a fine, containing spell from the Pavilion End. But it was the trio of Indian pacemen, with expensive help from Hardik Pandya, who did the damage on another nightmarish morning for England’s upper order. There was not a catalogue of dire shots. In fact, there was no shot at all from Keaton Jennings in the third over. Against Jasprit Bumrah and his unusual stiff-armed action it seemed as if Jennings never set eyes upon a delivery which swung back into the left-hander. Up went the finger and out went Jennings with an awfully long time to contemplate his next, crucial innings in a Test career that started so encouragingly with a century in Mumbai where England had the same top seven batsmen, albeit in a different order. The two Yorkshiremen soon joined Jennings in the dressing room and neither had looked secure as the ball started to swing and dart off the pitch. Joe Root would have been lbw to Bumrah until it was discovered that the bowler had overstepped by a millimetre or two. Ishant Sharma’s footwork is more reliable so when Root reviewed an lbw it transpired that not only was Sharma’s left boot in the appropriate place; so too was the ball. Soon after Jonny Bairstow feathered a fine ball from Bumrah into Pant’s gloves, which highlighted that the higher you bat the more difficult the process generally becomes in this country, as opposed to Sri Lanka. Alastair Cook’s dismissal, poking at Pandya, was another frustration since he had looked as secure as anyone. In seven of his nine Test innings this summer Cook has reached double figures without many alarms, which is supposed to be the hard bit. So England lunched at 57 for four, not much variety there. After the interval Jos Buttler stroked a few sweet boundaries but was then caught at third slip off Mohammed Shami seeking another. As usual Ben Stokes dug in and bristled in defence before using up England’s second review against Shami (Adil Rashid could have done with that later on when given lbw by the umpire Bruce Oxenford). Now there was some retaliation. Moeen hit two sixes, one off the top edge, another out of the middle against Ashwin. But this was not one of his skittish innings. He was prepared to leave the swinging ball outside the off stump, demonstrating that here was a man confident in his game. Meanwhile Curran was alert, nimble on his feet and plainly relishing the situation. So sure did they seem against the pacemen that it was a source of angst when Moeen top-edged a sweep against Ashwin, which was superbly caught by the diving Bumrah. After Rashid’s lbw Stuart Broad hung around diligently and was soon admiring the steely-eyed derring-do of Curran. Surrey’s cricket director, Alec Stewart, sees him as a batting all-rounder in years to come and it is easy to see why. Here he assessed risk and reward quite brilliantly while resuscitating England’s innings. Occasionally he darted around the crease to manufacture runs against the pacemen, but when defending he appeared to have plenty of time. His judgment finally deserted him when attempting to blast Ashwin to the leg side but by then he had hit 78 and had conjured 79 runs from the last three wickets. To accentuate the positive, which we must in this era: it seems as if England now have half a dozen men capable of batting at No 6.