On a frantic last day of business Fulham broke their transfer record with the purchase of Marseille’s André Franck Zambo Anguissa, a deal which took their summer spending over £100m on their return to the Premier League. Fulham confirmed the arrival of Anguissa for around £30m having been granted permission by the Premier League to complete the formalities of the move after the 5pm cutoff. The 22-year-old Cameroon international had undertaken a medical in the south of France earlier in the day. The defensive midfielder agreed a four‑year deal worth £67,000 a week. Fulham had sought similar extra time to secure the loansignings of Timothy Fosu-Mensah, a versatile defender who spent last season at Crystal Palace, and Luciano Vietto from Manchester United and Atlético Madrid respectively. Vietto, an Argentinian striker, had cost Atlético £14m in the summer of 2015 but will now provide competition for Aleksandar Mitrovic. He has spent time on loan at Sevilla and Valencia in recent years. Deals for Sergio Rico and Joe Bryan were completed before the cut-off. Chelsea had considered Rico, 24, as a replacement for Thibaut Courtois, after the Spain international fell out of favour at Sevilla. “Sergio is a world-class goalkeeper, and his services have been in great demand,” the Fulham’s director of football operations, Tony Khan, said. “Sergio answers our mandate of making our squad the strongest and deepest it can be as we face top Premier League opposition.” Bryan arrived from Bristol City having pulled out of a prospective transfer to Aston Villa on Wednesday evening. The left-back cost £6m and has signed a four-year deal, with an option for a further season. “Fulham’s style of play has really stood out to me and it will suit me,” the 24-year-old said. “The opportunity to play in the Premier League is one you can’t turn down as you may never get it again in your lifetime.” Jean Michael Seri, André Schürrle, Calum Chambers, Alfie Mawson, Maxime le Marchand and Fabri had joined earlier in the summer. Slavisa Jokanovic’s side are at home to Palace, coached by the former Fulham manager Roy Hodgson, on Saturday.