‘It’s all about men!” said the tagline on the poster for this extraordinary, almost Dalíesque Hollywood comedy from 1939, now on rerelease, gallopingly directed by George Cukor and adapted by Anita Loos and Jane Murfin from the stage play by Claire Boothe. But there isn’t a single (or married) man in it. Every character on camera is female, and it’s an elegant whirl of moneyed and married Manhattan women: ladies who lunch off each other’s reputations in health salons and beauty parlours, participating in bizarre regimens and surreal treatments, breaking out firecracker dialogue and indiscreetly tattling about whose husbands are stepping out with shopgirls on the sly. But these gossips get karmically punished by having their own husbands pinched. Rosalind Russell, weirdly deploying glasses and knitting, is the waspish Sylvia Fowler; Joan Fontaine is the doe-eyed Peggy Day. Norma Shearer establishes the movie’s heterosexual romantic idealism with her soft, almost myopic gaze, playing Mary Haines, a sensible and beautiful, married mother-of-one – no gossip, but genially tolerant of her friends’ chatty foibles. But then her world is to come crashing down when she hears that her husband has been seen canoodling with a woman who works at a department store perfume counter, a gimlet-eyed predator called Crystal Allen, superbly played by Joan Crawford. The men are all off-stage, an intense implied presence, like lingering cigar smoke, so the title is archly appropriate. (Incidentally, “White women” would not exactly be right, as African American maids and assistants are seen: there’s a great performance from Butterfly McQueen as the store attendant Lulu. And “Wasp people” is not really right either, with Paulette Goddard as the divorcing actress Miriam Aarons and Mary Boland as the Countess Le Lave, whose first husband reportedly described her as an “A1 schlemiel”.) The nearest thing to male or quasi-male authority on camera is Mr Haines’s fiercely professional and female lawyer, who comes on with the divorce papers. Is it feminist or anti-feminist? Their world revolves around and is paid for by men, although Peggy emphasises the importance of having your own modest income. The narrative is set in motion by what the men do, and the happy ending is all about forgiving the errant, chuckle-headed menfolk and instead giving the gold-digging stealers of other women’s husbands a boot in the behind. But the very fact of excluding men from the action feels radical – and it is performed with brilliant wit and a terrific physical comedy. (A 2008 remake with Meg Ryan in the Norma Shearer role was feeble. They missed a trick by not creating a new movie called The Men, solely from the men’s perspective.) Moreover, the absence of men has its own kind of ethical implication. It is a sort of abandonment, and the drama’s no-men structure is a satirical comment on their emotional distance. Around this drama of duplicity and infidelity, Cukor creates a brilliant spectacle, halted by Shearer’s moments of stunningly serious emotional devastation. And then there is that remarkable “fashion show” that the women attend, shot in colour: a mesmeric, wordless interlude that appears to allude to the nature of these women’s lives. It starts with jolly outdoor scenes, almost pastoral, but then descends into moody nightclub darkness, a world of metropolitan chic and brooding sensuality. I can only compare it to the dream sequence in Hitchcock’s Spellbound. Mrs Haines’s cook comments: “The first man who can think of a good explanation of how he can be in love with his wife and another woman is going to win that prize they’re always giving out in Sweden.” That of course is Mr Haines’s ordeal, and it is the fundamental premise of all the “remarriage comedies”, which allowed the movies to have their cake and eat it: monogamy and extramarital adventure. The single-sex approach gives this a unique flavour. It’s exhilaratingly funny.