One August night last year, neo-Nazis marched with flaming torches across the campus of the University of Virginia. Sophie Schectman was among those who protested against them. The next day, Schectman and her older sister Rebecca took to the streets again. As groups of white supremacists fought with counterprotesters, police officers stood back. But later, when a crowd moved up Fourth Street chanting “Black lives matter”, the Schectmans were among them. They were jubilant. “It definitely felt like we had won, the anti-racist activists had won, we had defended our town,” Schectman said. Then a car rammed into the crowd. People went flying. Schectman found herself on the ground, her sister next to her uninjured. Sophie’s left leg was “pretty badly” broken. Her right leg was fractured. Recovery took months. One counterprotester, 32-year-old Heather Heyer, was killed in what has since been widely seen as a white supremacist terror attack. A year later, Schectman and others hurt in Charlottesville are calling on Americans to become involved in the fight against racism – not to merely mark the anniversary of the attack and move on. “It’s one thing to show up and protest and rally against overt white supremacy,” Schectman said, “but it’s another thing to fight the everyday white supremacy that we see in our city.” Constance Young, 35, was also injured in Charlottesville. In Washington on Sunday, she told protesters: “We are responsible for this time in history. If we don’t stand up and say, ‘Not here, not now, not anymore’, this violence will keep happening on our watch.” That day, a white supremacist rally was set to take place in front of the White House. Many Americans celebrated what happened next. Only a handful of white supremacists showed up, to parade through the streets to cries of “Shame! Shame!” as thousands marched against them. Cordoned off in a corner of a park, the white supremacists addressed each other. Then they left, early. But Schectman and other Charlottesville survivors said such successes would not be enough if not backed up with other forms of action. Americans horrified by what neo-Nazis have done in Charlottesville and elsewhere must continue to act, they said. So must local governments and influential organizations. “I encourage other white people to join anti-racist organizations, to self-educate, and support people of color who have always been leading this work,” Schectman said. Young said “there is room in this movement for everyone” and added that while some people may want to be out in the streets, others could organize or donate money. “If you like to cook, you can cook for your people,” she said. Anyone who thinks anti-racism work has sufficient support is wrong, she added. “When people make that sort of statement, it shows that they do not understand how many people in this country live,” she said. For Schectman, the anniversary of the attack was not an easy day. “It’s an extremely difficult time and traumatic,” she said, adding that nonetheless she “knew I wanted to be here to continue the work”. Both activists said relationships they had built through anti-racist organizing had sustained them through their year of recovery. On the anniversary of the Nazi torch march, Schectman, now 22 and a recent graduate, marched again through her old campus, as an organizer of a protest demanding UVA do more to confront what happened. Demands included a campus ban on white supremacists and no-trespass orders for all identified activists who carried torches last year. She was also protesting police tactics. “We saw from last year, they will always protect white supremacists and not counterprotesters,” Schectman said. “The police do not protect us. They will always harm black and brown communities and anti-racist activists.” Survivors of the Charlottesville attack say many are struggling a year later, some unfit to work, some dealing with massive healthcare costs. “I’m very lucky that my parents were able to support me and take care of me and I’m privileged that they were were able to cover my medical and personal expense,” Schectman said. “Other survivors to this day are still struggling to make ends meet and their medical bills have not been paid.” Al Bowie, a protester from Richmond whose pelvis was broken in six places, said: “I wish people knew that these people that I’ve met through this horrible thing are some of the strongest, most badass people I’ve ever met, and it’s hard for them to sit back and be on the sidelines, it’s hard for them to not work.” He encouraged people to donate to Heal Charlottesville, a fund that supports the injured. Young said the huge crowds that turned out in Washington on Sunday provided an emotional boost. “When I see how we are able to do this, I feel very empowered,” she said. “Even though our country is in the midst of a terrible backsliding, we’re still holding on to each other, and we’re making progress.”