“Bullshit reigns” wrote Tom Wolfe in Bonfire of the Vanities, his satirical novel on ambition and greed – qualities both plentiful at AFL House. It would appear that satire too is in abundance were you to hear AFL chief executive Gillon McLachlan confirm the league favoured a shortened six-week 2019 AFLW home and away season, despite the addition of two new teams (North Melbourne and Geelong). Sadly, it was not satire, but bullshit reigning when McLachlan defended the decision with deductive reasoning on 3AW, saying: “The World Cup goes for four weeks. I don’t think anyone’s calling that Mickey Mouse.” The comment sounded more dutiful than celebratory and was syllogism of the thinnest sort – a defence no sane person would want to get involved with. McLachlan is one of the sharpest sporting administrators in the country, but his moral imagination on this occasion is a little disappointing. Indeed, women’s football pioneer Susan Alberti slammed the decision to shorten the AFLW home-and-away season as more than disappointing, but an “insult”: “It’s insulting on the part of all women who aspire to play AFLW, from the Auskick girls to the elite level,” Alberti said. “It’s insulting to all women who aspire to play our great game.” The league has been rumoured to be reluctant to pit the nascent women’s competition against the summer mainstays of tennis (the Australian Open) and cricket (the men’s and women’s Big Bash leagues). But AFLW star Daisy Pearce said the AFL should back the women’s product, and maintained they get around the issue with “clever fixturing”. “The commercial reality of broadcasting, trying to fit it in a time frame where there isn’t a lot of competition against other sports, I understand that,” Pearce said. “[But] when you’re trying to offer an elite, professional women’s competition and be the premier product and sport of choice in this country, I wonder whether that’s realistic or the right decision.” Under Pearce’s plan the AFLW season would kick off in early January to accommodate a full nine-game home and away series (each team playing each other once) plus two weeks of finals, finishing before round one of the AFL. But pressure to extend the season even further will come hard in 2020 with four more teams entering the AFLW. A solution to this may be found in an anonymous survey conducted by AFL Media in partnership with the AFL Coaches’ Association last month. The survey asked the 18 club coaches to weigh in on a range of topics, including the length of the AFL men’s season. Nearly two-thirds of coaches said a 17-game season was the ideal fixture. A 17-game season AFL season (with two byes) would allow the AFLW season to be extended by four weeks and position it as the most important domestic women’s sporting competition in Australia. While the thought of less AFL games would be an anathema to an organisation that wants nothing more than to sacrifice itself on the altar of broadcasting dollars, it instantaneously solves two problems – growing the women’s game (and putting it out in front of competing sports) and providing an equitable men’s fixture for the first time since 1986. Any argument against such a proposal will come with dollar signs attached. Sure, the influx of money has helped the AFL move into the stadium management and hospitality businesses, and attracted administrators, consultants and specialist coaches as sugar attracts ants, but outside expanding into Western Sydney and the Gold Coast (which could be argued has thinned the game’s talent pool), what has filthy lucre done to improve the health of the game more broadly? And should an organisation that enjoys tax-free status concern itself with issues that fall outside this remit? Wendell Berry once wrote that “only love can bring intelligence out of institutions and organisations, where it aggrandises itself, into the presence of the work that must be done.” Despite its early success, a women’s competition has been a long time coming and there is still much work to be done. If you love the game, you should genuinely appreciate that the AFLW has already provided so many opportunities for women and girls, and has had a far greater community impact that any other investment made by the current AFL administration. Moreover, as the Western Bulldogs’ No1 draft pick Isabel Huntington said, this impact cannot be determined purely by revenue. “Much of AFLW’s positive impact is unquantifiable,” she tweeted. “It’s an investment that [has] made incredible, much needed cultural change.” Some of this impact though is quantifiable and will soon translate into revenue, such as the 76 per cent increase in the number of women’s teams participating in Australian Rules football last year. The increase in numbers involved in the game will continue to grow exponentially should the AFL not mismanage it and treat it with all the gimmickry of AFLX. All this said, we should not underestimate the foresight and bravery required by the governing body to reduce the length of the AFL season, and arguing for this after five games were decided by a goal or less in the same round for the first time in league history is hardly great timing. But a season where everyone plays each other once would elevate traditional rivalries and provide each game with more significance, and in turn interest – which should result in better ratings and advertising dollars, offsetting some of the loss from less games. Over time, if managed correctly, the growth and popularity of the women’s game will further cover any shortfall. But more than this, sport is at its best when it connects us, when it inspires, when it provides opportunities for all. And as the body responsible for overseeing the health of our game, this should be the AFL’s primary concern. Again, this week, we were reminded that it is not.