The Warrington coach, Steve Price, has rejected the idea his side are the clear favourites to win Saturday’s Challenge Cup final against Catalans Dragons. Catalans are appearing in the final for only the second time, while Warrington will be aiming to win rugby league’s most prestigious competition for a ninth time – and the first since 2012. With the Wolves also in contention for the Super League Grand Final, many pundits see the Dragons as heavy underdogs at Wembley. “I wouldn’t agree with that notion at all,” Price said. “They’ve been playing well of late and have won a number of games in succession to get to where they’re at now in the league and cup. That all counts for nothing come Saturday – but I see it as two evenly-matched teams going at it for a trophy.” The two coaches have vastly different Wembley memories. Price’s only previous visit there was to watch the 2014 Community Shield between Arsenal and Manchester City, while Catalans’ Steve McNamara has endured defeat there as a fan, player and coach, when England lost to New Zealand in the 2013 World Cup semi-final. “I was crying there in 1980 when Hull FC lost to Hull KR,” McNamara said. “In 1996, I was there as part of the non-playing staff with Bradford, before playing and losing [to St Helens in 1997]. There’s a sense of achievement about reaching Wembley but when you do, it’s all about winning.” Ratchford; Charnley, Atkins, Goodwin, Lineham; Brown, Roberts; Hill, Clark, Cooper, Hughes, Livett, Westwood. Interchange Patton, Murdoch-Masila, Philbin, G King. Gigot; Tierney, Wiliame, Mead, Yaha; Langi, Drinkwater; Moa, McIlorum, Casty, Garcia, Jullien, Edwards. Interchange Bousquet, Da Costa, Baitieri, Anderson. Catalans have been well beaten in both their league fixtures since the semi-final victory over St Helens but, having rested most of his big names in those games, McNamara is not worried about the Dragons arriving at Wembley without any momentum. “That doesn’t concern me one bit – in fact, I’m really relaxed with it,” he said. “We’re not going to hide from it, we weren’t focused on those games, we were focused on getting the team right for a Challenge Cup final. We have nothing to play for in the league so there is only one focus and one aim, and it’s Saturday.” Both clubs were fighting against relegation this time last year before McNamara and Price oversaw remarkable transformations. “The club was in good shape but it needed to tinker and tidy up some things,” Price admitted. “The players have responded and they’re now 80 minutes away from doing something special.”