Any rock’n’roll biopic worth its salt will feature a scene where the musician is portrayed as a child, gazing at a guitar in a shop window, or at some icon on stage, in a moment of wonderment and revelation. For Jonas Blue, fast becoming one of the UK’s biggest pop stars, this moment came aged 10 in an Essex bedroom. “My cousin used to go round to this guy’s house and MC to garage tunes,” he says. “One weekend, we had to go and pick him up – I walked into his bedroom and I remember seeing a Pioneer CDJ-100S and a DJM-300 mixer, all in silver. I saw all the flashing lights and thought: ‘I don’t know what this is, but I know I want to do this for the rest of my life.’” Eighteen years of music-making later, he is now tantalisingly close to his first No 1, with Rise, a vitamin D-rich track that has been shooting up the charts in line with heatwave thermometers. It follows others such as Mama (nominated for a Brit award), Perfect Strangers and his pop-dance cover of Tracy Chapman’s Fast Car, all of which just skirted the top spot, but have collectively earned billions of streams for their pretty marimba melodies and carefree lyrics. He has also been signed up by the Ibiza superclub Hï as a resident DJ every Sunday night. I meet him for dinner after a set at Ushuaïa next door, a glam alfresco club whose endless showboating spumes of CO2 are surely contributing to Europe’s shortage. Tonight, he sports his own line of merch; a boxer’s nose roughens his Love Island handsomeness, and it is all topped off with hair that looks like a flame emoji in chestnut. Fantastical sushi arrives in waves. Also here is his girlfriend, the striking German model Melinda London. Jonas says that, when he split with his previous girlfriend of six years, “I wasn’t going to get back into a relationship because I just wanted the focus to be on my work. I was willing to sacrifice that – all my friends, partying, seeing my family. I never thought I’d be able to love again in that kind of way. So when I met Melinda …” – their eyes mist heavily – “… I found that, with the music I make, I love giving love and receiving love. And I realised that I was missing that in my life.” If it sounds like a charmed life, Jonas knows how precarious it is. “The expectations of everyone around me are insane,” he says. “The numbers that are expected of me and my music … to even talk of music in that way is pretty mad.” Is pop a cut-throat business? “Yeah. It’s the worst. If you’re not at the top of your game and you’re falling down, people are ready to kick you out.” He has had wobbles – the single before Rise only went to No 74. “It’s the worst feeling, going into your record label when you haven’t got a hit. It was like: ‘Maybe you’ve lost it.’ And, once you’re done, that’s it. There’s no support, or anyone to help you.” He credits a “very strong family” as his support network – he recorded his first hits in his parents’ house in Barkingside, east London, and got his dad to lend him money to buy a DJ setup, paying him back with what he earned playing friends’ parties and barmitzvahs. He had another revelatory moment watching Club Reps, an early 00s Channel 4 reality show about “the bad side of Ibiza, really – a load of Brits getting wrecked. But you would see Erick Morillo, David Guetta and Carl Cox DJing. I’m a little bit of a show-off; I just wanted to get girls and be popular. So seeing people in a club facing towards the DJ … I was like: ‘Oh, my God.’ “But when I got my decks, the musician in me was, like: ‘Why am I playing other people’s music?’ I wanted to create.” At 13, he discovered the Swedish pop producer Max Martin, someone he talks about with the fervour of a cult devotee. “When you listen to Britney’s Baby One More Time” – he sings Martin’s opening three-note fanfare – “you’re in. He had a seven-second rule: straight away, you had to be hooked. That has stuck with me to this day.” The teenage Jonas would work on production and songwriting until 4am and get up for school at eight. “I was a zombie. I started going in later and later. It got to the point where I just wouldn’t go and the school would call my house. One morning, my mum came into my bedroom and she was crying – she said she was getting ill because of it and it wasn’t fair on her. But I had been speaking to all these record labels, I knew I was getting somewhere. So I burned a CD of all the music I had been working on and took it to my headteacher at lunchtime. I said: ‘This is what I’m doing. There’s a record label in Florida that loves what I’m doing. And I’m going to do it.’ She said: ‘What does that mean?’ I said: ‘I’m never coming into school again.’ I was 15.” He doesn’t have any GCSEs. “But I wholeheartedly believe I made the right decision. It stems from my dad, who had his own videography business, and my grandpa, who was a photographer, one of the first people to bring colour photos into our area. It passed to me, that entrepreneurial spirit. I saw school as a business and, once I had got what I needed out of it, I left. I have never had a normal job since.” He first started making music under his real name, Guy Robin, and was signed to the house label Defected, before a name change to Scales, a genre switch to garage, and a jump to Chase and Status’s label MTA. “Until 2015, I was chasing and copying people – I didn’t have a sound.” The hinge was his version of Fast Car, “my mum’s favourite song when I was a baby”. It was made in one evening as a diverting side project and was played to a rapturous Ted Cockle, the CEO of Virgin Records, during a meeting about its guest vocalist, Dakota. It kicked off Robin’s career as Jonas Blue. (Ever the Martin devotee, he chose the pseudonym for its Scandinavian feel.) He now collaborates with a couple of other songwriters, Sam Roman and Ed Drewett, having failed to gel with others earlier in his career. “I don’t get along with many people, especially in studios,” he says. “I’m quite blunt and I know what I want – and songwriters are very sensitive people. If you tell them their work is terrible, which I have done in the past, it goes very badly and people get hurt.” He promises a range of moods on his album, which is “90% done”, but everything he has released so far has been beamingly positive. Why? “There’s a lot of shit going on in the world, to be honest. I don’t get involved in politics or watch the news, but there are a lot of people out there who have a lot of issues in their lives, like family members being sick. The couple of hours they’re out there enjoying music and feeling great, they can forget all their worries. It’s like Larry Levan DJing at the Paradise Garage – gay people would go to a club to escape. That’s what I want people to feel when they hear my music. I’m not here to write about a relationship that has really hurt me and I’m dying inside.” Jonas is in the awkward position, like another of his idols Calvin Harris, of being a non-singing star who relies on guest vocalists, but – ever the sunshiney optimist – he sees it as having his cake and eating it: “I can be in the studio, that guy between the speakers, but I can also go out on stage and be a frontman.” Pop’s sword of Damocles still hangs over him – even more so now that Rise is doing so well. “My dad was like: ‘This is amazing … you’ve got another hit!’ But Rise is finished, it’s out. So what’s the next one going to be? And that is tiring.” Tomorrow morning, after tonight’s euphoric house set, Jonas and Melinda will fly to another gig in France, and then one in Belgium. “I feel like I’m in a dreamworld – it has been amazing,” he says. “I need to find another word for amazing.” His GCSE English teacher is probably despairing, but we would probably all swap some vocab for positivity like his.