The England rugby union international Danny Cipriani faces a battle to save his career after he was arrested and hit with five charges including assaulting police following a nightclub incident while on Gloucester’s pre-season tour in St Helier. Cipriani, who has just joined Gloucester having fought his way back into the England picture, has been remanded in custody and is due to appear at magistrates court on Thursday morning. Jersey police have confirmed that Cipriani has been charged with common assault, larceny, assault on police, resisting arrest and disorderly on licensed premises following the incident which took place at 2am on Wednesday morning in the Jersey capital. Gloucester said in a statement: “Gloucester Rugby are very aware of an incident involving Danny Cipriani in the early hours of Wednesday morning following an incident at a St Helier nightclub. He was arrested and has since been charged.” It is understood the incident occurred following an altercation with a bouncer outside The Little Drift nightclub when Cipriani tried to a drink outside the premises. The incident raises question marks of Cipriani’s international future after he had fought his way back to make his first England start for 10 years on the summer tour of South Africa in June. It was the first time Eddie Jones had selected Cipriani in his squad but the England head coach had warned the fly-half over his future conduct. Cipriani started the third and final Test and impressed in setting up Jonny May’s decisive try in England’s victory against the Springboks, and last week spoke of his recall. He said: “My philosophy hasn’t changed; I’m trying to become a better rugby player and I’m in the right place to keep learning and play well. I’ve got back in, right now I’m in there and I’ve got to do everything I can to stay there.” Cipriani is among England’s highest‑profile rugby players having burst on to the scene as a 20-year-old in 2008 with an eye-catching international debut. He has amassed only 16 caps in the following decade but was included in England’s pre-season training camp in August.