In the 1990s, black rice, once rare and “forbidden” to all but the Chinese emperor, was cross-pollinated with a variety of Italian risotto to create a beautiful rice, called black venus, that is now widely available. At around the same time, a Japanese seed scientist crossed Chinese kale with broccoli to produce a new vegetable in which the stem is as delicious as the tip. It was named Tenderstem. Today’s dish brings together these two plant-based creations – and it makes me wonder: what could we be eating in another few years’ time? White miso is a genius ingredient that makes almost anything it touches taste divine, because it instantly adds bagfuls of umami. It’s also not as obscure as you might think: many supermarkets now stock it as a matter of course, and it’s also readily available online. You’ll need a small blender to make the dressing. Prep 20 minCook 35 minServes 4 For the salad300g black venus riceRapeseed oil200g Tenderstem broccoli150g mangetout1 avocado¼ red cabbage (around 200g), shredded150g mixed radishes, topped, tailed and thinly sliced150g frozen edamame beans, defrosted For the dressing 60g unsalted cashew nuts1cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and roughly chopped 3½ tbsp white miso paste 2 tbsp rapeseed oil 3½ tbsp lemon juice 1 tbsp brown rice (or maple) syrup 1 tsp salt Put the rice in a large pan, cover with plenty of water and bring to a boil. Once boiling, turn down the heat to a simmer and cook for 18 minutes, until tender. Drain into a sieve, then set the sieve over the same pan, cover with a tea towel and leave to one side. Put all the dressing ingredients in a blender with 100ml water and blend. Taste, and adjust the salt, lemon and miso as you wish. For the vegetables, heat a tablespoon and a half of rapeseed oil in a large frying pan on a medium-high flame. Once hot, add the Tenderstem and cook for two minutes, then add a splash of water (about three tablespoons), toss and cover with a lid. Leave to cook for five minutes, until tender, then transfer to a plate. Add another drizzle of oil to the pan and, when hot, add the mangetout. Cook for a couple of minutes until nicely blistered, then add to the plate with the broccoli. To assemble the salad, put the cooked rice in a large serving bowl. Peel and stone the avocado (do this at the last minute, so it doesn’t discolour), then cut into wedges. Layer the cabbage, Tenderstem and mangetout over the rice, followed by the radishes, edamame and avocado. Drizzle over the dressing, mix and serve.