When Gretchen Röehrs graduated in 2012, she moved from her parents’ rural Missouri house to California with $20 to her name. She slept on a friend’s sofa in Palo Alto and wrote “lovely letters” to Apple, Google and other digital behemoths, looking for a job. She had studied fashion design but not long into her degree realised it wasn’t for her. It was while she was an intern at Vogue in New York that she had an even bigger revelation. “I was working on vogue.com, and discovered that you can translate something so rich in print into something even more beautiful online.” That was the point, she says, when she fell in love with digital. But Silicon Valley wasn’t as welcoming as she’d hoped. “Vogue means nothing out here,” she laughs. “Most people see fashion as frivolous and feminine – it’s so frustrating. But I thought, I’m going to make them care about it.” The only company to reply to her letters was a shopping app called Shopkick. Röehrs took a job there and moved to San Francisco. “It’s much cheaper than Palo Alto, which I found culturally vanilla, not very stimulating.” Six years later, she has just joined Rothy’s, a company that makes women’s shoes from recycled plastic bottles, as art director. But it’s the modest fame she’s found online that has propelled her career in a way she never expected. Röehrs lives in Hayes Valley, an artistic, creative neighbourhood of San Francisco. It was once partly covered by an elevated motorway, the Central Freeway, which was seriously demolished after an earthquake in 1989. Almost overnight, Hayes Valley was transformed into a bustling, walkable part of town. Its powerful residents’ association has banned almost all chain companies, resulting in an inevitable imbalance: you can pop out for a deconstructed vintage shift dress but not a pint of milk. “It’s wonderful: no Starbucks, and so many great independent shops,” says Röehrs, “but it’s impossible to find a good grocery store.” The modern, three-storey apartment building where she lives with her partner, Jeremy, and their two dogs is built in a gap where the freeway once stood. Inside, it’s a warm jumble of antiques, books, artworks and plants – the latter something of an obsession – that belie the modern surroundings. The large canvases, mostly portraits in oil, are by Röehrs. “I haven’t sold a single one, so our home serves as a pop-up gallery.” A floor-to-ceiling bookshelf is artfully messy, with titles displayed at all angles. Next to it is an industrial grey wall – actually a cement support beam left bare. An Eero Saarinen oval dining table is from Craigslist, surrounded by mismatched vintage chairs and stools. “I love colour and excess. I’m the complete opposite of a minimalist,” she says. Most of the antiques in the apartment are Jeremy’s. “He’s from a classical home, and had a proper upbringing with real silver and china,” she smiles. “We have a lot of heirloom pieces from his family.” A previously “dark, dead hallway” now has a well-lit gallery hang of artwork – a mixture of friends’ pieces, photographs by Jeremy, and Röehrs’ own “scribbles” and paintings. Plants are everywhere, including a pair of magnificent fiddle-leaf figs standing watch over the sofa. “I know they’re going out of style, but they’re so beautiful,” she says. “I’m trying to replicate a jungle in our apartment. I end up making my way to Flora Grubb (the only plant shop in San Francisco you need to know) and getting another plant. We look after our plants and dogs as if they were our children.” A pair of floor-standing globe lights by the sofa are from Target. The couple’s bedroom is painted – walls and ceiling – a deep blue, which offsets a mid-century sideboard and oversized mirror. “It feels like I get to tuck into a velvet envelope every night,” she says. The only thing missing from home is some outdoor space. “I would happily exchange an organ or two for a backyard. Even a terrace.” While adjusting to life on the west coast, Röehrs started to create doodles in idle moments at work: whimsical line drawings of women, photographed wearing real fruit and vegetables instead of clothes. A romanesco forms a full skirt, a cluster of sprouts is a cocktail dress, a pair of bananas is a memorable trouser suit. “They were inspired by the bounty out here,” she says. “I just couldn’t believe you could buy tomatoes and blackberries in January.” As a taunt to her fresh produce-deprived friends on the east coast, she started to post them online. “People began liking and sharing them, and then through no action of my own, they went mad,” she says. To her surprise, Rizzoli has published a volume of her drawings, and Röehrs has created a sticker app on iTunes called Chic Eats. “There’s no great secret to them – they’re easy to understand, and they make people smile.” With the success of her “edibles” and her new job, “which is finally, properly in fashion”, Röehrs feels like life is starting to settle into place. “Growing up, I always wanted my surroundings to reflect who I am. Now they finally do.” • Edible Ensembles: A Fashion Feast For The Eyes, by Gretchen Röehrs, is published by Rizzoli priced at £18.95.  This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.