Amid the Brexit fog there is at least clarity on one point. Theresa May is trapped. There is no parliamentary majority for her Chequers plan. Michel Barnier has indicated opposition to key elements from the EU perspective, again this week ruling out her white paper’s proposal for a free trade in goods, and warning against any attempt by her to undermine the European single market. If there are changes to May’s plan, these will move further towards the wishes of the EU and further away from the hardline Brexiteers in her parliamentary party. Such a move is unlikely to secure the support of the Labour leadership, which is disinclined to dig a dysfunctional government out of a deep hole. Parliamentary paralysis this autumn is likely, with a majority of MPs also opposed to the UK crashing out without a deal. We remainers would have one enduring hope. If voters support a soft Brexit, the chances of rejoining are high One way through the obstacles is a referendum posing at least three options. They would include remaining in the EU, no-deal or May’s deal. Personally,  I support such a proposition and I hope it happens. But I am not prime minister. May is prime minister and probably will be this autumn as she seeks to navigate a way through. May will not back such a referendum. She has argued with some justification that the referendum in 2016 decided that the UK would leave the EU. Parliament voted to hold the wretched 2016 referendum by an overwhelming majority. Both main parties entered last year’s general election pledging to leave. She has left herself no wriggle room. She will not hold a referendum that challenges the 2016 verdict. If she is removed as prime minister, a successor would probably be even less inclined to provide the space for such a referendum. Yet May does have another option, a game-changer that could see her and the UK through this nightmare. She could offer a referendum on her final deal with the EU, with the other option being no-deal. Such a move does not challenge the 2016 verdict but would be a sequel to it. The UK is leaving, but the people would decide on what terms. There could be no screaming from the rooftops that the “elite” is depriving “the people” of its choice made in 2016. A referendum on a Brexit deal versus no-deal could offer her an escape from hell. She would be in a position to negotiate a softer deal with the EU without worrying about her parliamentary party going bonkers, or whether Labour would back her in parliament (it will not do so). The people would decide. Such a proposition is not great for any faction, but nor is it dire either. Quite a few leading remainers accept that the UK is leaving, but seek a sensible deal. May will be freer to negotiate such a deal without the pressure of having to please her hardliners in parliament. Those of us who would prefer the UK to stay in the EU would at least avoid three possibilities: losing another in/out referendum; triggering the rise of the far right if remain were to win; and fuelling even more intense anger against the EU in the future. Indeed, we remainers would be the angry ones, but with one enduring hope. If voters support a relatively soft Brexit, the chances of rejoining in the future are high. For the hardline Brexiteers, May presents them with two gifts if she follows such a course: a referendum that accepts the UK is leaving the EU; and the chance for them to put the case for no-deal. No doubt some of them would claim that they would have negotiated a better deal by acting more robustly in negotiations. May has the perfect rejoinder: there is nothing tougher than threatening no-deal. Her referendum would pose such a threat. The advantages for May in making such a move are overwhelming. She bypasses the parliamentary paralysis. She forces those who waffle about the benefits of no-deal to focus more clearly on the implications. She could negotiate a more workable soft Brexit option than her convoluted Chequers white paper, which has already failed its tests in terms of domestic politics and the reaction of the EU. There is an obvious risk that no-deal wins such a referendum and the UK hurtles over the cliff, led by triumphant hardline rightwingers. But that risk applies anyway. Given the thumbs down to May’s Chequers plan, there is much talk at Westminster of the UK tumbling out of Europe without a deal. Putting any vote to the people in these wild times is not easy, but I suspect when voters are faced with the more detailed consequences and realities of no-deal, and without having the excuse of complaining about a perceived elite forcing them to remain in the EU, the majority would be against crashing out. The people would have made their Brexit choice, and hardline Brexiteers would have to calm down for a year or two. If I were Theresa May, I would return from my latest walking holiday in Italy and change everything by proposing a referendum – but the choice on offer would be either a newly negotiated deal with the EU, of which her battered Chequers plan will play a face-saving part, or no-deal. She knows the latter will be calamitous and will oppose it sincerely. No Brexiteer can shout betrayal, the emotive term that fuels angry support for hardliners. I would prefer us to stay in the EU – but this is Theresa May’s only way out. • Steve Richards is a political columnist and broadcaster