They flooded into Trent Bridge on Monday, in what was a credit to the marketing folk at Nottinghamshire. But what transpired for the capacity crowd, from an English perspective, was close to three sessions of slightly zombified cricket as India slowly tightened an already vice-like grip with Virat Kohli’s 23rd Test century. Just 50 minutes into play England’s troubles had deepened as Jonny Bairstow, a teak-tough Tyke seldom prone to making a fuss, fell to the ground in agony; an 85.6mph ball from Jimmy Anderson had hooped after passing Cheteshwar Pujara and struck the wicketkeeper flush on the end of his left middle finger. By the time Bairstow was trudging off the field with the physio, his face purple with pain and his England cap covering the injury, Jos Buttler was already back in the pavilion, having sped off almost immediately after the incident to fetch his wicketkeeping gear. And just moments later he was back behind the stumps for England in a Test, nearly three years after being usurped by the Yorkshireman. Though not the circumstances anyone would wish for, this was the scenario many have long felt should be the case. Buttler, having just moments earlier dropped Pujara on 40 diving one-handed to his left like a keeper, not a second slip, was probably happy to have the gloves back on, too. And with Bairstow’s injury later confirmed as a fracture, it will likely continue beyond the 66-over shift put in here. Bairstow will be gutted to give Buttler a chance. He has always been prickly on the subject of his wicketkeeping and with some justification over the past 18 months, when it has hit new heights. But much of this has revolved around the batsman many believe he can become; one who certainly should be averaging more than 39 in Test cricket and making centuries after the first innings of a match, which has not been the case to date. Really the team’s needs should come first. If Buttler’s extraordinary ball-striking talent is indeed to be harnessed in Test cricket, he needs a purpose beyond this curious deployment as a specialist No 7 luxury that, by its very nature (and as witnessed in the first innings here), will often see him run out of batting partners. As it is, Buttler the wicketkeeper has come to pass in the short term. England have said Bairstow intends to bat in the fourth innings but looking ahead to the fourth Test at the Ageas Bowl, it would surely be foolhardy to press such a valuable commodity into service with a busted digit, while keeping duties are a certainly no-no during an expected four- to six-week healing process. If Buttler's ball-striking talent is to be harnessed in Test cricket, he needs a purpose beyond being a No 7 luxury Thus it is fair to discuss the replacement batsman – not Sam Curran, who should only contend with the bowlers/all-rounders – and there are a number. Moeen Ali, fresh from pummelling a 51-ball century for Worcestershire in the T20 Blast on Friday, slipped down a gear at Scarborough on Monday with an unbeaten 107 from 167 against Yorkshire. He has been the spare batsman this series too, in theory, while Southampton, as the scene of a career-best six for 67 against India in 2014, is a place of happy memories with the ball. Could James Vince return on his home ground? Ed Smith, the national selector, said the right‑hander “has not defined enough matches” upon leaving him out of his first squad – the day after a double century – and since then two more hundreds have come, the latest Monday’s 147 against Nottinghamshire. He is second to Rory Burns in Division One scoring charts, with the Surrey captain another option and one who, if used in the top three, would allow Root to drop down to his preferred place in the order. Joe Clarke of Worcestershire, but likely elsewhere next summer, was in the frame when the 20-year-old Ollie Pope got the nod at Lord’s, although placing a 22-year-old alongside him now in the middle order for such a crunch encounter may be deemed a youngster too many. Joe Denly of Kent is a mature option at 32 (and his leg-spin has hit new levels of late, such that he could well make a winter tour), as is the perennially overlooked James Hildreth of Somerset, two years his senior. The romantics will also mention Ian Bell – resurgent as he is for Warwickshire this summer after two fallow years getting England out of his system – but, though Smith championed the deployment of more seasoned players when a columnist, recalling a 36-year-old does not feel like the direction of travel for England at present. Whichever way they go – and England are certainly less predictable under Smith – the matter of who keeps wicket will still come around when Bairstow is fully fit once more. Can Root persuade him the way forward is to focus solely on his batting? If so then it will suddenly become a case of looking to prove his perceived critics right.