Zimbabwe’s ruling Zanu-PF party has won the majority of seats in parliament after sweeping rural constituencies by huge margins, official results show. The parliamentary outcome does not necessarily indicate voters’ choice of president, however. The result in the presidential vote is due by 4 August but expected sooner. Tensions are rising in the former British colony as opposition fears grow that the election count is being rigged. Monitors have warned of possible violence if the results are contested, and authorities are braced for protests. Millions of people voted peacefully on Monday in the first election since the army removed Robert Mugabe from power last year. Long queues formed outside polling stations and turnout was recorded at 75%. The latest results announced by the Zimbabwe Electoral Commission showed Zanu-PF had won at least 109 seats, enough for a majority in the 210-seat lower house of parliament. With more results to be declared, the party has a chance of gaining the two-thirds majority that would allow it to change the constitution at will. The opposition leader Nelson Chamisa’s Movement for Democratic Change (MDC) had won 41 seats. Analysts blamed divisions within the opposition for the low tally. Chamisa claimed in a tweet on Wednesday morning that the ZEC “seeks to release results to buy time & reverse the people’s presidential election victory”. He added: “The strategy is meant to prepare Zim mentally to accept fake presidential results ... We won the popular vote & will defend it!” Early on Tuesday Chamisa said he was “winning resoundingly”, a claim repeated by senior officials over the course of the day. His supporters gathered at their party’s headquarters in the capital during the afternoon to celebrate victory despite the lack of official results. If no candidate wins more than half the votes in the presidential election, there will be a runoff in five weeks. Another possibility is negotiations to form a coalition government. Pre-election opinion polls gave the incumbent, Emmerson Mnangagwa, a slim lead over Chamisa. Support for Zanu-PF historically has been deepest in rural areas, particularly the party’s Mashonaland heartland, where more than two-thirds of Zimbabwe’s 17 million people live. Although the campaign has been free of the systematic violence that marred previous polls, the MDC has repeatedly claimed it has been hindered by a flawed electoral roll, ballot paper malpractice, voter intimidation and handouts to voters from the ruling party.