Kepa Arrizabalaga is expected in London on Wednesday afternoon to have a medical with Chelsea that will seal his world record transfer from Athletic Bilbao after the goalkeeper’s £71.6m buyout clause was triggered earlier in the morning. The 23-year-old’s lawyers were in Madrid early this morning and, as per Spanish law and having been provided with the funds by Chelsea, deposited the amount needed to secure his release at 9.22am local time. Athletic confirmed the player, who has been on their books since the age of 10, was set to leave. “Kepa Arrizabalaga has met the requirements for the valid unilateral termination of the work contract that linked him to Athletic Club,” read a statement on Bilbao’s website. “The amount of the compensation established in the contract has been deposited. Athletic thanks the player for his contribution during the time he has remained in our club.” The fee for Kepa, capped once by Spain but a regular through the country’s junior sides and considered one of the most promising goalkeepers in Europe, will surpass the £66.9m Liverpool paid Roma for Brazil’s No 1, Alisson. “I saw Kepa one year ago [when I was] at Naples and my first impression was he was a very good goalkeeper,” said Maurizio Sarri after Chelsea’s goalless draw with Lyon on Tuesday. “Very young but very, very good.” Kepa will be joined at Stamford Bridge by the Real Madrid midfielder Mateo Kovacic, who is expected to complete a one-year loan move as he seeks greater game-time. That could conclude Chelsea’s incoming transfer business in this window, though other players could yet depart. Thibaut Courtois is expected to travel from Belgium to Spain to complete his £35m move to Real, signing a six-year contract, having been absent without leave all week. The Belgian international has entered the final 12 months of his deal at Chelsea. There is interest from Milan in Tiemoué Bakayoko, while Danny Drinkwater and Tammy Abraham have attracted inquiries from Premier League clubs seeking to bolster their ranks with loanees before Thursday’s 5pm deadline.