Smooth tarmac to rough, potholed roads, gravel tracks to mountain paths, cyclists encounter good and bad surfaces, but rarely do we ride on sand. Most bikes would get stuck and seize up in seconds. Beaches may be free of traffic, but they are the last place you think of for a bike ride. Yet a fat-bike defies the laws of traction and discomfort, and allows you to explore thousands of miles of coast in a fraction of the time it would take to do so on foot. But where best to try it? Porthcawl, near Bridgend station on the coast between Cardiff and Swansea, is a surprisingly underused and beautiful beach. It’s the nearest lengthy surf beach to London and several other cities, lies near world-class mountain bike trails, is home to the rarest flower in Britain, and was a film location for Lawrence of Arabia. And for one weekend a year, it’s the surreal home to 35,000 Elvis devotees. But here I sought other ways to be all shook up. Porthcawl is ideal for exploring miles of unpopulated coast on two wheels. Hire a fat-bike and feel like you are riding a tractor. With their massive wheels and tyres, you feel you should be wearing a gold chain – they’re the badboy gangster of the big, showy bike family. And for a regular road cyclist, they are also strangely counterintuitive. Tyre pressure is best set low: sometimes as low as 6psi (most road bikes are pumped to at least 80psi), and with very low gearing, the experience is a bit like rolling on a cushiony balloon across all sorts of rough surfaces. This felt strange at first, but once I found a comfortable low gear, apart from stopping on some very steep sections on fine-sand dunes, the rolling resistance on sand and rock really works. Going above 15mph is difficult, but with so much unspoilt coast, it’s a great way to explore. Merthyr Mawr sand dunes, lying just behind the beach, are also known as the South Wales Sahara due to the Lawrence film, and covers a bumpier 800 acres. Going up some of its slopes was less easy, and required a bit of walking, but a treat was in store at the top. Our guide, Corum Champion from Porthcawl Bike Hire, took us up to its highest point, and second highest dune in Europe, known as the Big Dipper, from which you can try a slippery but fun descent: Unless you plan to ride on beaches daily, bike hire (from £10 an hour or £35 for four hours) is the best option, as fat-bikes need regular maintenance to keep their chains and gears clean and oiled. Punctures weren’t a problem. The Fat-bikes’ thick tyres, at least in one afternoon, seem impervious to sharp rocks, shale and pebbles. Gliding along the coast on a variety of surfaces with a sea breeze certainly offers a refreshing alternative to clogged city roads or sharing country roads with cars. If you’re lucky, your guide might help you find specimens of the rare fen orchid. We spotted it. On a fine day, the waves also beckon along Bridgend County and the Glamorgan Heritage Coast, and there are plenty of surfing action to be had in the area. But for the time being I’ll be sticking to two wheels to explore the traffic-free Glamorgan coast and beyond.