The celebrations in Perpignan will continue for a good while yet following Catalans Dragons’ Challenge Cup triumph on Saturday but for the sport itself the question is where such a historic moment can take rugby league. Les Dracs’ 20-14 win against Warrington at Wembley was a triumph against adversity on numerous levels, not least given the tumultuous history of French rugby league: in the midst of the second world war the pro-Nazi Vichy government banned the sport in France in 1940. For rugby league in general – with an elite level still viewed by some as played along the M62 corridor in the north of England – a foreign side winning the most prestigious trophy on offer underlines there is a chance the sport can fulfil its expansionist dreams. Catalans, above all else, have shown there is a way. “We’ve had a fire in our belly and it’s why we are so proud to achieve this,” the Catalans captain, Rémi Casty, said. No player has made more appearances for the Dragons since their formation in 2006 than Casty – he is the commandant of rugby league’s new history boys from the south of France. Born and raised in Narbonne, Casty is more than a humble French rugby league convert: he is somewhat of an addict. He followed the failed expansionist attempt in Paris in the late 1990s and, having seen numerous false dawns for the game to crack into the mainstream in France, the 33-year-old is keen to ensure this is the beginning of something altogether different. “We have to surf on this wave,” he said. “It’s an opportunity we cannot miss. We missed an opportunity in the 1980s when the French Championship was big but some bad things happened. Now we have to grow up and quick – and the French Federation have to come with us.” How this victory will be received outside Perpignan – and particularly in the capital – in the coming weeks will indicate whether this moment can be capitalised on. Casty, though, is aiming much higher. “I grew up owning the PSG jersey [they played in Super League for two seasons, in 1996 and 1997, before being disbanded],” Casty said with a smile. “The French Federation has to push for a good team in Paris but we know there’s some hard work to be done. Paris is a lot about soccer and rugby union but we know that winning the Challenge Cup will help. The next step may be to win something with the French team: that would be a big step.” This triumph is all the more remarkable given Catalans were one game away from relegation in the Million Pound Game last year. “It would have been the end of Catalans Dragons for sure if we’d lost that game,” Casty said. “It could have impacted negatively on rugby league in France, too. We have to see the French national media and talk about this incredible story with them. We have to sell the story to the national media in France. After that maybe we can move to other regions.” Catalans could yet be joined in Super League next year by another ambitious French side, with Toulouse making strides for promotion. But with such as Toronto and London watching as Catalans lifted the cup, the ramifications of this weekend are likely to be felt much further afield than France. Saturday may not have changed just the landscape of French rugby but the entire image of the sport.