As a former speechwriter for the mayor of New Orleans, Jericho Brown understands the importance of speaking directly and persuasively. His poetry has received critical acclaim in the US, with his haunting first collection Please winning the 2009 American Book Award. His second, The New Testament, daringly juxtaposes the sacred and the profane, and in doing so encourages us to reconsider those very terms. Expanding on the themes of his debut, it offers a dazzling array of lyrics on the inextricable relationship between masculinity, sexuality, desire, violence and race. Unearthing the Bible’s violent moments, Brown powerfully subverts the meanings and implications of holy verse. In To Be Seen, a preacher appears in the guise of a doctor who “clings to the metaphor / Of war” as he holds the speaker’s life in his hands and “[says] through clenched teeth, / Look at me when I’m talking to you”. In Romans 12:1, Brown refashions the scriptural passage to reveal his experiences of living as a gay black man in the deeply religious and socially conservative southern states. In this specific Bible verse, believers are urged to “offer your bodies as a living sacrifice … this is your true and proper worship”. Brown counters: I will begin with the body,In the year of our Lord,Porous and wet, love-wrackedAnd willing: in my 23rd year,A certain obsession overtookMy body, or should I say,I let a man touch me until I bled,Until my blood met his hungerAnd so was changed, was givenA new name … As part of a lineage of American writers including James Baldwin, Mark Doty and, most recently, Danez Smith, Brown seeks to write, in the words of Doty, “the tragedy of this body”. Here, faith and religious ecstasy are transfigured by the speaker’s desire for another man’s flesh, a union that is at once earthly and transcendent. That the speaker is “given / a new name” is an allusion to the horrific erasure of names during slavery, but also bears testament to the power of naming in the wake of collective and personal trauma. Elsewhere, in Fairy Tale, Brown reminds us of the fate of “those men / Brought, bought, and whipped until / They accepted their masters’ names”. In juxtaposing violence with intimacy, Brown urges us to see the body for what it is: a marvel capable of both destruction and tenderness. Death looms large over the entire collection. Four poems are titled Another Elegy: in the first, violence is a familial trope, as the speaker recalls his mother’s threat to his brother: “You don’t believe her / When, sobbing as usual, she / Calls to say if you don’t stop / Your brother, / she will kill him / This time.” In Langston’s Blues, Brown draws on Langston Hughes’s poem The Negro Speaks of Rivers to meditate on the legacy of slavery, exploitation and mass incarceration, flowing like a “bloody river … through the fattest vein / Of America”. Brown’s profound ability to intermingle private grief with systemic injustice reveals a greater truth: that intergenerational trauma has shaped the very fabric of African American lives. Hearing Brown perform his poetry at the Ledbury poetry festival this year, I was struck by the deep musicality of his work, the way his clipped breath at the end of each line propels us forward in anticipation at each shift in tone or meaning. Nowhere is this attentiveness to music more apparent than in Hebrews 13, a poem reminiscent of Robert Frost’s Stopping By Woods on a Snowy Evening. Frost’s last lines – “But I have promises to keep, / And miles to go before I sleep” – are echoed in the final lines of Brown’s surrealist scene: They drank with a speed that must haveBurned their tongues one hot cup thenAnother like two bitter friends who onlyWished to be warm again like two wornCopies of a holy book bound by words to keepWatch over my life in the cold and never ever sleep Brown’s work sings of the multiplicity inherent in contemporary US poetics. ’N’em – the title of a poem that means “and them” – evokes vernacular from the south and the intimacy forged by shared communities. In Heartland, Brown writes: “Every last word is contagious,” recalling the New Testament’s “In the beginning was the Word”. His poems reveal an unwavering belief in the power of language to redeem us from the wreckage of history and contemporary conflict, one that is contagious and might even give us all a reason for hope.