Donald Trump says he fears that an interview with the special counsel Robert Mueller would be a “perjury trap” – while pointing out that he could “run” the Russia investigation himself if he chose to. In a wide ranging White House interview with the Reuters news agency on Monday, the US president expressed fears that investigators could compare his statements with those of others who have testified in the inquiry, such as the former FBI director James Comey, and that any discrepancies could be used against him. “Even if I’m telling the truth, that makes me a liar,” said Trump. “That’s no good.” But he also asserted his authority, as president, over the investigation. “I’ve decided to stay out. Now, I don’t have to stay out, as you know. I can go in and I could ... do whatever, said Trump. “I could run it if I want.” Rudy Giuliani, one of Trump’s legal team, has regularly warned that being interviewed by Mueller in the investigation, which is looking into Russian interference in the 2016 election and allegations of collusion between the Trump campaign and Moscow, would be a perjury trap for the president. The statements came only hours after Trump renewed his attacks on Mueller in one of his regular morning Twitter storms. He described the former FBI director as “disgraced and discredited” and repeated claims that the investigation was a “Rigged Witch Hunt” while calling it “a National Disgrace”. In the Reuters interview, Trump also renewed criticisms of the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, over the detainment of Andrew Brunson, an American pastor whom Turkey claims was involved in a coup attempt two years ago. “I think it’s very sad what Turkey is doing. I think they’re making a terrible mistake. There will be no concessions,” said Trump. The US has recently imposed tariffs on Turkish steel and aluminum in an attempt to pressure Erdoğan to release the imprisoned American. Trump also said that Erdoğan had violated a deal reached in July under which Brunson would be released if the US could successfully pressure Israel to release Ebu Ozkan, a Turkish woman facing charges of aiding the fundamentalist group Hamas. Ozkan has since been released and Trump said that Erdoğan had not kept up his end of the bargain. Trump also indicated that he would “most likely” meet again with Kim Jong-un, the North Korean dictator. The two held a much vaunted summit in Singapore in June, which Trump has repeatedly hailed as a success although the North Korean regime has shown no indications that it would accede to American demands that it denuclearize. On domestic policy, Trump yet again criticized Jerome Powell, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, for raising interest rates, saying he was “not thrilled”. It is unusual for a president to criticize the chairman of the Federal Reserve, which is supposed to be independent of politics. However, Trump has criticized Powell, whom he nominated in 2017, several times in recent months. He said the US central bank should do more to help him to boost the economy. “We’re negotiating very powerfully and strongly with other nations. We’re going to win. But during this period of time I should be given some help by the Fed,” he said.