Sheet, jelly, bubble, glitter: face masks are having a moment. So, too, is DIY beauty, with homemade skincare solutions playing out in YouTube tutorials and Instagram videos from beauty accounts such as @hudabeauty and @maskingfortrouble. The new at-home masks are a long way from the teenage sleepover approach of smearing a smoothie over one’s face. Here are the best ingredients to try. Commercially, charcoal and clay tapped into the trends for multi-masking and performative self-care. Sand & Sky’s Brilliant Skin Purifying Pink Clay Mask sold 60,000 pots within three months of launching, but its key ingredient – kaolin clay – can be bought in its pure form for a fraction of the price. The same goes for other clays, such as bentonite or French green clay, and activated charcoal powder. “It’s very cost-effective and you also get to create bespoke face masks for your own skin concerns, wants and needs,” says beauty influencer Danny Defreitas. This year’s biggest beauty trend, the sheet mask has become a selfie staple. Not to be left out, DIY maskers have come up with their own alternatives, buying cotton face sheets and soaking them in homemade solutions such as eucalyptus oil and aloe vera. Rice paper, too, is being used as an eco option. Or there is Lidl’s SilverCrest Face Mask Maker, which creates customisable hydrogel sheet masks using collagen tablets. Despite advances in at-home mask-making, many beauty fanatics still raid the kitchen cupboard. Rather than banana, honey and rolled oats, though, on-trend DIY-ers use avocado, turmeric and coconut oil. Actor Priyanka Chopra recently shared her recipe for a homemade mask, with ingredients including turmeric, rose water and lime juice. “DIY skincare solutions are evolving with our kitchen cabinets,” says Ariane Chui, the co-founder of the organic beauty blog f toxins . “Now, a lot of us have ingredients such as raw cacao powder around.” Despite scepticism from within the beauty world – including concerns about the environmental impact of glitter and whether it has any benefits – face-mask fans have been keen to slather themselves in shimmering peel-offs from brands including GlamGlow and Too Faced. But with both priced at £42, lo-tech, low-cost DIY versions are rife, with pleas for people to use cosmetic-grade glitter, rather than scraping it off Christmas cards.