Having failed to recruit a single player before the time available for incoming deals ran out, Tottenham’s summer transfer window is only now starting to hot up, with this morning’s newspapers linking them with a stadium-fund-swelling if slightly optimistic £150m-worth of outgoings. The Express exclusively report that Paris St-Germain are ready to spend £100m on Christian Eriksen, on whom the French side “have long been keen”, but that Spurs are “equally determined not to sell”. The Parisians aren’t the only club whose eye has been caught by the twinkle-toed Dane: according to the Star, Real Madrid could join the chase if they sell Luka Modric to Internazionale (though according to Tuttosport that move is becoming less likely). Spurs are considerably less determined to hold on to Danny Rose, with the Mirror reporting that they would be happy to wave him farewell – though if they receive the £50m they apparently want for their 28-year-old reserve left-back, astonishment would be a more appropriate emotion. PSG – them again – “have joined Schalke in the chase”, apparently. And Rose might not be the only Englishman heading for Gelsenkirchen, with Schalke also attempting to bring in Chelsea’s Ruben Loftus-Cheek on loan. It sounds like they shouldn’t get their hopes up: “Loftus-Cheek is minded to stay and fight for his place,” says the Mail, while the Telegraph insist that “the prospect of the 22-year-old being allowed to leave is described as ‘extremely unlikely’”. Barcelona haven’t given up hope of buying Paul Pogba this month, or at least they haven’t explicitly ruled out the possibility. The Sun quotes the club president, Josep Maria Bartomeu, saying: “There’s still time to do business, but I will not speak of any names. We have respect for all clubs.” United obviously want the midfielder to stay, but less obviously also hope Matteo Darmian will reject the advances of Juventus, Napoli and Inter to remain at Old Trafford. This is news to the Manchester Evening News, who believe that “Darmian wants to leave” and that “United are prepared to let him depart provided they receive an acceptable offer”. Middlesbrough and Aston Villa are engaged in a two-way scrap for the loan signing of Everton’s Yannick Bolasie, though it says here that “Boro believe they can offer a more attractive package”. The Star says Tony Pulis “wants several loan signings” this month and it is an ambition Villa – who also have Chelsea’s Tammy Abraham and West Ham’s Robert Snodgrass on their loan list – appear to share. Marseille might make a bid for Mohamed Elneny, the Egyptian midfielder who has slipped down the pecking order at Arsenal since the arrival of some better midfielders. And Liverpool are ready to sell their slow-motion Estonian Ragnar Klavan, with a variety of Bundesliga clubs apparently mulling over a bid.