Manchester United are continuing to back José Mourinho despite the 3-0 loss to Tottenham, with the board encouraged by the side’s first-half display against Mauricio Pochettino’s team in particular. United suffered a second consecutive defeat with Monday night’s defeat at Old Trafford. However Mourinho’s team were bright before the interval as the manager sent out a new 3-3-3-1 shape that had Ander Herrera in a fresh role as the right-sided centre-back. Although the game remained goalless at half-time, United had created several chances, with Romelu Lukaku missing one clear opportunity to score. Following the dismal capitulation at Brighton & Hove Albion in the previous game, the response engendered by Mourinho impressed the club’s hierarchy, it is understood, and there is no move to even consider his future as manager. The Portuguese takes his team to Burnley on Sunday before the international break and unless there is a defeat of an alarming nature Mourinho is unlikely to be sacked before the visit of Watford on 15 September. Paul Pogba said he was baffled by the outcome against Tottenham. “It’s bizarre,” he said. “We were determined, we started well and in the end we lost 3-0. It’s a shock. We have to keep going, we must not worry. We must work. We are still Manchester United and we won’t give up on anything.” The midfielder, used in a new position on the right of midfield in the manager’s formation, described it as an “undeserved defeat” and added: “Even we don’t understand what happened. We started the game really well, we conceded two goals [in quick succession] in the second half. The first goal was a real blow; we didn’t understand why, because we had the game in hand.” Luke Shaw was one of United’s best performers and was congratulated by Mourinho at the final whistle but he described it as a “sad night”. He told MUTV: “We need to win and win in a good way because we played really well in the first half and if we keep playing like that, and take our chances, then we will win games.”