Donald Trump’s attorney Rudolph Giuliani caused a diplomatic commotion on Tuesday by complaining to the president of Romania about his country’s efforts to tackle corruption and calling for an amnesty for some convicted criminals. In a letter to Romanian president Klaus Iohannis, which was published by Mediafax, Giuliani sharply criticised what he called “excesses made in the name of ‘law enforcement’” by Romania’s national anti-corruption directorate. The agency, he said, had used unfair tactics against suspects and intimidated judges and lawyers. “An amnesty should be given to those who have been prosecuted and convicted through the excesses,” Giuliani said, claiming “many innocent people” had been jailed. Giuliani’s remarks aligned him with political forces in Romania who last month succeeded in ousting the country’s top corruption prosecutor, who had pursued senior politicians, prompting tumultuous public protests. Giuliani, a former federal prosecutor, said in his letter he supported legitimate efforts to curb corruption. But he protested repeatedly about what he claimed were recent excesses in Romania. The letter was written under the letterhead of Giuliani Partners, his private consultancy firm, and did not mention his role as personal lawyer to the American president. It was unclear whether the letter was sent at the urging of any third party. Messages left for Giuliani and his company on Tuesday were not immediately answered. The White House did not respond to a request for comment. The state department moved to distance itself from Giuliani’s intervention. Asked if the US agreed with his remarks, a spokesman said: “Romania until recently has shown considerable progress in combating corruption and building effective rule of law. We encourage Romanians to continue on this path.” By then the former New York City mayor’s letter had been criticised by Romania’s ambassador to the US, George Maior, who said Giuliani appeared to be speaking on behalf of “figures who have problems with the justice system”. The ambassador’s response in turn angered the Romanian foreign ministry, which said in a statement his words “does not represent the position” of the government. It said Maior was being recalled to Bucharest to discuss his remarks. The ministry also noted that the country’s ambassadors should “refrain from public statements that could negatively affect bilateral relations with other states”. Last month, Iohannis fired the head of the country’s anti-corruption directorate, Laura Codruta Kovesi, who had led an aggressive push to prosecute corruption among the Romanian elite. Earlier moves by the government to rein in Kovesi prompted waves of street demonstrations. Romania scores 48 out of 100 on a perceived government corruption scale measured by Transparency International, where 0 is the most corrupt and 100 least. Romania ranks joint 59th out of 180 countries, alongside Greece and Jordan.