Snap, the parent company of Snapchat, has announced its first decline in daily active users following a controversial redesign. Yet it defied pessimistic analysts with good revenue numbers, which sent stock surging briefly before plummeting on signs of enduring weakness. The Los Angeles company beat Wall Street’s expectations for both revenue and losses. Its share price surged by more than 11% in after-hours trading, partly on news of a $250m (£193m) investment from Saudi prince Alwaleed bin Talal, but ultimately closed down 2% at $12.90. Snap is battling for relevance against Facebook-owned Instagram, and many analysts had expected active daily user numbers to be flat. Instead, Snapchat dropped its daily user total by 2% to 188 million users from an expected 193 million. On the upside, the company reported second quarter revenues of $262.3m against analyst estimates of $249.8m, up 44% over the same period last year, and a loss of $0.14 earnings per share against a loss estimate of $0.18. Overall, the company posted a loss of $353m, or 27 cents a share, compared with a loss of 36 cents a share a year ago. At the end of a savage technology-sector earnings season, which saw Twitter and Facebook badly mauled after reporting poor numbers, Snapchat’s anaemic performance was explained away as a redesign issue by CEO Evan Spiegel in prepared remarks with analysts. Spiegel said Snapchat’s drop in daily users “was primarily driven by a slightly lower frequency of use among our user base due to the disruption caused by our redesign”. Speaking six months after the relaunch, he added: “We have been working hard to iterate and improve Snapchat based on the feedback from our community.” When Snap went public in 2017, shares surged 44% on the first day of trading. But within three months they were back at the $17 IPO price. Last quarter, its stock dropped by as much as 24% after releasing its first-quarter earnings report. Ahead of the release of the results on Tuesday, the self-described camera company warned year-over-year growth had slowed down “significantly” from the first quarter’s 54%. It also warned that, like Facebook and Twitter, user growth had been punished by the implementation of Europe’s General Data Protection Regulation. Snapchat is dogged by many of the same issues it has always been: an appeal to teens and young adults but limited attributes for significant take-up beyond those age groups.