These are tough times for political satirists. News bulletins have morphed into comedy sketches, and our political overlords have assumed the roles of pranksters tasked with exposing their own idiocy. What carefully crafted piece of slapstick could compete with auto-satirical campaign manager Kellyanne Conway citing the fictitious “Bowling Green massacre” to justify the US’s Muslim travel ban? Or Trump’s backpedalling on his remarks about Russian interference in which he definitely didn’t want to not support the findings of US intelligence officials? Finding ways to out-prank an endlessly unfolding shitshow is the challenge faced by new Sacha Baron Cohen series Who Is America? (Channel 4, 10pm, Monday). It introduces a series of new characters including gazillionaire photographer Gio Monaldo, Trump-loving citizen journalist Dr Billy Wayne Ruddick Jr PhD, ex-con and conceptual artist Rick Sherman and anti-terror agent Erran Morad. Using the power of prosthetics, Cohen goes to extreme lengths to find the funny in the ongoing political apocalypse but frequently falls on his face. Part of the problem lies with his targets. It’s hard to raise a smirk at the rich Republican couple looking justifiably baffled as Cohen, posing as an NPR-loving liberal, reveals how he forces his daughter to pee standing up to subvert gender stereotypes. Similarly, there’s not much to be gleaned from watching The Bachelorette star Corinne Olympios – hardly the sharpest tool in the shed – being hoodwinked into doing sexy poses in a hazmat suit while pretending to help Ebola victims in Sierra Leone. Cohen’s shtick works better when taking aim at the big guns. His most effective creation is Morad, an Israeli “terrorist terminator” who has some novel methods for repelling aggressors. It’s with alarming ease that he persuades Georgia politician Jason Spencer to yell racist slurs at imagined attackers while dropping his trousers and waggling a pimply arse in their direction. And you can’t help but marvel at his poker face as he runs a beeping “paedophile detector” up and down Roy Moore, the former Alabama Republican senate candidate accused of sexual misconduct against teenage girls. “Maybe Israeli technology hasn’t developed properly,” growls Moore before storming off. Cohen’s talent lies in teasing out the worst instincts of his targets, which is why his pranks only work with bona fide dickheads. His efforts to punk liberal luminaries Bernie Sanders and Ted Koppel don’t fly because neither takes the bait. When he tries to sell a gallery owner bits of cardboard smeared in his own effluent, her peppy reaction seems to stem more from politeness than the prospect of hanging crap on her walls. Who Is America? bills itself as “the most dangerous show in the history of television”, a Trumpian pronouncement if ever there was one. There’s a sense that the hijinks enacted are less about revealing the US’s dark underbelly – which has been hanging out for some time – than putting Cohen’s brass balls to the test. His chutzpah is impressive, but as for exposing the contempt of the ruling classes, they’re doing that perfectly well by themselves.