When Louis CK admitted to a number of acts of sexual misconduct last year, he said in an apparently heartfelt statement: “I have spent my long and lucky career talking and saying anything I want. I will now step back and take a long time to listen.” Less than 10 months later, it appears CK’s listening window may be coming to a close. Last night he made his first public appearance since the allegations emerged, performing a surprise standup set at the Comedy Cellar in New York. The venue has hosted similar surprise appearances by the comic throughout his career, and appeared in the title sequence of his near-eponymous sitcom Louie. In some ways, last night was no different from any of CK’s “walk-ons” over the past decade: he came onstage unannounced before one of the billed acts and performed material about familiar topics including racism, tipping in restaurants and parades. Yet the set was testing more than just new material. CK’s return to the stage will be seen as an early test of whether audiences are willing to forgive him for his misdeeds. According to the club owner, Noam Dworman, most of the crowd enjoyed the set and CK got a standing ovation when he first took to the stage. Dworman said one person complained the following day, saying they would have liked to have known CK was performing so they could make an informed decision about whether to attend. CK did not make reference to acts of sexual misconduct, nor did he perform any material explicitly related to sex or relationships, often a mainstay of his act. On social media, however, reaction to CK’s return seemed mostly negative, particularly from other comedians. Ian Karmel, head writer on the Late Late Show with James Corden, tweeted: “Louis CK being ‘banished’ from stand-up comedy wasn’t some kind of petty punishment, it was a workplace safety issue.” After the New York Times published detailed allegations against CK, he admitted to a number of occasions in which he had masturbated or exposed himself in front of female co-workers and other comedians. CK is one of a number of men who had allegations made against them last year in the wake of the #MeToo movement, who is now attempting to return to work. In July, Aziz Ansari made a similar unannounced appearance at the same comedy club as CK, and has been performing occasional low-profile sets ever since. Ansari was accused of sexual misconduct by a photographer in an article published on babe.net. Matt Lauer, the Today Show host who was fired by NBC following an investigation into claims of workplace harassment, is apparently telling fans that greet him in person that he’ll soon be “back on TV”, according to a Page Six report.