Trifle is a divisive dish. Some people don’t like it at all(or at least the versions of it they have tried in the past); others are devotees. Some must have jelly in theirs; others swear by candied peel and angelica on top. I know a handful of folk who insist on making the sponge themselves. For me, however, trifle is an excuse to make custard and to eat lots of summer fruit. Everything else is subjective. How do you like yours? This is a family-friendly, booze-free trifle, but I would always recommend sprinkling the sponge layer with a liqueur of your choice (a muscat would be delicious). Prep 20 minCook 20 minChill 2 hrServes 6-8 4 peaches1 lemon3 tbsp honey200ml whole milk450ml double cream4 egg yolks2 tbsp caster sugar1 heaped tbsp cornflour1 tbsp icing sugar200g stale plain sponge or madeira cake, sliced thinly150g raspberries3 tbsp roasted hazelnuts, roughly chopped To make the peach compote, chop three of the peaches into large chunks, then put in a saucepan. Shave two long strips of lemon peel from the lemon and add to the peaches, then zest the remainder of the peel into a mixing bowl and set aside for later. Squeeze two teaspoons of lemon juice on the peaches, then add the honey and 200ml water. Cook over a medium heat for eight to 10 minutes, until the peaches are soft and beginning to fall apart. Discard the lemon peel and put the peaches aside to cool. Next, make the custard. Put the milk and 150ml of the double cream in a pan, and warm to a simmer – but do not allow it to boil. Meanwhile, in a large mixing bowl, whisk together the eggs, sugar, cornflour and a splash of the milk mix into a smooth paste. When the milk mix comes to a simmer, whisk it into the egg paste. Return the mixture to the panover a medium-low heat. Cook, stirring constantly, until it has thickened– eight to 10 minutes. Pour into a bowl, cover with clingfilm touching the custard to prevent a skin forming, then put in the fridge to chill. Meanwhile, put the remaining cream in the bowl with the lemon zest and whisk with the icing sugar, until the cream is softly whipped but not too firm. You want itenough to be able to flop off a large spoon. When the compote and custard are cool, you can start assembling the trifle. Cut the remaining peach into bitesize pieces. Spoon the peach compote into a large, glass bowl and top with the sponge. Scatter with the chopped peach and half the raspberries. Spoon on the custard, followed by the cream to finish. Decorate the top with the remaining raspberries and sprinkle with the hazelnuts. If you are making this for children, I find a scattering of silver balls adds some real excitement (not to mention edible glitter). Chill for a few hours before serving. I make double the compote – it makes for a great breakfast with yoghurt. I also always make double the amount of custard– I can never resist a dollop here and there. Try it over fresh berries with some more toasted chopped nuts, or over jelly, for a very quick pudding.