An order by Donald Trump to his secretary of state to “closely study the South Africa land and farm seizures” and the “large scale killing of farmers” has drawn an angry response in a country where land ownership is a deeply divisive issue. The South African government said the US president’s tweet was based on “false information” and reflected a “narrow perception which only seeks to divide our nation and reminds us of our colonial past”. It was meeting with the US embassy as it sought to clarify the remarks. Trump’s tweet followed a segment on Fox News on Wednesday in which host Tucker Carlson claimed that the South African president, Cyril Ramaphosa, had started “seizing land from his own citizens without compensation because they are the wrong skin colour,” calling the alleged seizures “immoral”. “The presidency has noted Trump’s tweet, which is misinformed in our view,” said Khusela Diko, a spokesperson for Ramaphosa. “We will take up the matter through diplomatic channels.” All major political parties in South Africa have agreed there is a need for extensive land reform in the country, where 72% is in the hands of white farmers, according to the Land Audit Report, despite white people making up just 8% of the population. On 1 August Ramaphosa announced that the ruling African National Congress (ANC) would forge ahead with plans to change the constitution to allow the expropriation of land without compensation, a motion passed by parliament in February. Ramaphosa, a pro-business moderate, has sought to reconcile demands for radical land reform from the left of the ANC and the populist Economic Freedom Fighters party with the need to attract foreign investment to boost a flagging economy. Almost 25 years after the end of apartheid, the land issue has become a focus of economic and social grievances in what has remained one of the most unequal countries in the world. In parliament on Wednesday, Ramaphosa said the question of land was not going to go away and an answer was required to heal the historical “festering wound” of dispossession. “We must transform land or property ownership in our country. That goes without saying. It must be underpinned by development ... We must do it in a way that shall enhance stability in our country,” he told legislators. Trump is the latest in a string of leaders to have taken up the cause of white South African farmers this year. In March, Peter Dutton, the home affairs minister for Australia, announced that white farmers from South Africa “deserve special attention” and that his department was examining a range of methods to fast-track visas for them. The South African government said it was offended by Dutton’s statements and demanded a retraction. Earlier this year Katie Hopkins, the former British columnist and reality TV show contestant, crowd-funded a trip to South Africa where she interviewed white farmers about violence they had suffered. Trump repeated the rhetoric of South African farmers being particularly vulnerable to violence. The issue is controversial and statistics are contested. However, according to research by one of South Africa’s biggest farmers’ organisations, such murders are at a 20-year low. In 2017-18, 47 farmers were killed, according to statistics compiled by AgriSA, an association of hundreds of agricultural groups across South Africa. Violence against farmers peaked in 1998 when 153 died. Between 80 and 100 were murdered each year from 2003 to 2011, and about 60 until 2016. Despite the decline in the number of fatalities there has been a rise in the number of attacks on farms, from 478 in 2016-17 to 561 a year later. “There is no white genocide in South Africa,” Julius Malema, leader of the opposition Economic Freedom Fighters party, told reporters. “There is black genocide in the USA; black people are killed every day. There is a black genocide here in South Africa; just recently a farmer was convicted for the murder of a black farmer.” The AgriSA figures have been challenged by other organisations representing farmers in South Africa such as Afriforum, a lobby group that campaigns for the interests of South Africa’s white Afrikaans-speaking minority. But AgriSA said its research was reliable. Senior officials from Afriforum travelled to the US in May where they met Carlson, the Fox news host quoted by Trump in his tweet. In January, South Africa protested to the US embassy in Pretoria about reported remarks by Trump that some immigrants from Africa and Haiti came from “shithole” countries.