The woman at the centre of allegations that Geoffrey Rush behaved inappropriately during a 2015 production of King Lear has agreed to appear as a witness for the Daily Telegraph in its defamation battle with the actor. Lawyers for News Corp – the publisher of the Telegraph – are seeking to again amend their defence on the basis of a statement by the woman, who co-starred with Rush in the Sydney Theatre Company production. Rush is suing the Telegraph over a series of articles published in November and December. He claims the articles defamed him by portraying him as a “pervert” and “sexual predator”. The woman has not spoken publicly since the Telegraph published the stories, but on Friday the federal court heard News would seek to argue truth in its defence on the basis of her statement. Rush’s lawyers are seeking to have the application thrown out on the basis that it is “too little too late”. In court on Friday Rush’s barrister Sue Chrysanthou said Rush had witnesses who would “directly contradict” the woman’s statement. She also said there were inconsistencies in the woman’s statement of what occurred and the claims made in the Telegraph’s original defence. News previously argued that Rush touched his cast-mate in a manner that made her feel uncomfortable on a number of occasions while carrying her on stage in front of an audience of hundreds of people. It had also alleged that, during a party for cast and crew after the production ended, Rush “entered the female bathroom located in the foyer of the Roslyn Packer theatre, knowing [the woman] was in there, and stood outside a cubicle” she was in. On Friday Chrysanthou said the woman’s statement contradicted those claims. “The complainant says she told [Rush] to stop and he did,” she said. “The original defence claimed he followed her into the toilet. The statement we now have, he didn’t follow her into the toilet. What is my client to do with this?” The Telegraph had been relying on the defence of qualified privilege after Justice Michael Wigney previously threw out the newspaper’s truth defence. He has also refused to allow it to subpoena the theatre company. The Telegraph has argued the allegations were “matters of proper and legitimate public interest” following a string of allegations concerning “sexual misconduct, bullying and harassment in the entertainment industry”, which started with the Harvey Weinstein scandal. But Rush’s lawyers argue the Telegraph was motivated by “malice” and that the newspaper published the articles “predominantly for the improper motive of harming” Rush. On Friday Chrysanthou said Rush intended to run a “substantial malice case” against the Telegraph. Wigney will hear News’s application to amend its defence next Thursday, describing it as a “significant application”. He said he would not make the woman’s statement available to the public because he did not want a “trial by media”.