As we come to the end of The Moonstone, we must ask a very important question: what the hell? Here – and this is spoiler territory, so please go and enjoy the end of the novel for yourself before reading the following paragraphs – is how things conclude. The mysterious disappearance of the Moonstone diamond was just an unfortunate accident. The whole novel is something of a shaggy dog story – and the Moonstone the MacGuffinest MacGuffin of them all. We learn that Franklin Blake, the ardent young man most eager to solve the puzzle, was actually the person who took the gemstone. As a kind of practical joke, he was spiked with laudanum after the dinner party at which Rachel Verinder first wore the precious stone. In the middle of the night, in a poppy-induced stupor, he went into Rachel’s bedroom and took the stone, intending to hide it so it couldn’t be stolen by anyone else. As he hunted for the stone, Rachel, still awake, sat and watched him in amazement. Later, she refused to blab on a man she loved and said nothing about his guilt. Meanwhile, the immoral (and indebted) Godfrey Ablewhite found the Moonstone after Franklin, in his night-time confusion, failed to hide it properly – and so the long chain of circumstances that made up the rest of the novel was set in motion. After about 400 pages, outsider Ezra Jennings begins to understand what happened and conducts an “experiment” by putting Franklin back on laudanum, to recreate the night the Moonstone disappeared. Franklin duly went on another midnight ramble – and everyone took that as the proof they needed about the “theft” of the stone. So the innocent lived happily ever after and the unjust got their desserts. As I describe it here, this conclusion sounds absurd. It seemed pretty silly to me as I read it too, even if Wilkie Collins tried to provide a wealth of scientific detail and learned-sounding references to bolster his ideas about laudanum and memory. But this bizarre grand finale has inspired plenty of other authors, including Philip Pullman, who used a similar opium-induced memory to end his first Sally Lockhart mystery, The Ruby In The Smoke. And if you’re having doubts about opium’s effect on memory, meanwhile, we can turn to no other than Collins himself for insight. According to Peter Ackroyd’s biography, the author took so much laudanum while writing The Moonstone that he once said: “I was not only pleased and astonished at the finale, but did not recognise it as my own.” How very neat to be unable to remember writing about memory loss. While I did not buy into the scientific pretence of Ezra’s experiment, I did enjoy reading about it. Collins had done such a good job of gripping me in his narrative that I wasn’t going to be tripped by the final hurdle. Even if the mechanics of the conclusion are ludicrous, there is plenty that remains ingenious and intriguing. It was Franklin who took the stone; who, after spending so much time and energy looking for answers in obscure places, found them within himself. The Moonstone was written almost 40 years before Sigmund Freud published The Interpretation of Dreams, when you can see the germ of psychotherapy in Franklin’s delusions and eventual insights. Not least because his actions are so sexually fraught. What was he doing breaking into the virginal Rachel’s bedchamber? What was she thinking as she sat there, wide awake, watching him in silence? If you’re thinking that my reaction is too prurient for a Victorian readership, we can again turn to the authority of Collins. It is not just that he had a complicated love life – involving relationships and families outside wedlock – and views that hardly fitted our general stereotype of the 19th century. It’s that hehad written about such issues – and sharply. Here’s a telling snatch of dialogue from The Woman In White: “There is another misfortune,” I said, “to which a woman may be liable, and by which she may suffer lifelong sorrow and shame.” “What is it?” she asked eagerly. “The misfortune of believing too innocently in her own virtue, and in the faith and honour of the man she loves,” I answered. There’s a troubling darkness at the centre of The Moonstone, a shadow that lingers after its bright and happy ending. Even at its most preposterous, this is a fascinating, compelling novel. Collins is wonderful.