John McCain, one of the most influential US politicians of the past century never to win the White House, returned to his political home on Friday, lying in state at the US Capitol in Washington. “Though the highest office eluded him, he attained what is far more enduring: the abiding affection of his fellow citizens, and an example down the generations,” said the House speaker, Paul Ryan, paying tribute to the senator who died last Saturday, just short of his 82nd birthday'. McCain ran for president twice, in 2000, when he lost the Republican primary to George W Bush, and in 2008, when he was defeated by Barack Obama. But Congress, though less celebrated in movies and TV, is where much of the nation’s business gets done, and McCain was among its giants. On Friday he returned there for the last time in a casket draped in the Stars and Stripes. His family attended a commemorative service where his mother, 106-year-old Roberta, clutched the hand of his daughter, 33-year-old Meghan, who sobbed with raw grief. There was the awkward spectacle of the McCain family listening to Donald Trump’s deputy, Mike Pence, deliver a tribute, with everyone in the rotunda keenly aware of McCain and Trump’s mutual enmity. Pence insisted: “As the president said yesterday, we respect his service to the country.” In brief remarks, he added: “We gather here today to honor an American patriot who served a cause greater than himself … We will ever remember that John McCain served his country, and John McCain served his country honorably.” Mitch McConnell, the Senate majority leader, recalled McCain’s “signature cackle” and “that John McCain glint in his eye”. Ryan added: “So I think ahead now. I think ahead to the day when I – like so many – will bring my own children, and perhaps their children, to that hallowed lawn in Annapolis. “I think about that. I think about what I might say to them: “This is one of the bravest souls our country ever produced.” Cindy McCain approached her husband’s flag-draped casket, bowed her head, clasped her hands and mouthed a prayer. Then his mother was wheeled to his side and silently crossed herself. McCain would have appreciated the setting at the centre of the marbled corridors of power where, for nearly 35 years, he worked with members of both parties and enjoyed an often cordial, sometimes prickly relationship with journalists. At 10.53am his casket was solemnly placed on a catafalque, draped in black, in the rotunda under the vast dome of the US Capitol, surrounded by ornate carvings, gold-framed epic historical paintings and statues including George Washington, Thomas Jefferson, Andrew Jackson, Abraham Lincoln, Martin Luther King, Gerald Ford and Ronald Reagan. McCain is the 31st person to lie in state in the US Capitol, a rare distinction reserved for military personnel or elected officials. Four private citizens have lain in honour, including Billy Graham, the Christian evangelist, in February, and Rosa Parks, the civil rights leader, in 2005. Among the first guests to arrive on Friday, in a wheelchair, was Henry Kissinger, the former secretary of state, now 95 years old. Another striking presence was McCain’s 106-year-old mother, Roberta, whose wheelchair was pushed by a man in white naval uniform, and who wore a translucent garment over a black blouse. Pence, wearing suit and blue tie, stood with hand on heart as the casket was lowered. McCain’s widow, Cindy, dressed in black, was on his left side. The defence secretary, James Mattis, attorney general, Jeff Sessions, White House chief of staff, John Kelly, and national security adviser, John Bolton, were also among the guests. A graduate of the US Naval Academy, McCain served as a naval aviator for 22 years and spent five years as a prisoner of war in North Vietnam’s “Hanoi Hilton”. He served in the House of Representatives from 1983-1987 representing the first district of Arizona. In 1986, he was elected to the Senate, serving as chairman of the armed services committee at the time of his death last Saturday. McCain was the Republican party’s 2008 nominee for president, losing to Barack Obama, and said he regretted choosing Sarah Palin as his running mate. Palin, the former governor of Alaska, was not present on Friday and has reportedly not been invited to any of the commemorative services, which began in Arizona, continue at the National Cathedral on Saturday – speakers include Barack Obama, George W Bush and Kissinger – and culminate with McCain’s burial at the US Naval Academy in Annapolis, Maryland, on Sunday. The senator reportedly meticulously planned the series of events himself after learning that he was terminally ill with brain cancer. Also missing: Donald Trump, a sworn political foe of McCain who made no mention of him at a rowdy rally in Indiana on Thursday night. There has been much hagiography of McCain since his death. But he was a complicated figure, a military hawk with a short temper whose commitment to gender and racial equality has been questioned. Some have observed that he was not perfect – but that he was unusually aware of his own imperfections.