After what has been an arduous few weeks – what with the heat, followed by the sudden appearance of schoolchildren everywhere across the city (how do they know how to do this at the same time? Do they share a collective subconscious?) – what a blessing to be exposed to proper, full-on, title-fight hype. Deontay Wilder and Tyson Fury have agreed to square off later this year at an as yet unconfirmed location on an unconfirmed date to contest Wilder’s WBC heavyweight title. To say they have agreed is to say that they’ve agreed to say that there’s an agreement. The actual terms will come out at another time, perhaps later this week, so that they can be talked up and knocked down in their own right. And that will do for starters. The highlight of Fury’s shutout points victory against the Italian Francesco Pianeta was not the fight itself but the post-match banter that involved Wilder entering the ring and confirming to everyone in the audience (and of course those watching at home on BT Sport and Showtime) that the fight was on. “It’s official baby!” beamed Wilder with a doo rag round his head and sporting a plaid jacket even Kurt Cobain would have rejected for being a bit skanky (such are the vagaries of fashion). “This is what we’ve been waiting for right here, the best fighting the best!” Now Wilder might not be being strictly accurate there, and we’ll return to that in a minute, but boxing big talk has had a disinterested relationship with the truth long before such things became fashionable. For his part Fury, the Gypsy King, responded in biblical fashion as befits a man of good Christian values (if you set aside the misogyny, homophobia and very on-trend anti-semitism he has articulated in the past, that is): “They called, I answered. I said send me a contract. They sent me a contract. I said yes. And now he gets his chance to fight the lineal heavyweight champion of the world.” Fury then proceeded to swagger over to Wilder and promise to “knock you the fuck out boy”, thus earning his second reprimand of the night on behalf of BT Sport’s impressionable viewers. All this when the Mancunian should really have been receiving commendation; not only for stretching the idea of a “lineal heavyweight champion” but also having the chutzpah to suggest it was this champion, the one who won a belt off Wladimir Klitschko but then gave it back after testing positive for nandrolone, who was the one doing the other a favour. The action didn’t stop there as Fury – who has lost an incredible eight and a half stone in weight since returning to the sport after a two year absence (the suspicion remains that he could have a highly successful series of exercise DVDs if only he could be relied upon not to verbally assault his audience during a High Intensity Interval Training) – then sauntered off to his press conference where he performed an a capella version of Don McLean’s American Pie. As for Wilder, his city break in Belfast also had its moments, including paying tribute to his crew by shouting “bomb squad!” in the lobby of the Europa Hotel, the site of 36 different explosions during the Troubles. The Bronze Bomber was also a peri peri naughty boy at Nando’s, enjoying an altercation with the WBO middleweight champ Billy Joe Saunders which ended with the Englishman chucking (he insists) an entire cooked chicken at the American before the pair and their assorted entourages chased each other through the two level restaurant in a bout of ad hoc parkour. Wilder had an altercation at Nando's in Belfast, where Billy Joe Saunders threw an entire cooked chicken at him All that and so much more to come, most of it over Instagram, over the next few months. It’s a sensation like no other, not even a José Mourinho pre-match press conference the week after a defeat and days before a big match (tune in on Friday for just such an occasion!) can hope to rival it. The fight won’t be bad neither, guaranteeing the spectacle of two 6ft 5in-plus giants with the foot speed of a riverdancer and the punching power of a police battering ram (apparently known in the force as “the big red key”) going toe to toe. The hype will be exciting and the fight will be fascinating. No doubt everyone will get rich. But what really sets off Wilder v Fury is the man who won’t be there. In any serious discussion of the “best fighting the best” in the heavyweight division then Anthony Joshua, the IBF, WBO and WBA champion, would have to feature. And indeed he has, a lot. Fury called him the “biggest shithouse inside boxing” on Saturday night, earning himself another BT Sports wrist-slap in the process. This fight only came into being after both participants had first fruitlessly chased after Joshua and both now have their own story of betrayal and cowardice to relay to the boxing public. Fury believes he’s a better boxer than Joshua, Wilder that he could expose the Englishman’s chin with just that one shot. Both say he is running scared as Joshua pursues a defence against the 38-year-old Alexander Povetkin. The truth is both would be earning more money were Joshua their opponent and there’s a reason for that; not only does Joshua hold the belts but he has the charisma that gets bums on sofas. This fight is also an act of seduction.