Late-night hosts on Thursday discussed Donald Trump’s attacks on the press, the Russia investigation and the president’s feud with former adviser Omarosa Manigault Newman. “Omarosa is just Trump’s most recent adversary,” Stephen Colbert began. “His true nemesis is the free press.” The host then showed a reel of Trump attacking the press, calling them “absolute scum”, “fake news” and, in one clip, saying: “I would never kill them, but I do hate them.” “That’s good footage,” said the host. “Thank God the enemy of the people was there to accurately record it. That’s how insidious they are. “This morning the press fought back as hundreds of newspapers denounced Trump’s attacks on the media in coordinated editorials,” Colbert continued, referencing an initiative spearheaded by the Boston Globe. “That’ll get them. It’s like that famous scene in 300 where the Spartans released coordinated editorials.” Some papers like the San Francisco Chronicle, Colbert explained, declined to participate, believing the editorials would play into Trump’s hands. The host then read aloud Trump’s response to the effort on Twitter. “There is nothing that I would want more for our Country than true FREEDOM OF THE PRESS,” Trump wrote. “The fact is that the Press is FREE to write and say anything it wants, but much of what it says is FAKE NEWS, pushing a political agenda or just plain trying to hurt people. HONESTY WINS!” “It’s true, honesty wins,” said Colbert. “But lying will get you the electoral college.” Meanwhile, NBC’s Seth Meyers discussed the administration’s attempts to quash the Russia investigation and further revelations from Omarosa. “As the Russia probe intensifies, Trump’s legal team is getting more desperate,” he began. “This week, his lawyer Rudy Giuliani openly threatened special counsel Robert Mueller and warned him to end his investigation soon.” If the investigation doesn’t proceed in a timely fashion, Giuliani suggested the Trump team would “unload on him like a ton of bricks”. “Oh, Rudy, you really think you’re going to scare Robert Mueller?” Meyers asked. “Who are you going to bet on in a showdown between a former marine and elderly lawyer who looks like a half-finished Bitmoji? “Trump and his inner circle will go to virtually any lengths to silence or buy their critics,” Meyers continued. “Just yesterday, for example, the White House revoked the security clearance of former CIA director John Brennan. “Republicans,” he said, “are fully on board,” showing a clip of the Louisiana senator John Kennedy criticizing Brennan for engaging in “politics” and calling him a “butthead”. “Senators should not be calling people buttheads, especially since you all look like Old Beavis,” Meyers quipped. “And then, of course, there’s Trump’s ongoing feud with his former confidante, Omarosa Manigault Newman.” With Manigault Newman releasing a steady stream of secret White House tapes, Trump reportedly wants the attorney general, Jeff Sessions, to have her arrested, although it’s unclear what law she broke. “You think you can arrest Omarosa?” Meyers asked. “This is a person you tried to fire four times and you still can’t get rid of her.”