It is one of Katarina Johnson‑Thompson’s earliest memories. The TV on, a Gary McAllister free‑kick swishing into Alavés’s box, then – moments later – what felt like a sonic boom across Liverpool as her beloved team clinched the 2000‑01 Uefa Cup, and a treble, with a stunning 5-4 golden-goal victory in Dortmund. Seventeen years later Johnson‑Thompson is hunting a treble of her own on German soil. The world indoor (pentathlon) and Commonwealth titles have already been chalked off in 2018. Now only a heptathlon gold at the European Athletics Championships, which begin in Berlin on Monday, remains on her bucket list for the year. “I remember watching and celebrating with my granddad and the incredible atmosphere in the city,” she says, smiling. “And at the start of the year I also said to a friend that I hoped Liverpool and I would both do well in Europe this year, so it’s down to me now.” But unlike Liverpool in 2001 Johnson‑Thompson is not lining up against a plucky Spanish outsider. Instead she faces perhaps the world’s best female athlete, Nafissatou Thiam. Not only is the 23-year-old Belgian the Olympic and world champion but she also has a heptathlon personal best of 7,013 – higher than Jessica Ennis‑Hill ever achieved and more than 300 points better than Johnson‑Thompson’s best. Yet while Johnson-Thompson is an underdog, she is relishing the challenge that awaits. “Thiam’s an amazing athlete,” she concedes. “She has done everything that I want to achieve in my career and the hype around her is deserved, for sure. But I don’t believe that anyone is unbeatable. I will get to Berlin thinking that the treble is still on.” In the past Johnson-Thompson would visualise herself standing on the podium, the national anthem striking up and a gold medal round her neck, thinking that if she only believed enough it would happen. She was cruelly disabused of such notions at the 2015 world championships in Beijing, when she fouled three times in a row in the long jump while favourite to win – dropping her from what looked like a guaranteed medal to 28th place. “I used to visualise being on the podium all the time,” she says. “That is why Beijing was so devastating because I’d seen myself succeeding so many times. I don’t do that any more. I just focus on each event and what I need to do to nail it.” And, for the first time, she confesses that what happened in 2015 still plays on her mind. “I can get over it in life but on the runway it’s a different story,” she says. “But I am working on it with my coach. He has realised the more I take my mark back, the more I overstride on to the board. I’ve just got to be confident in my running and my sprinting. I can do that in a normal long jump competition but it’s still in my head when I do a heptathlon. I know I have only three attempts and I have to nail one. “In Berlin the long jump will be key. That’s where the medals will be won. My long jump hasn’t been where it should be in the heptathlon in a while. It’s a long process but I am getting there.” No one doubts that she has immense talent. Her 1.98m in the heptathlon high jump at the Rio Olympics would have won her gold in the individual event, while she also has a 2014 world indoor long jump silver to her name. Yet when the pressure has been on, her slender shoulders have been weighed down with great expectations. However, after disappointing at the 2015 and 2017 world championships and the 2016 Olympics, she believes winning the world indoor pentathlon in Birmingham in March could be a turning point. “What I realised there is that people just want me to do well,” she says. “If you see that as pressure, then it’s not. So I want to take the feeling I had in Birmingham into all my competitions.” A month later she won Commonwealth Games gold in Australia, gritting and willing herself to victory despite a calf injury, and then enjoyed a second moment of revelation. For years she focused more on her weaker events – the shot put and javelin – than her strengths. But nowshe understands thatgetting it right in the high jump, 200m and long jump matters at least as much. “It’s very easy to talk about my throws,” she says. “I know they aren’t the best. But other people’s jumps aren’t the best either, but they’re still winning world and Olympic medals. If I can jump 1.95m in the high jump and put in a 6.70m long jump, basically getting my strengths to where they need to be, and my throws to an OK level, then I can definitely win. “But people forget that I am only 25. I know people were saying I was going to break all these records four years ago but while I had good events I knew I was still very erratic. And if those events didn’t go well, then my heptathlon went to pot. But now I feel like I’m in a better place and I’m a better heptathlete.” Such honesty is encouraging to anyone who has followed her career from the moment she burst on to the scene as a 19-year-old at London 2012. For years she was a self‑confessed “mummy’s girl” who had most things done for her. But since moving to Montpellier in early 2017 to join a world-renowned group that includes Kevin Mayer, the world decathlon champion, she has grown up on and off track. When she first arrived, her coaches admitted they would call her “Droopy” because she used to drop her head in competitions, while her principal coach, Bertrand Valcin, kept telling her to smile more and not appear as if the weight of the world was on her shoulders. Her body language suggests their approach is working. “I’ve always said it would take a while to adapt,” she says. “Last year I didn’t think it was just going to click instantly. But I have definitely came into my stride – it’s a great training environment.” She now talks fondly of cycling to training and of getting to the beach more easily after training now Montpellier has Uber. Some things, however, have not changed as drastically. “My mum still brings home-cooked meals to stick in the freezer – she can’t help herself,” she says, smiling. “But I’m definitely doing more now. My mum will FaceTime me to make my own meals – I’m pretty basic but she’s teaching me how to make sauces and stuff. “And when it comes to learning French I’ve still a long way to go. We have a good contest now where my coaches give me French instructions in training, which I understand. But then when we have real conversations I still get a bit lost, unfortunately.” Yet when it comes to her career, her path ahead is lit up luminous and clear. “I’m not settled with the fact that this has been a good year for me,” she says. “I want to do really well in Berlin. Then want to keep building, improving and honing my craft. And, trust me, that process is not going to stop until the Tokyo 2020 Olympics and beyond.” Katarina Johnson-Thompson is an ambassador for Qipco British Champions Day on 20 October. For tickets visit britishchampionsday.com