Sam Stosur was returning to her New York hotel, ecstatic having just made the final of the US Open for the first time. Beaten in her only previous grand slam final, at the French Open the previous year, few people thought she could beat Serena Williams in the final at Flushing Meadows. But as she unloaded her tennis bags, she experienced a rare feeling. “The night before [the 2011 final], we were getting back after I beat [Angelique] Kerber in the semis,” Stosur tells Guardian Australia on the eve of this year’s event, where she will play No 2 seed Caroline Wozniacki in the first round on Tuesday. “I rocked up back to the hotel, we were all getting out of the van and I don’t know, I was just like, I’m going to win tomorrow. I was really sure about what was going to happen. I felt like this was my turn and it all came together.” That win – a straight-sets demolition – was seven years ago and as she took time out of practice here, she was more than happy to take a brief trip down memory lane. Australia’s best player for more than a decade, Stosur spent five straight years inside the top 20, peaking at No 4 in February 2011, not to mention hitting the No 1 spot in doubles. But after missing last year’s US Open because of a hand injury, her ranking dropped and in June, she fell out of the top 100, briefly. “I didn’t like it, but I sort of knew it was coming,” she says. “Luckily it was only for one week.” This is Stosur’s 14th US Open and at the age of 34, the temptation is to question if retirement might not be too far away. But she remains fit, strong and crucially, motivated, still enjoying the simple thrill of hitting a great winner, no matter the stage. “I know this is a sport you can’t do forever, so while you’ve still got the opportunity and you’re still enjoying it and you get that feeling from it, why not?” says Stosur, who is now ranked 64. “I know there’s obviously a lot less time ahead of me than I’ve had. But as long as I can compete with the best players in the world, I think that’s motivation enough to want to keep going and feel like you can still be a contender at certain times and enjoy it. I do still feel like it’s in me. So while I’ve still got that desire and feeling, then you never know.” As she enters the twilight of her career, Stosur has also become a great sounding board for Australia’s younger players, and the likes of Ash Barty and Daria Gavrilova have both been inspired by her achievements. If it is not a role she would have envisaged, she is revelling in it. “I guess I’ve been able to achieve a lot and been through a lot, ups and downs, good moments and bad moments throughout my career. It is a really nice feeling thinking that my peers – OK, I’m a bit older – can look up to me and hopefully learn something. I think that’s a really privileged position to be in. “There’s been a lot going on my head recently as to how I can help those younger ones a little bit more. I haven’t broached it with any of them but I’d love to be in that position where you can do something a bit more formal, I guess.” Coaching, in some form or other, may be in her long-term future. More immediately, she has to take on Wozniacki, who won her first grand slam title in Melbourne this year. It’s a tall order, but with very little to lose, Stosur believes she has a chance. “It’s not the ideal draw that you want to see straight up but I don’t think it’s the ideal draw for her either,” she says. “I know it’s going to be a really tough match, I know I’m going to have to play very well…but I’m feeling fit and healthy and there’s nothing really holding me back. “So as long as I can keep myself together and go out there and play the way I know I can then I think I’ve got a chance. Caroline, she’s No 2 in the world, she’s a fantastic player, so as long as I do my best that’s all I can ask for.”