First, a thank you. To the person who, in the comments after my recent article about the deadly nightshade family, constructively noted that the aubergine, an Asian plant, was in fact brought to Europe during the middle ages by the Arabs, who cultivated them in Sicily and Spain, where they thrived. The Italian name melanzana, from the latin mala insana, or “unhealthful fruit”, reminds us, though, of how they were perceived by many. In his essay Eggplant – Food of the Plebeians, Massimo Montanari tells us the Renaissance cook Bartolomeo Scappi called the aubergine pomo sdegnoso – “contemptible apple” – and that in 1568 the naturalist Pietro Andrea Mattioli called them pianta volgare – “vulgar plant” – and observed how only the vulgar ate them “fried in oil with salt and pepper”. The writer Costanzo Felici expressed similar distrust for the people who ate the vulgar plant “avidly, cooked for the most part in embers or on the grill, or even fried ...” Even fried! I agree with the Italian proverb (and the conviction of every Glaswegian fish-and-chip shop) that “whatever can be fried is good to eat”, especially plaice, chips – and aubergines. It is aubergine time here now, and at the market they’re upstaging even tomatoes with their inky-black curves and blotting-paper mottles. Aubergines turn my cooking head to Sicily, see me heating pans of oil, despite the heat, to make caponata (aubergine fried in plenty of oil, then united with balanced celery, onion, a little tomato, capers, olives, sugar and vinegar) , or aubergines Ustica-style (fried, then dressed with mint and vinegar). Sometimes I make what my partner Vincenzo’s uncle calls “insoles”– slices of aubergine, boiled or grilled, then dressed with olive oil, or – now that I have the recipe – I make Enza’s aubergines. As you might remember from the pesto alla trapanese recipe three weeks ago, Enza works in the kitchen at the Anna Tasca Lanza cooking school in Sicily. She is a good cook who will tell you her strength is cakes, Sicilian sweets and preserves. But we think her savoury dishes are the very best sort of home cooking: tasty and generous – especially these aubergines. They sound a bit odd written down, but they’re delicious rounds of aubergine, topped first with cheese – such as scarmorza, provola or mozzarella –, then thin rings of onion, nubs of anchovy, and finished with the Sicilian calling card of breadcrumbs, oregano and olive oil. The slices of aubergine slump into softness, the cheese slumps into the aubergine, the onion sinks into the cheese and anchovy into that, and the breadcrumbs and oregano form an irresistible crisp top. As with cheese on toast eaten on a plate on a tea towel in front of the TV, the joy is the contrast between the molten part and the crisp lattice around the edges. Satisfaction, too, is when, as you take a round from the baking tray, you drag a significant piece of cheesy lattice from surrounding pieces which, despite a cursory gesture of cutting it with your fingers, you put on your plate. All is fair in love and crisp bits. At the school, Enza’s aubergines are served either with a great big green salad, or with boiled potatoes tossed with cracked olives, capers, olive oil and sweet onion (red onion works, too – just soak the slices in a mixture of vinegar and water for 20 minutes, which smooths the edges and stops them repeating on you all night). They can be made in advance, but bake as near to eating as possible; the cheese should stretch like the telephone cords our kids wouldn’t recognise, and sizzle slightly in your mouth. Prep 10 minCook 20 minServes 4 2 aubergines, cut into 5mm slices (you want 16)Olive oilSalt and black pepper1 onion, peeled and sliced into thin rings400g scamorza, provola, or plain or smoked mozzarella8 anchovies, halvedDried oreganoDry breadcumbs Line a flat baking tray large enough to accommodate the slices in a single layer, with baking parchment. If you don’t have one large enough, just use two. Lay the aubergine slices on the parchment, brush generously with olive oil and sprinkle with a little salt. Cut the cheese into 5mm slices and put one on each slice of aubergine. Share the onion rings between the 16 mounds, topping each with half an anchovy, a pinch of oregano, a grind of black pepper, a good sprinkle of breadcrumbs then zigzag each with more olive oil. Bake at 200C/390F/gas 6 for 20 minutes, until the cheese is golden and bubbling, breadcrumbs crisp and the edges darker. Serve and eat while still hot.