Faces, tassels, shells and chandeliers … the phrase “go big or go home” could have been made for earrings in the past few years. But the latest shift in the world of earrings is back to something more familiar. The hoop – an earring classic worn by everyone from Sade and Clara Bow to Victoria Beckham and Georges Bizet’s Carmen – is back, with Cardi B, Hailey Baldwin and Jennifer Lopez all wearing them. They vary in drop – earring speak for the distance between the bottom of your lobe and the end of the earring - from discreet mini hoops to gigantic shoulder-grazers. But before embracing the trend, take a breath. Like a red lipstick or a pair of jeans, hoop choice is a personal thing: it takes time and patience. Here’s our handy guide to finding the hoop for you. Average drop: less than 5mm This is the hoop for newbies to the trend – so tiny that these are practically not hoops at all. Wear if you want something discreet but you’re bored of studs. For an auricle-based update, have two or three different ones in each ear, possibly combined with an ear cuff. Tiny but mighty, in terms of fashion statements. Find at: Etsy, Asos Average drop: 40mm This is a classic or playing it safe, depending on your point of view. Personally, I love a midi hoop as an everyday choice and I have Sade on my side. Hers are chunky and gold – making an easy graphic statement that upgrades basics such as a chambray shirt or a white T-shirt. Skinnier ones work, too - and they will lighten the load for your lobes. Find at: Wolf & Gypsy Vintage, Argos Average drop: 65mm Jennifer Fisher’s Lilly earring – worn by Michelle Obama and Jennifer Lopez – has the same circumference as a Coke can. Although Fisher’s are £445 and regularly sell out on her website, the Coke-can earring is also found on market stalls (I like the ones at Ridley Road in Hackney, London) and high-street stores. Big but not huge, these look great with Obama-approved shift dresses. Think impact without effort. Find at: Amazon, Etsy Average drop: 120mm Big fan of Kendall Jenner, Rihanna and Victoria Beckham circa 2003? Your hoops should reach your shoulders. Some call these oversized, but they’re clearly not thinking big enough. These look great with a hoody and a high ponytail. Be warned, though. However you wear them, these are the kind of earrings that start conversations. Find at: Missguided, River Island Average drop: variable So far, all the hoops here have varied in size but have their circular shape and gold or silver finish in common. Enter hoops that aren’t really hoops at all – a curvy square, a spiky oval, even a hoop bent into the shape of a unicorn. This is the choice for those who don’t like to be defined. That means these can be worn with anything, obvs. Find at: Topshop, Urban Outfitters This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.