A leading gay rights group has criticised a stunt intended to highlight the absence of any openly gay footballers in the Premier League. An empty open-top bus will feature at Brighton Pride on Saturday to point out the “statistical anomaly” that not one of the top 500 players in the Premier League is out. Stonewall said the stunt, which has been sponsored by betting operator Paddy Power, was “well-intentioned” but argued that no one should feel pressured to publicly declare their sexuality. Kirsty Clarke, Stonewall’s director of sport, said: “Coming out must always be a personal decision. Speculating over why people don’t come out ignores the many valid reasons someone may have for not being open about their sexuality. Focusing on the absence of openly LGBT players often adds more pressure to what is already a high-stress environment in elite sport.” The discord came as tens of thousands took to the streets of Brighton on Saturday for the city’s annual Pride parade before moving on to Preston Park for the festival. Performers include MNEK, Pixie Lott and Ella Eyre, with American pop superstar Britney Spears headlining on Saturday night. Rail passengers faced crowded stations and trains as they tried to reach Brighton, while Pride organisers said the event in Preston Park was sold out. The parade included a protest against the event’s main sponsor, British Airways, for allowing people being deported from the UK to be carried on its flights. On Friday, an open letter to the Guardian signed by dozens of MPs and public figures called on the airline to “refuse to remain complicit” in working with the government to deport people. They claimed deportees included those facing persecution because of their sexuality. British Airways said it was legally bound to carry deportees when asked by the government. Meanwhile, Stonewall also called for the “endless stream of tabloid stories speculating about footballers’ sexual orientation” to stop. In May, the Sun published a story claiming a Premier League footballer had been having a “secret” gay relationship for four years but would not come out because he feared the backlash from fans would wreck his career. Paddy Power called on the Premier League to “boot itself into 2018, and create a welcoming environment for its first gay player”. “We think a Premier League footballer coming out as gay would have an extraordinary effect not just on the LGBT+ community, but society in general,” a spokesperson said. In recent years, Stonewall has been running its Rainbow Laces campaign, which aims to build support for LGBT equality not only in football but across many sports and has been backed by top-flight clubs including Arsenal. Stonewall said in a blogpost that it was working with the Premier League to foster LGBT-inclusive sporting environments and to “create spaces where players, coaches, fans and staff are accepted without exception”. The group added: “The more support there is, the easier it will become for athletes to be open about their sexuality, if they choose to. We are slowly seeing a shift happen – for example, there are openly lesbian professional female footballers who are inspiring role models for inclusion in sport. “Footballers coming out can’t be taken as a sign of success or progress in isolation. This is only one part of a wider cultural shift … it’s everyone’s responsibility to make sport more inclusive – including companies and the media.” The FA chairman, Greg Clarke, has said footballers would face “significant abuse” if they came out while still playing. In May last year, he admitted football has a serious issue engaging with people who are lesbian, gay, bisexual or transgender.