Southampton signed Danny Ings on loan from Liverpool after being granted an extension to the 5pm transfer window deadline. Liverpool announced the deal was an initial one-season loan with the move becoming permanent on 1 July 2019, then with a fee of £18m plus £2m in add-ons. Ings had interested Crystal Palace but they signed Jordan Ayew from Swansea instead. He became their fourth summer signing, following on from the arrivals of the goalkeeper Vicente Guaita and the midfielders Cheikhou Kouyaté and Max Meyer. The deal is initially a loan, with the possibility of the move becoming permanent in January. Newcastle completed their deadline-day deal to sign Federico Fernández from Swansea for an undisclosed fee. Fernández became Newcastle’s seventh summer acquisition, with the Argentina defender going straight into the squad for the season opener against Tottenham on Saturday. West Ham completed a double swoop for the Arsenal striker Lucas Pérez and the Colombia midfielder Carlos Sánchez before the transfer deadline. The West Ham manager, Manuel Pellegrini, concluded his impressive summer spending, bringing in nine players and spending more than £100m as he reshaped a squad that battled for survival during most of the previous campaign. Pérez, 29, joined Arsenal from Deportivo La Coruña in August 2016 and spent last season on loan back at the Spanish club; he is now determined to kickstart his career in England. Sánchez, meanwhile, moves from Fiorentina and will return for a second Premier League spell, the 32-year-old having spent two campaigns in the top flight with Aston Villa. Wolves brought in their second signing in two days with the recruitment of Leander Dendoncker from Anderlecht. The 23‑year‑old midfielder, who can also play in defence, has joined the club initially on a season-long loan but the move will become permanent next summer. Dendoncker’s arrival follows that of the winger Adama Traoré, who joined Wolves from Middlesbrough on Wednesday, and he could make his debut against Everton on Saturday. But they were frustrated with their attempts to sign Oleksandr Zinchenko from Manchester City. The club had agreed a £16m fee with City but the wing‑back was reluctant to make the move. Leicester City spent £32m on two defenders, Filip Benkovic from Dinamo Zagreb for £13m and Caglar Soyuncu, a Turkish international from Freiburg. They also signed Jamie Vardy to a new four-year contract, which will keep the striker at the club until he’s 35. “Everybody knows how I feel about playing for this club,” he said. “The journey that me, the team and the club have been on in the past few years has been incredible.” Cardiff bolstered their squad by completing deadline-day loan deals for Harry Arter and Victor Camarasa. They announced that the Bournemouth midfielder Arter and Real Betis’s former Spain Under-21 international Camarasa had been signed on season-long arrangements. Arter had been linked with a move to Watford but opted for to move to Wales. He will not be eligible to face his parent club on Saturday. Brighton completed their business bringing in the right-back Martín Montoya from Valencia. The 27-year-old former Barcelona defender signed a four-year deal after joining for an undisclosed fee. They also signed the central defender Dan Burn from Wigan for an undisclosed fee. The 26-year-old has agreed a four-year contract with Albion but will remain with the Latics until January on a loan deal.Leicester City spent £32m on two defenders, Filip Benkovic from Dinamo Zagreb for £13m and Caglar Soyuncu, a Turkish international from Freiburg. They also signed Jamie Vardy to a new four-year contract, which will keep the striker at the club until he’s 35. “Everybody knows how I feel about playing for this club,” he said. “The journey that me, the team and the club have been on in the past few years has been incredible.”