Britain is basking in 31C heat, temperatures on the continent have reached 45C, and a mountain glacier in Sweden has melted so much that its peak is no longer the country’s highest point. Europe’s heatwave is not over yet, with temperatures across the UK this weekend forecast to remain at an average of about 27C (80.6F), with highs of 31C a possibility in London. Alex Burkill, a Met Office meteorologist, said that despite the cooler temperatures of recent days “it is not the end of the hot weather for the summer” as sunshine returns to most of the country. A yellow severe warning for thunderstorms was in place for some parts of England and Scotland until 9pm on Friday. A yellow severe weather warning for #thunderstorms has been issued: https://t.co/QwDLMfRBfs. Stay #weatheraware @metofficeuk pic.twitter.com/kbK7nJyxVN The Met Office said: “Some flooding of a few homes and businesses is possible, leading to some damage to buildings or structures. There is a good chance driving conditions will be affected by spray, standing water and/or hail, leading to longer journey times by car and bus. Some short-term loss of power and other services is likely.” Sun-drenched British holidaymakers are enjoying record temperatures on the continent during their summer breaks. Tourists are being urged to avoid the sun during the hottest part of the day and remember that children are particularly susceptible to the heat. Eight places in the centre, south and east of Portugal have broken their temperature records as Europe swelters. On Thursday temperatures reached 45.2C near Abrantes, a town in the centre of the country. Experts have said the highest temperature ever recorded in continental Europe – 48C in Athens in 1977 – could be topped this weekend. The International Red Cross has called on people to check on older relatives and neighbours. Sweden had its hottest July in 250 years, and while meteorologists were forecasting cooler temperatures and thunderstorms across the country on Saturday there may be no return to heights in excess of 2,000m for the Kebnekaise mountain, whose shrinkage has raised concerns about the rapid pace of climate change.