Michael Avenatti could become the second person to go from cable news fixture to president. Speaking to a crowd of activists at the Iowa Democratic Wing Ding event, Avenatti left the room electrified. The lawyer, who is exploring a potential presidential bid, turned what has been a sleepy presidential pre-season so far upside down. The lawyer for Stormy Daniels has become a national sensation with his ever-constant appearances on cable news advocating for his client and attacking Donald Trump. But while Democratic activists like Avenatti on television, they love his live show Friday. They clapped, they cheered and flocked to him for selfies afterwards in a mob scene. Jeff Link, a top Democratic operative in the state who was spending the day accompanying Avenatti, said the only comparison he had ever witnessed was Barack Obama’s first visit to the state, in 2006. In his remarks, which went for nearly half an hour, or twice as long as the limit for speakers at the event, Avenatti drew repeated standing ovations as he called for a vigorous, aggressive Democratic response to Trump. He turned Michelle Obama’s famous statement from the 2016 convention – “When they go low, we go higher” – by telling the crowd: “When they go low, I say, we hit harder.” I haven’t been this excited since JFK. Avenatti insisted on tough tactics, telling the cheering audience: “I believe that our party, the Democratic party, must be a party that fights fire with fire” and warned that for too long the party has had a “tendency to bring nail clippers to a gunfight”. The trial lawyer also acknowledged the unusual circumstances that brought him to the point of considering a presidential bid. “What, you may be asking, is a quote-unquote porn star lawyer doing talking to us about our republic, our party?” He cast himself as a protector of the little guy. “I can stand here today and say with pride that I’m not just some TV lawyer,” said Avenatti. “I’ve been fighting for Davids versus the Goliaths for 18 years, my entire career.” After his speech, Avenatti spent over 20 minutes surrounded by a mob of attendees who were seeking selfies. Among the group of mostly female fans was Bonnie Norris, who had driven four hours from Red Oak, Iowa, to see Avenatti. “I think he is fantastic,” said Norris. She seemed giddy about the experience. “I daydreamed that I would get a selfie with him and I got it!” When asked if she would support him for president, Norris said “Michael? I want to be on his campaign.” The former Obama and Sanders supporter said: “I haven’t been this excited since JFK.” Despite the combative rhetoric, Avenatti embraced mostly conventional Democratic policy including “sensible gun control”, investing in public schools and a “real infrastructure plan”. Among current progressive shibboleths, he supported Medicare for all. However, Avenatti came out against abolishing Immigrations and Customs Enforcement, (ICE) to reporters after the event. “I completely disagree with the idea of eliminating ICE. We should not eliminate ICE, it’s like saying we should eliminate the police force.” The trial lawyer, who recently went to the US-Mexico border and has done legal work on behalf of families being separated, made clear he favored changing policies on ICE and said the agency was engaging in “abuses of power”. He also said he was still unsure about full repeal of the 2017 Republican tax cut bill. “I haven’t made a decision,” said Avenatti. “I am exploring that, researching that, seeking advice from people relating to the tax plan as far as whether it should be fully revealed or partially repealed. Ultimately I’ll certainly have a position.” Although he has no experience in elective or appointed office, Avenatti felt comfortable that he could serve as president. “I think I could do the job,” he told the Guardian. “I’m fairly confident I could do the job. I think one of the reasons why I could do the job is because I think people would be enthusiastic about assisting me. You know being president is a solo decision. You surround yourself with highly qualified people that are smarter about issues than you are. But that’s not enough. You then have to listen to them.” Avenatti acknowledged conversations with former White House aide Omarosa Manigault Newman, who has claimed to have recordings of Trump, but did not comment any further. “I’m not going to go into the details of what I said about that. She had reached out to me a number of months ago,” said the lawyer. Avenatti, appeared alongside two darkhorse presidential candidates, Congressman John Delaney of Maryland and Congressman Tim Ryan of Ohio. . The Wing Ding wasn’t Avenatti’s only event in Iowa. On Wednesday evening, Avenatti had a private dinner at a country club in Des Moines where he dined with top Iowa operatives as well as a number of past and present chairs of the Iowa Democratic Party. On Thursday, Avenatti visited the Iowa state fair and, on Friday, before the event, he visited a northern Iowa farm to learn about agriculture policy. He told the Guardian that it was “very illuminating.” This won’t be Avenatti’s only lesson in Iowa. The trial lawyer is returning to Des Moines later in August to speak before a convention of local Democratic election officials. 