A poet’s late-night internet search of local newspaper archives has revealed that one of the US’s greatest cultural icons, the African American poet Langston Hughes, was born a year earlier than his biographers have believed for decades. Kansas poet Eric McHenry told the New York Times that he was trawling through digitised local newspaper archives when he spotted a note on the society page of the African American weekly newspaper, the Topeka Plaindealer from 20 December 1901, mentioning that “Little Langston Hughes has been quite ill for the past two weeks. He is improving.” The paper recorded the minutiae of daily life for locals, promising: “Do you want to know where your friends are, who they visit, what they are doing? What the race is doing in general? Read the Plaindealer.” At first, McHenry wasn’t sure the mention he had found was of the Hughes who would go on to become one of America’s most acclaimed poets, writing works including I ,Too (“I, too, sing America. // I am the darker brother. / They send me to eat in the kitchen / When company comes, / But I laugh, / And eat well, / And grow strong.”). All previous biographies of Hughes list his date of birth as 1 February 1902. But McHenry found another mention, in an edition dated 17 May 1901, of how “Mrs Carrie Hughes and little son Langston are visiting friends in the city before leaving for Buffalo”. Hughes’s mother was called Carrie, and his father lived in Buffalo. A third mention from 17 January 1902 also referred to Mrs CM Hughes and son. “That’s when I thought, ‘I got it, it has to be the same Langston Hughes,’” McHenry told the paper. The New York Times reported that Denise Low, co-author of Langston Hughes in Lawrence, also looked into the historical records. She found found three censuses – from 1905, 1910 and 1915 – giving an age for Hughes that pointed to a 1901 birth. McHenry suggested that the discrepancy may have originated from Hughes’s mother, who could have waited a year to enrol him in Topeka’s white elementary school, which she chose instead of the local “coloured” school. “Maybe his mother deemed it advantageous for him to be older, and for them not to know,” he said. Arnold Rampersad’s acclaimed biography of Hughes gives the poet’s birthdate as “near midnight on 1 February 1902”, but adds: “The date of this birth he would take on faith, since Missouri did not require the registration of infants, and his birth was never entered officially there.” Rampersad told the New York Times that McHenry’s evidence for an earlier birthdate was compelling. “It is on the one hand unimportant, but on the other hand quite important,” said Rampersad. “You want to know when your subject was born.”