The ball that did for Murali Vijay was not the most spectacular that Jimmy Anderson has bowled in this match. It was stock, short of a length, straight, but slanting in towards middle stump. He delivers dozens like it in every Test, hundreds in every season. But he will always remember it, because it earned him his 100th Test wicket at Lord’s. He is only the second man to take so many at one venue. The other was Muttiah Muralitharan, who took a hundred and some in Kandy, Galle, and Colombo. Which means Anderson is the first fast bowler to do it – Dennis Lillee could not do it at the MCG, Richard Hadlee did not achieve it at Lancaster Park and Dale Steyn failed to do it at Newlands. The milestone is a mark of Anderson’s longevity more than anything else, as well as Lord’s preeminence among English venues. He has played here twice a year every year since 2008, and nowadays its quirks and idiosyncrasies must be as well known to him as those of his own house, the run-up as familiar as his front hallway, his bench in the dressing room as comfortable as his own sofa. He has bowled so many overs here – more than 906, now – that he will likely spend the rest of his life walking with a lean where one leg’s been worn shorter than the other by all the time he has spent running along the slope. Anderson finished with four for 23, which gave him nine for 43 in the match, from 25.2 overs with 10 maidens. They are silly figures, but his often are here. Overall, those 100 wickets have come at an average of 24, but the second 50 of them cost only 20 each, and the last 25 came at just 12, figures which read like something you might find in an ancient copy of Wisden in a report of some distant century tour of South Africa when England played against hapless batsmen on matting wickets. They are the sort of numbers SF Barnes used to notch up at the beginning of the 20th century. A lot of modern batsmen seem to find Anderson pretty much unplayable in cloudy, damp conditions. The skills they need to bat against him seem to have been lost to the modern game. KL Rahul played outside the line of an in-swinger, Kuldeep Yadav was bowled off an edge when he left a gap between his bat and pad, and Mohammed Shami just plain missed the ball. They may as well be trying to read runes from wax tablets or work a spinning jenny. In the circumstances his four wickets here were as inevitable as the incoming tide, India’s resistance as stiff as a sandcastle. Where Anderson leads, of course, Stuart Broad follows. He is the Clark to Anderson’s Lewis, the Roy to his Siegfried, second among equals. By the end of the innings Broad had actually pulled himself up into second place behind his partner on that same list, as the fast bowler who has taken the second-most wickets at any one place. His 83 put him equal with Heath Streak, who took his at the Harare Sports Club. Broad also moved up into the list of the top-10 wicket-takers in Test cricket, too. But then, you never measure Broad by the numbers so much as the moments. And in the afternoon session here, Broad had one everyone there will remember. A spell in which he seized control of the game brought him four wickets for seven runs in only 37 balls. It began when he had Ajinkya Rahane caught at slip, a loose shot that seemed to spur Broad into new life. He bowled Che Pujara with a brilliant in-swinger, had Virat Kohli caught off his glove at short leg, fending away a snorting short ball, and then trapped Dinesh Karthik lbw. It felt like the only reason he did not run through the rest of the Indian team was because a shower came and broke his rhythm. Still, when the players went off, the match went with them. India’s hopes rested with Pujara and Kohli. Broad did for both. He needed the wickets. Anderson is all but undroppable now, but his partner does not have such a strong grip on his place in the team. He took 30 wickets at 36 each in Test cricket last year, and has felt like a peripheral figure in this series. He was pretty ineffective in the first Test at Edgbaston, and then again in the first innings here. Until he changed ends and came charging in from the Pavilion. Then everything slipped into place and the ball started to swing in the air and spark and spit off the pitch. Anderson and Broad have been running this double act for a decade now, since they first played together here against New Zealand in 2008. Everyone else must be getting pretty damn sick of it. But England’s supporters will hope the show runs for a few more years yet, because on this pitch, in this weather, they are as good as it gets.