You could never accuse my mum, Nita, of not keeping things fresh in the kitchen. Over the years, she made a dynamite mushroom paté blazing with green chillies, a pizza base made using chapati flourtopped with tomato masala and okra, and avocado and coconut milkshakes, long before either ingredient was popular. But more often, and especially when entertaining, she made this: her failsafe ratatouille, which is, in short, a magnificent jumble of British summer vegetables cooked French-style by an Indian. Mum would often stir red pesto into her ratatouille, but that contains parmesan, so I’ve made an almond and coriander crumble to top mine with instead. Using a bigger frying pan is a bonus when making this dish because it means you’ll be able to fry the aubergines and courgettes in just a couple of batches. Prep 15 minCook 45 minServes 4 For the ratatouille Rapeseed oil3 aubergines (900g), cut into 3cm x 3cm cubes2 courgettes (400g) cut into 2cm x 2cm cubes2 red onions, peeled and diced 2 red peppers, cored, deseeded and diced 4 garlic cloves, peeled and minced 1 green finger chilli, finely chopped4 medium vine tomatoes (400g), chopped1½ tsp garam masalaSalt 1 tbsp lemon juice For the topping 40g ground almonds 20g desiccated coconut ¼ tsp chilli powder1 tsp lemon juice 1 large handful fresh coriander leaves (about 20g), finely chopped Line a large plate with two sheets of kitchen towel and put to one side of the stove. In a large frying pan, heat a good amount of oil (enough to coat the base of the pan) over a high flame, then fry the aubergines for six minutes, turning now and then, until coloured on the sides but not cooked all the way through (depending on the size of your pan, you may need to do this in batches). Transfer to the prepared plate with a slotted spoon. In the same pan, fry the courgettes for two minutes on each side, then transfer to the same plate. Add another two tablespoons of oil to the pan (if need be – the vegetables, the aubergines especially, may well have soaked up a lot of the original batch) and, when hot, fry the onions and peppersfor 15 minutes, until the onions are very soft and jewel-like. Add the garlic and chilli, cook for three minutes, then add the tomatoes and cook until they break down into a paste – about four minutes. Throw in the garam masala, a teaspoon and a quarter of salt and the lemon juice, stir, then return the fried veg to the pan with 100ml water. Leave to bubble away for five minutes, until the aubergines are tender, then take off the heat. For the topping, heat a tablespoon of oil in a nonstick pan on a medium flame and, once hot, add the almonds and coconut. Stir-fry for two to three minutes, until they start to turn golden, then add the chilli, lemon juice and a pinch of salt. Mix, tip into a bowl, leave to cool for a minute, then add the coriander. To serve, transfer the ratatouille to a serving dish and sprinkle over the coconut and almond topping.