After Malcolm Turnbull’s narrow leadership ballot win over Peter Dutton and a string of resignations, Canberra is bracing for a second leadership ballot – but it’s not certain a second spill will be a straight rerun of the Turnbull-Dutton contest. The deputy Liberal leader Julie Bishop and treasurer Scott Morrison have not ruled out putting their hands up if Turnbull calls another vote or Dutton gets the numbers for a spill. So far, moderates and conservatives are locking in behind Turnbull and Dutton, but on Wednesday morning the first suggestions emerged that Morrison is canvassing a run as a compromise candidate. The treasurer denied the reports which he called “the usual nonsense”. “The prime minister has my full and total support and I want to put at rest any suggestion that I’ve made an approach, that any approach has been made,” he told reporters on Wednesday. There are reasons a third candidate may be needed. If Turnbull does not have sufficient support to fend off Dutton, moderates may want an alternative to keep the former home affairs minister out of the Lodge. If Dutton proves so unpalatable that Coalition colleagues – such as Nationals MP Darren Chester – threaten to sit on the crossbench, then conservatives may need an alternative too. One Turnbull supporter told Guardian Australia a compromise candidate is unlikely to fare any better against Dutton than Turnbull would. “I don’t think the Queenslanders or conservatives would be more likely to go for either [Julie Bishop or Scott Morrison],” the MP said. “Neither would be a circuit-breaker. “Tony Abbott wouldn’t support either,” the MP said, citing the fact that Bishop supported Turnbull in his successful challenge in September 2015 and Morrison ran dead by not whipping his votes for Abbott, which harmed his standing among conservatives. One Dutton supporter said they didn’t think that Bishop or Morrison stand a chance because conservatives “think [Dutton] would be the best option to take the fight up to Bill Shorten”, even suggesting Labor is scared of the former home affairs minister. The MP said they did not regard Chester’s threat as credible. “He can do what he wants, he’s not in the Liberal party room,” the MP said. If the leadership race becomes a three-cornered contest, then the result would be difficult to predict and would depend on whether Dutton can improve on the 35 votes he achieved on Tuesday. If Dutton wins seven more votes, he would have a majority and the presence of a third candidate would do nothing other than split the anti-Dutton vote. If Dutton falls short of a majority, the order of candidates in the first round of voting will be crucial. If the compromise candidate comes third, the second round will produce a repeat of Turnbull v Dutton. If Turnbull were relegated to third, then Bishop or Morrison could face off against Dutton in the second round. The 2009 leadership contest is instructive. After Turnbull’s leadership was destabilised by his plans to help Labor pass the carbon pollution reduction scheme (CPRS), Kevin Andrews moved an unsuccessful spill motion then Abbott resigned prompting a second push. Three candidates contested the ballot: Turnbull, Abbott and Joe Hockey. Hockey offered Liberal colleagues a conscience vote on the CPRS whereas Abbott promised hard opposition to it. Although Hockey was considered a popular option as measured by opinion polls, he unexpectedly fell just short of Turnbull in the first round of voting (Abbott won 35 votes, Turnbull 26 and Hockey 23). After Hockey was eliminated, Turnbull lost to Abbott, 41 votes to 42. Ultimately, Hockey failed because his third way didn’t solve the Liberals’ emissions trading problem. He couldn’t appeal to Abbott supporters who wanted to kill the CPRS outright and supporters of the CPRS stuck to the incumbent Turnbull in sufficient numbers to block Hockeys’ run. The crucial question for Bishop and Morrison: is there any reason to think they’d fare better than Turnbull against Dutton?