The Trump administration has announced a new space force to protect America from what Mike Pence has called “the growing security threats emerging in space”. But Trump supporters have been asked to put aside questions like “How much will this cost?” and “Isn’t the air force already doing this?” and instead focus their attention on another crucial issue: what should the space force logo be? Do you think you have a better idea? Are you possessed of space age design skills you'd like us to showcase? If so, get drawing/designing/editing, share your idea with us, and we'll feature some of the best in a gallery on the site. Share your design – a photograph, screenshot or other type of file is fine – via this form. You can read terms of service here. Brad Parscale, who is Trump’s 2020 re-election campaign manager, has emailed supporters asking them to vote for one of six space force logos to commemorate the “huge announcement”. “President Trump wants a space force – a groundbreaking endeavour for the future of America and the final frontier,” wrote Pascale. It is unclear if the winning logo will actually be adopted by the sixth military service, or just used on commemorative merchandise produced by the campaign, which Parscale announced would be sold to mark the announcement. The six logos all feature the words “Space Force”. One also has the slogan “Mars awaits”, which the science editor at Mashable took issue with. Cute, but like... The Space Force would have literally nothing to do with Mars? Unless... I guess we could go to war with Martians, then this this logo might be relevant. pic.twitter.com/LnoiVjnqfp Most logos are adorned with spaceships, though one has an odd yellow shape that some on Twitter have suggested is an homage to the president’s hair. Twitter users have responded with their own suggestions for the logo. David Frum, a former speechwriter for George W Bush, suggested it should draw on the catchphrase from Galaxy Quest, a spoof sci-fi film. How can this not be the Space Force badge? pic.twitter.com/5LiXmNKLSR Others weighed in with gifs and videos, or amendments to some of the suggested logos. Make this the space force logo pic.twitter.com/D9z4PRmPkR I like the Space Force idea but this slogan is a little troubling pic.twitter.com/bmjCCDdRCX Still others suggested that the logo – like space force itself – was unnecessary, echoing retired astronaut Capt Mark Kelly who told MSNBC it was a “dumb idea” that would duplicate work already done by the air force. I'm old enough to remember when the military's already existing space force used this logo, which it still does because it already exists pic.twitter.com/4ih7i3jRqY Will somebody in the Pentagon please tell @realDonaldTrump that DoD already has a Space Force, it's called @AFSpace.Thanks, that'd be super. Me, leaving this circus tent of a planet. pic.twitter.com/sllJUKrGZV