Ben Stokes has been recalled to the England team facing India in the third Test at Trent Bridge in place of Sam Curran, captain Joe Root confirmed. Stokes joined up with his teammates after the jury at Bristol crown court on Tuesday delivered a unanimous verdict of not guilty over his charge for affray. Stokes was cleared of wrongdoing, along with co-defendant Ryan Ali, nearly 11 months on from the fight in the city centre last September. “It was one of the most difficult decisions I’ve had to make as captain,” said Root on Friday. “It’s about us as a squad delivering over five games and on this occasion Sam is unfortunate to miss out. “[Ben] is just desperate to get back playing cricket, make that his main focus moving forward. I sat him down yesterday and asked him where he’s at and he told me he’s desperate to get out there. He wants to put in performances and concentrate on his cricket now. He felt he was ready to play. We assessed his fitness as well and made that call.” Curran can be entitled to feel hard done by after taking four wickets and making a combative half-century in what was only the 20-year-old’s second Test. His efforts helped swing the series opener in England’s favour at Edgbaston and saw him named man of the match. England lead the series 2-0. Not since 13 August 1955 has a Test in England started on a Saturday, when Peter May captained a team featuring Brian Close, Denis Compton and Jim Laker against South Africa at the Oval (they would win by 92 runs). Fast-forward through 63 years of mostly Thursday starts – with a few Fridays, Wednesdays and, in 2014, a Sunday – and we are in the midst of a five-Test series being played over a breakneck 42 days. India were keen on a break after the ODI series in July and another before the Asia Cup that begins in the United Arab Emirates on 15 September. This spacing was felt fairest, with three days scheduled between the first and second Tests and four between second and third (as it happened, the early finishes at Edgbaston and Lord’s added extra rest to the schedule anyway). If we go the full five days at Trent Bridge there will be an eight-day gap before the fourth Test in Southampton. “I think the difficult part is the fact that everyone is performing so well,” Root added. “I think some people would see that as the easy option to leave Sam out but he’s offered so much to this bowling group and at the start of the series I said to the team for us to win a five-match series against the best side in the world it’s going to take more than just 11 players. “What he’s done so far has been nothing short of high class, so that’s a testament to how well we’ve been playing and is a really good sign for this group moving forward.” The England head coach, Trevor Bayliss, has called on Stokes to make a public apology over the events which led to his trial, having apologised to his teammates in New Zealand last winter when he rejoined them after having to miss the Ashes while a criminal charge was being considered.