“If Lucas Hernández was born a year and a half later, his age would be lower than his shirt number (21). Have any World Cup winners achieved this?” muses Edward Gibson. Squad numbers were introduced in 1954, and since then we’ve had three World Cup winners who’ve been younger than their squad numbers, advises Mark van Dijk: In 1970, Brazil’s Emerson Leão was 20 years old and wore No 22. In 1994 Brazil’s Ronaldo was 17 and wore No 20; and in 2002 Brazil’s Kaká was 20 and wore No 23. Also worthy of note are Brazil’s Zé Maria and France’s David Trezeguet who, in 1970 and 1998 respectively, wore their age on the back of their shirt; 21 in the case of Zé Maria and 20 in the case of Trezeguet. “Another close call is Shkodran Mustafi, aged 22 and wearing No 21 in 2014,” writes Robert Hickman. But Hernández is the closest to achieving this having played in the final itself, with only Alberto Tarantini (22 and a half wearing No 20 in 1978) and Mario Götze (Just turned 22 and wearing No19 in 2014) in close competition. Meanwhile, Chris Charlton notes that in the 2011 Women’s World Cup final, Japan’s Mawa Iwabuchi came off the bench in the final minute of extra-time, aged 18, wearing shirt number 20. She did not take a penalty, but her side did win on penalties, beating USA 3-1 to settle a 2-2 draw. “David Stockdale got called up to the England squad in 2011, although he never got a game,” tweets Owen Collins. “Would he have become the first player to play for both England and the England C team – or has it been done before?” Pete Tomlin can answer that! “There have been two footballers who have played for both England and England C,” he teaches. “The first was former Leicester City and Arsenal striker Alan Smith. I can’t find any details of his appearance(s) for England C, but the Alvechurch FC website confirms that he did represent them. This would have been in 1981 or 1982 before he moved to Filbert Street, and as well as winning 14 caps for the full England team, he also represented England B on four occasions. The second player to achieve the feat was Steve Guppy. He appeared for England C (then known as England Semi-Pro) in 1993 while he was at Wycombe Wanderers. Guppy is the only player to have represented England, England B (one cap), England C and England U21 (1 cap). Otherwise, there are a number of other players who have represented England C followed by their national side: Junior Agogo (Nigeria), Kevin Betsy (Seychelles), George Boyd (Scotland), Ken Charlery (St Lucia), Danny Collins (Wales), James Comley (Montserrat), Clayton Donaldson (Jamaica), Barry Hayles (Jamaica), Steve Jones (Northern Ireland), Craig Mackail-Smith (Scotland), Steve Morison (Wales), Eamonn O’Keefe (Republic of Ireland), Reece Styche (Gibraltar), Andy Yiadom (Ghana). Finally, there are two others who have sort of represented England C and England: Danny Alcock played for Team GBR at the 2011 World Universiade (aka the World Student Games) and Alex Rodman played for the England Futsal team from 2005-2007 and was also a member of the English & British Universities squad when he was a student.” Missing from that list is Sam Ricketts who, notes Chris Williams, played four times for England C before winning 52 caps for Wales. It seems we forgot another high-profile Scottish forward from our list of players who had a late change of heart on their transfer destination. “I’m sure you are forgetting Mo Johnston on his return from France to Scotland,” emails David Sutherland, “who stated that ‘there is no other British club I could play for apart from Celtic’. He was paraded in a Celtic shirt, had signed a pre-contract agreement, and was all set for a return to Parkhead. Things are a bit misty on why he didn’t sign, but joining Rangers, Celtic’s bitter rivals, angered many fans of both clubs.” “I was wondering,” wrote Robert Sleigh in 2010, “what was the highest ever attendance at a reserve game?” OK, so who’s going to start the bidding? 15,000 anybody? 10,000? No? What about 8,559? “Back in 1982 Gillingham drew Spurs at home in the League Cup third round,” writes James Tong. “Knowing that this was a money spinner, the club decided to sell the terrace tickets through the turnstiles at an evening reserve match. Orient were the visitors, and Gills beat them 3-1 in front of a club record crowd for a reserve match of 8,559.” Unfortunately for Gills fans, though, the Priestfield Stadium cannot lay claim to the record. There were 33,800 at Ibrox on 30 August 1997 to watch Rangers’ second string take on Celtic following the cancellation of the first-team Old Firm clash due to the death of Princess Diana. The presence of Antti Niemi, Stuart McCall, Gordan Petric, Tony Vidmar, Barry Ferguson, Gennaro Gattuso, Jonatan Johansson, Ian Durrant and Jörg Albertz in the Rangers line-up probably helped swell the numbers (although they were held to a 1-1 draw by a Bhoys side comprising 11 teenagers). That figure narrowly eclipses Sunderland’s 33,517 for their 1-0 win over Liverpool reserves in January 1999. There was free entry and £7,000 raised for charity. Michael Proctor (remember him?) scored the only goal of the game, while Liverpool’s Brad Friedel saved a penalty. And since then the Knowledge has unearthed this picture of Arsenal reserves versus Chelsea reserves at Highbury in 1948. We’re not sure what the attendance is but Highbury looks full - and a few years later, in 1951, a crowd of 72,408 packed into the ground to watch an FA Cup fourth-round tie against Northampton. • For thousands more questions and answers take a trip through the archive. “What is the hottest English league or cup game on record?” asks Mike Dunn. “The Washington Valor arena football team just won their league’s championship, having finished bottom of the table with a 2-12 record but still qualifying for the end-of-season play-offs in which they triumphed,” writes Kyle Hill. “Their final record was 4-13. In that spirit, what’s the worst football club to ever end up as champions (or just promoted)?” “This week Sydney Swans AFL player Alex Johnson will play his first game since 2012,” notes Graham Clayton. “He has missed nearly six seasons due to five knee reconstructions. I wonder which footballer holds the record for the most knee reconstructions during a career?” • Email your questions and answers to knowledge@theguardian.com or tweet @TheKnowledge_GU.