“I’m only passing through,” said Vidiadhar Surajprasad Naipaul. As we were looking at Stonehenge when he said it, I had also some sense of being here today and gone tomorrow, but he meant, I think, that even within the compass of a lifetime he could not, would not settle. His domicile today is a bucolic cloister. A bungalow with the flintstones exposed in the outer wall in the midst of a slightly fake manorial covert-gravelled drive and mossed pay-on-the-nail stones, giant beeches like a palisade around spongy lawns – eight miles out of Salisbury. It’s all he ever dreamed of, he said. This peace. The bare chalk escarpments that way, the lush tropical greenery of the Wiltshire Avon on the other. But I wasn’t to think it his bungalow. It was only rented, he insisted, as if freehold were synonymous with captivity. A querulous, complaining traveller, airsick, seasick, and often heartsick, he has become paradoxically a wheel, the weight of his obsessions at a tangent to any society in which he finds himself. A child of the Indian minority culture in Trinidad, he went on to the let-down of Oxford, the jaunty ebullience of finding himself as a writer in London, and to produce the special mandarin comedy of his later books to which prizes have mostly been attached, seeming to him in one mood like a string of tin cans and in another like the essential levers to a further stage of development. Just now the wheel rests. He is doing nothing. You mean, I said, hardly anything? No, nothing. Reading, yoga to keep fit, very important to keep fit, certain special walks. Nothing. He walks deliberately, you could say politely, swinging a light ochre walking stick like a metronome, binoculars hung over his woollen windcheater, his dark glasses apparently clamped on by his ebony hair, never missing an emphatic courtesy to the men and women of Wiltshire. The stick he picked up in Uganda, passing through, observe the built-in ferrule. Rather lovely this stroll, the view untrammelled by buildings, an astonishing perspective in these overcrowded islands. The burial mounds, clear to see. Not many people today at the Henge. Good. People had been writing to tell me 10 years ago that he was prickly, he said. He hadn’t been, then. But today yes, oh certainly, more prickly. Even when he was doing nothing, he liked to know in advance exactly what the day was to be, and it flustered him when it wasn’t. And when he wrote a book the process went on round the clock, bearing with it the dreams and nightmares which were pertinent. For book, read articles, read reviews, all equally serious in their expressions of his obsessions. He liked to know the year in advance and 1971, carefully planned to bring in £2,500 from intensive journalism up to June, to fund his next travels through South America, had been calamitous. Bronchitis, which he had associated with the common cold, was an uncommonly severe disruption. He had reported the Indian elections, and dropped in on Mauritius to observe on the way home. Then the writing had gone forward only half an hour a day. But with so many books in print, his royalties would cushion such martyrdom? They amounted, he said, to £400 a year, with occasional goodies in the form of translations. The journalistic assignments, which he calls missions, often bring him to a state of near panic. He can rarely, at first sight, believe there is anything to write about and once sat, while his expenses ran out, for most of a fortnight staring at six sheds in Cannery Row, wondering what kind of a follow-up he could make of them. Guilt about the commission is bad enough, but the severest goad is his commitment to reportage as part of an “emblematic” development of his view of the neo-colonial world. Clinging to the area railings of this collapsing framework are the characters who carry VS Naipaul’s obsessions through his new book, In a Free State (Andre Deutsch, £1.75). The short novel, which gives the whole sequence of emblematically associated reportages, short fixations and personal journal its title, concerns the drive of an English civil servant and the wife of a friend through a small African state at the climax of its political dissolution, homing on a “compound” of security. But its real motion is venerated by a tightly planned semi-theatrical dialogue which, said Naipaul, he devised after intensive pleasure in the concentrated scenes of Ibsen. “The whole thing was conceived as a big novel containing all the elements of American involvement with weaker communities, and the way that individuals from them are trapped by bigger powers. The book is properly about power and powerlessness. But then something I find harder and harder to do is the artificial side of making up big narratives – even while, as one becomes older, one is more and more fictitious – and I decided to let the book fall into its component parts. I shouldn’t wish the African story to be published independently of the other parts.” Ruanda in flux, and a brief stay in a half-built embassy in its rundown capital, gave him his location, but he wrote the first words passing through Canada after his desperate throw at Cannery Row had come good at the eleventh hour. He can point you the two passages, like practice runs, in the heart of the narrative, which told him he had a book. Then it was all in his head at once, all the characters being himself, and the dreadful murky struggle was on to sort out what he had sorted in from so many sources. All the characters are himself. Writers say that, and it often has the cheerless rustle of the overflowing wastepaper basket. Naipaul seemingly disintegrates his personality with frightening abandon. He had dreamed by the abyss for his protagonist. There is a dream of dizziness in the book, containing the image of an exploding head, one of the warnings of an impending breakdown. One dream he did not use, because it was too mysterious until he traced its elements later in the finished book: “It was fleetingly after Bobby has been beaten up and faints, and the dream was this – he’s on a bed, and of course the bed would be mine where I was sleeping. He’s quite naked and one of his legs is yanked up with hospital apparatus, all rather ridiculous because he’s not in splints. The woman has her back to him, sitting on a plain wooden chair such as I had by my bed. She’s comforting him because he’s in pain and vulnerable because he’s sexually exposed. She says ‘It’s only the wind’ and though he knows it’s not the wind, he is comforted because she is saying it to comfort him. Too literary to use, and perhaps most significant to people who have read the book, but it gives you an idea of the empathy, how one is totally involved.” I suggested to Naipaul, in pursuit of my obsessive interest in how a writer keeps his balance on a tripod with legs in the Caribbean, India and England, that he must have suffered from the conflict expressed by T. E. Lawrence: “Sometimes these two selves would converse in the void and then madness was near, as it would be near anyone who saw at once through the veils of two customs, two educations, two ways of life.” He said that it had never formulated itself so consciously, but that yes, when he first came to England he had broken down, mildly with a great sense of being adrift with no anchor and the added terror that young people have of all that lies ahead. Son of a brilliant journalist, he had been wonderfully flattered in his final year in Trinidad. He had discovered the response of people to his skill with words, though he wrote only a couple of articles. He had had a very simple vision of leaving the New World which was imperfect, spiritually poor, poor from the point of view of making, poor in history, poor in artefacts and he would just go to the Old World and flower. He hadn’t realised that when you’re born in the New World you carry it with you for ever. The Caribbean was all he had to write about when he started and it was a great distress to him to have exhausted it so quickly and not seem to have replaced it with anything else. Then he perceived that this life itself, this struggle, this problem, had become his subject. There was his space, not in the Caribbean, England, nor India nor yet the Republic of Letters. When I asked if he could not graft on to any main body, he said wryly, turning down the corners of his mouth, that it was rather that the main bodies rejected the graft. But England had made him welcome, treated him warmly? Oh no, he groaned, grimacing, I shouldn’t say that London was his commercial centre, a city in which he could not bear more than a few hours at a stretch, and this place was fabulous in satisfying all his simple wants, but it was policy now to move on, he knew he would damage himself if he accepted the idea of staying. He had had such luck, luck in discovering he could make jokes, luck in writing his first book at 22, luck in finding himself with A House for Mister Biswas in his head, luck in finding his way to non-fiction through Eric Williams’s invitation to write The Middle Passage, and with luck he might have three more books left in him, taking him on another decade till he was 50. Thereafter, something more than luck would be needed if he were not to pass through that fear of destitution which he thought he had shaken off for good when he was 26. Just now he does not know where the next book will come from but he will shortly graft his way through a reportage in South America, sick and complaining in the rough hotels, eating fish through the meat-producing countries as a remnant of his Hindu background, brooding on the iniquities of the colonial life and possibly even greater iniquities attendant on its departure. Could I in the whole of recorded history think of anything more savage than the behaviour of the Moslems in Bengal? It gave a further twist to the obsessional screw.