Uniting our experiments with American-style crosswords and our speculation regarding Donald Trump’s response if he were ever to see how he is used as cryptic fodder: a treat as tiny as the man’s self-awareness. First, there was this cartoon from the New Yorker (whose new crossword continues to astonish): Today's daily cartoon by Brendan Loper: https://t.co/XHuWHL6TcZ pic.twitter.com/mzYRwptyuQ Then, in response, this puzzle. The setter known locally as Brendan enjoyed the cartoon and constructed this puzzle in response as a gift to the cartoonist, another Brendan: The crosswording Brendan has pointed me to this video with regard to one clue ... ... and reassures me that the “Teresa” spelling is all part of the fun. On which subject: that same leader is described by a colleague as “a sphinx without a riddle” in a lengthy Reuters piece that tries to explain Britain’s prime minister to international readers. The phrase is especially chilling to crossword solvers: if, like Oedipus, your options are a) being strangled and eaten or b) marrying your parent, you at least want a little wordplay beforehand. The profile stresses how little sleep the PM is afforded and so has a pleasing echo in this contemporaneous clue from the quiptic, the Guardian’s stepping-stone puzzle for quick solvers who are tempted to go full cryptic ... 27ac Proficiency of PM snatching disturbed rest (7)[Surname of the prime minister (“PM”) containing anagram of (“disturbed”) REST][MAY containing STER] ... where Matilda is looking for the answer MASTERY. In anniversary news, regular readers will know from his Meet the Setter that Gaff is partial to challenging us with a themed puzzle. Solvers reading the introduction to his FT puzzle, “A birthday puzzle”, may be none the wiser when staring at entries like this one ... 9ac With new Conservative leader, easier to obscure things (9) [Anagram of (“new”) first letter of (“leader”) CONSERVATIVE with EASIERTO][Anagram of CEASIERTO] ... where “obscure” is a sneaky adjective, not a noun, and the answer is ESOTERICA, and this one ... 10ac What barman calls sound flavour (5)[Soundalike (“sound”) of what a bartender might call][Soundalike of TIME] ... for THYME and wonder whose birthday we are talking about. Other entries (or, rather, pairs of adjacent entries) are more revealing: it doesn’t take a long look at the right edge for the name of a certain foundling to reveal himself, and then you notice that there is another name in the middle if you run ESOTERICA and THYME together – and so we know whose birthday we are celebrating (I also recommend these infographics). Incidentally, if you, like me, were startled by the apparent lack of a single puzzle themed around the World Cup, there was in fact one that I was forbidden to mention by our stringent code of ethics: it was a prize puzzle. So, I can now recommend Clash, an Enigmatic Variations puzzle by Samuel. If you are going to solve it, skip the next paragraph. If, for whatever fine reason, you are not going to solve it, you may still like to hear about Samuel’s astonishing feat: between 9.38pm on 11 July (the end of the second semi-final) and the morning of 15 July (publication), he created a puzzle that contained the names of the finalists hidden in the diagonals, the phrase FIFTY-TWO YEARS OF HURT hidden in the clues and, at rock bottom of the grid, IT’S NOT COMING HOME. Allowing for test-solving and the little business of getting the Sunday Telegraph printed, this is topical setting at its finest. The setter known locally as Enigmatist (Meet the Setter) has now created 128 puzzles in the Telegraph Toughie series. Being Enigmatist (or rather, over there, Elgar), he puts that versatile number through its paces. Here is a clue that doesn’t spoil the theme (which reveals itself gradually and seems to morph into another): 12ac Genius? No time to come to our country without it! (9)[Prisoners’ synonym for “time”, then name of our country without letters IT (“it”)][BIRD, then BRITAIN – IT] “Bird” for a prison sentence is one of those etymologically disappointing pieces of criminal slang. Aware that the point of thieves’ cant is to keep the rest of the world out, I hope that each piece of lingo will come with a surprising and intricate tale that reveals to the straight world some extraordinary aspect of life outside the law. But “bird” is rhyming slang for “time”, in itself not such an arcane term for “prison time”. We have nothing against rhyming slang at Crossword Blog, although we prefer it in seemingly infinite chains of re-rhyming; indeed, this Guardian piece conveys why kangas are prison warders, aprils are weapons and polo means penniless (extra points if you can work them out before reading). For the longer tales, the best place to go is Crooked Talk by slang lexicography hero Jonathon Green. Its pages turn faster than a Lee Child as we see how criminal argot moves from the Russell-Brandisms of the Victorian age to the curt demotic of today. And what could be more delightful to a lexicographer of slang than to report that the very word “slang” appears in the 1740s as a noun meaning nonsense and a verb meaning to cheat, to swindle or to defraud. From the same era comes the subject of our next challenge, for which my Oxford English Dictionary gives 111 senses, among them “swindled”. Readers, this should stretch even your indefatigable imaginations: how would you clue DONE? Many thanks for your clues for FIAT. I do hope there is not a Curse of Crossword Blog, as suggested by Cmiall, who oded “Marchionne’s legacy is primarily fixing Italian automotive technology” in a posthumous tribute. It is typically a pleasure to see a clue that adds letters to the answer only to take them away elegantly, as Harlobarlo does in “Proclamation takes rights away from Friar Tuck’s leader”. Our thanks to Lizard, too, for skipping the usual explanation concerning “Exhaust gas no end of danger, stifling one in car”. This blog does not offer financial advice, so you can take or leave Schroduck’s injunction “Invest capital in oil, not Bitcoin”. The runners-up are Chrisbeee’s hopeful “Car initially failed its annual test” and ComedyPseudonym’s “Order raffia tote bags”; the winner is Croquem’s misleading but fair “Sanction a feeding frenzy”. Kudos to Croquem. Please leave any entries for this week’s competition and your pick of the broadsheet cryptics below. As so often, we have a surface reading where one part of speech is disguised as another, in this case managing the job even though the figurative “lead up the garden path” is surely more common than the literal. Nominated by reader Tony Collman, it is the Times’s: 4ac A stroll in the park leads up garden path to gorge (4,5)[Synonym for “leads up garden path”, then synonym for “gorge”][KIDS + STUFF] The rest of this devious puzzle, however, is not child’s play. You are welcome for those nine squares.