When most of England was glued to the World Cup and gleefully chucking beer around in feverish fanzones, club football seemed to recede into some proper perspective, where the national team’s success would always be the highest priority. Yet one month later, as this summer’s transfer window closed, it seemed almost party‑pooping even to mention that the overwhelming majority of Premier League signings are from overseas and to wonder at the effect this will have on opportunities for English players. The Premier League is so financially dominant now, its £8.4bn 2016-19 TV deals are double those of the next richest league, the Bundesliga , and a similar bounty is all but sealed up to 2022. So its clubs can buy and pay seductive wages to almost any player they fancy, apart from the topmost stars still residing at the rich handful of clubs in Madrid, Barcelona, Munich, Paris and Turin. The newly curtailed summer window gives the impression of relative calm, due to Manchester City mostly sticking with their squad of champions, United not twisting to José Mourinho’s demands and Tottenham opting out completely as they contemplate the vast expense of their new 62,000 seat stadium. Newcastle’s owner, the Sports Direct boss Mike Ashley, has dragged supporters and Rafael Benítez through his familiar parsimonious gamble on survival – but elsewhere spending has been huge. Liverpool were the biggest net spenders by far, the American owners, Fenway Sports Group, backing Jürgen Klopp to build on last season’s third-place finish and dazzling run to the Champions League final; the club’s income elevated by those performances and the new Anfield main stand. Unlike their Goodison Park rivals, who spent £28.5m in the final hour to put Yerry Mina in an Everton centre back’s shirt, Liverpool could sit back, arms folded, on deadline day having already spent a net £158m. Goalkeeper Alisson from Roma (£65m), was joined by midfielder Naby Keïta from RB Leipzig (£52.8m), Monaco midfielder Fabinho (£40m) and Xherdan Shaqiri, signed for £13m from Stoke after a strong World Cup for Switzerland. Liverpool’s all‑English midfield last season of Jordan Henderson, James Milner and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain – until his injury in the Champions League semi final home leg against Roma – was much admired, as was Trent Alexander-Arnold’s remarkably assured promotion to the first team. Amid the promise of the forthcoming season at Anfield, it will be important to watch whether appearances by English players diminish and if any more academy graduates follow Alexander-Arnold’s trail. Chelsea broke the world record fee for a goalkeeper, spending a barely believable £71.6m on Kepa Arrizabalaga from Athletic Bilbao, and also paid £50.4m to beat City to the Brazilian-born Italian midfielder Jorginho from Napoli. It is a sign of the money-soaked times that City’s signing of Riyad Mahrez for fully £60m barely registered. United, despite Mourinho’s grumbles, still spent £43.7m on the Brazil midfielder Fred from Shakhtar Donetsk and £19m on defender Diogo Dalot from Porto. Arsenal, who closed the transfer window not with a signing to stir supporters’ souls but with the news, dispiriting to many, that Stan Kroenke is to take full control of the club, nevertheless spent a net £63.8m. But the super-sized scale of Premier League finances are perhaps illustrated most spectacularly by the spending lower down. West Ham, needing to raise cheers from a deeply alienated crowd at their converted London Stadium, spent a staggering net £76.5m, including a club record £33.5m for the Brazil midfielder Felipe Anderson from Lazio. Bournemouth, fondly-viewed as a lower division club for their whole history until promotion in 2015,  have 11,464 seats in their stadium yet received £111m TV money last season and this summer paid £25m for the midfielder Jefferson Lerma from Levante. Brighton, after staying up last season, spent a net £44.3m. The promoted clubs signalled their intent to establish themselves, Shahid Khan’s Fulham spending an extraordinary net £74.5m and Wolverhampton continuing to draw eye-catching names, with a heavy Jorge Mendes influence, to Molineux. The Premier League money magnet has attracted another wave of overseas talent from the great clubs of Italy, Spain France and Portugal, promising excitement and a football spectacle that will generate yet more money. But the clubs need also to remember the inspiration drawn from World Cup performances by lads from Chesterfield, Sheffield and Chingford and not neglect the talent at home.