Michaela Coel has called on the media industry to do more to protect young writers, after sharing the story of how she faced pressure to deliver scripts after being sexually assaulted. The screenwriter and actor, who has just been commissioned to write a new show for the BBC on sexual assault, described how she had been working overnight on a script before heading out to meet a friend for a drink. She said she woke up several hours later at the production company’s office and realised something was wrong: “I had a flashback. It turned out I’d been sexually assaulted by strangers. The first people I called after the police, before my own family, were the producers.” Coel said the production company staff then began “teetering back and forth between the line of knowing what normal human empathy is and not knowing what empathy is at all”. One member of staff allegedly warned Coel that the company would not automatically suggest delaying the script deadline and the writer would have to demand it. Eventually a deal was reached, with the company paying for her to attend a private clinic for therapy sessions. “I asked to push the deadline back and for the channel to be informed as to why,” she said. “The deadline was pushed back, but the head of comedy never found out why.” Coel made the comments as part of the 43rd MacTaggart lecture, the prestigious speech delivered by a prominent industry figure during the annual Edinburgh television festival. The 30-year-old described her journey through the television industry, from growing up in the City of London to being accepted to drama school and winning the Bafta for Breakthrough Talent by writing material that appealed to “misfits” like her. Sarah Ward of the Bectu union said that Coel’s treatment was “absolutely shocking, and totally unacceptable”. “Unfortunately we’re still hearing of far too many experiences of sexual harassment across the industry,” she said. “Our recent survey of Bectu members working in media and entertainment found that nearly two-thirds of women had experienced some form of sexual harassment, and this rose to 82% for those who are 30 and under.” Coel also described the experience of meeting an anonymous London TV producer at a party after winning a writing award. “I said, ‘Oh yes, nice to meet you.’ ‘Do you know how much I want to fuck you right now?’ was his immediate choice of response. I turned from him and went home so quickly I left my plus one. He called, upset. Someone called him a nigger. It was the same man. Could my silence have encouraged this producer to push boundaries with women and black people further? This thought is uncomfortable, but I cannot block it out. I have to face it.” The scriptwriter and actor drew on her experience of the industry and said the process of producing her award-winning sitcom Chewing Gum was sometimes torturous, while parts of the second series were “despised” by Channel 4. “I was on set all day even when I wasn’t in a scene. Doing rewrites in the trailer; assessing where I could save the producers money despite having no clue how much that money was.” She also recalled finding all the minority ethnic actors on set confined to one backstage trailer, while a white actor was given an entire trailer to themselves: “I asked the actors why they agreed to share. They just wanted it to work, their belief in the job only matched by their anxiety of losing it. I apologised. I told them we were working for a reputable channel, and a reputable production company, and they wouldn’t dream of recasting anyone for wanting a private space to prepare and change. “I’ve never accused anyone at work of racism but I’ve been urged to understand someone ‘isn’t racist’ on every job I’ve acted in since, just by pointing out possible patterns, tendencies. When I agree they aren’t racist, but suggest they may be thoughtless on the matter, it doesn’t go down very well. But if you’re not racist, or thoughtless about race, what other thing can you be?” Coel said she had now learned how to navigate the television industry but had decided to speak out for the benefit of the next generation of writers. “I’ve decided to embrace as many as I can, and be brave enough to update my beliefs, and discover I’m not always right. What a brilliant thing, to discover we’ve been wrong about some things, what a brilliant thing it is to grow. “We’re all gonna die. Instead of standing here, wishing for the good ol’ glory days, about the way life used to be before Mark Zuckerberg graduated, I’m going to try to be my best; to be transparent; and to play whatever part I can, to help fix this house. What part will you play?” Responding to Coel’s lecture, Channel 4’s director of programmes, Ian Katz, said: “Michaela’s MacTaggart is a powerful and important wake-up call. She has raised vital questions about opportunity, support, transparency and inclusion that as an industry we must all address with urgency. The experiences she has described in her lecture are not what we would want for anyone working with Channel 4 or any part of our industry. “She has opened an honest debate about how we ensure that writers and performers, whatever their backgrounds, feel respected and heard. We want an industry that truly celebrates difference and is accessible to all, so broadcasters and producers now need to work in partnership to act on the issues she has raised.”