A child and two men have been shot at while surfing off a remote New Zealand beach in an incident of suspected “localism” by territorial figures defending their waves. Two men and a 14-year-old boy reported they had been surfing at Te Maika point on the Taharoa coast – a remote spot on the west coast of the North Island – when they were fired upon by two people who had concealed themselves on the shore. Police confirmed they are investigating the incident, which was reported to them on Thursday morning. The trio originally believed the first two shots were misfires from a nearby animal hunter, but when a third shot landed within metres of the teenager they realised they were being deliberately targeted. The surfers then spotted two people on the bank – who they believed to be men – who began shouting abuse at them, Stuff reported. Police would like to remind people that the ocean is for everyone’s use and enjoyment. “The identity of the people on the ridgeline is unknown at this stage,” said Senior Constable Jonathan Maoate. “We are ensuring the victims are supported and are making a number of enquiries to establish the circumstances. This includes speaking with people in the community.” “Police would like to remind people that the ocean is for everyone’s use and enjoyment.” According to Stuff, the shooting is not the first incident of violence in region, with a fisherman allegedly shot at while fishing in the area. Both incidents are believed to be cases of localism, in which residents resent the presence of tourists or outsiders at local beaches or breaks without their invitation. The term is not unique to New Zealand, and has been used to define an aggressive territorial streak found in surfing communities across the world. Typically, a group declares a particular beach “local” and uses varying levels of menace to deter outsiders, dubbed “trolls”, forcing them onto crowded, non-local beaches. Tourism is New Zealand’s biggest export earner, and last year there were 3.78 million international visitor arrivals, a 4% increase on the previous year. Daniel Kereopa, from the popular surfing town of Raglan, said the point was known as invitation-only and locals could be staunch in defending the slice of paradise. “Ever since I have known the place and the people that have cared for it, it’s generally been by invitation,” Kereopa told Stuff, with access granted by requesting the landowners’ permission to travel over the beach or by water. “It’s one of those places that is still New Zealand – not affected by tourists, not promoted. People live there because they are born for that land and, unfortunately, it’s brought some attention by what’s happened down there. “We all have rights to areas of our coastline – there are people who really care for their land and keep it as is ... it’s one place that is so unique, you don’t have to hassle anyone for the waves.”