Small scuffles broke out Saturday, and a reporter was injured, as police in Portland, Oregon, deployed “flash bang” devices and other means to disperse hundreds of rightwing protesters and anti-fascist counter-protesters. Fears of violent protest at the rally had been rising. The rightwing group Patriot Prayer went into their rally promising to carry guns in a city park, and to attempt to infiltrate the ranks of counter-protesters. On Saturday just before 2pm PT, police in riot gear ordered people to leave an area downtown, saying demonstrators had thrown rocks and bottles at officers. A reporter for the Oregonian/OregonLive was injured when he was struck by a projectile during the rowdy protests. Eder Campuzano was bloodied Saturday afternoon but said in a tweet published on the newspaper’s website that he was “okay” and was going to get evaluated. There were arrests, but it wasn’t immediately clear how many. “Get out of the street,” police announced via loudspeaker. There was also debris left in the streets by various protesters. Demonstrators aligned with Patriot Prayer and an affiliated group, the Proud Boys, gathered around midday in a riverfront park. The hundreds of opposing demonstrators faced them from across the street, holding banners and signs. Many of them yelled out chants such as “Nazis go home”. Officers stood in the middle of the four-lane boulevard, essentially forming a wall to keep the two sides separated. The counter-protesters were made up of a coalition of labor unions, immigrant rights advocates, democratic socialists and other groups. They included people dressed as clowns and a brass band blaring music. In Facebook videos in the days leading up to the rally, Joey Gibson, a rightwing Senate candidate who founded Patriot Prayer, said that “there’s nothing strange” about the group’s habit of carrying concealed firearms into political protests. He also said that the Proud Boy Russell Schultz would be coordinating attempts to infiltrate the ranks of masked “black bloc” anti-fascist protesters. Portland police bureau (PPB) announced Friday that there would be a significant law enforcement presence at the site, and that they would carry out weapons checks at the entrances to Tom McCall Waterfront Park. A PPB spokesman told the Guardian, however, that they would not confiscate firearms from holders of Oregon concealed handgun licenses (CHL). Only CHL holders may carry loaded weapons in public areas in Portland. On 30 June, Gibson’s last rally degenerated into a riot, and the incident became a cause célèbre on the right. On Saturday, as people gathered they saw a significant police presence that included bomb-sniffing dogs and weapons screening checkpoints. Many of those gathering are expected to be from out of state. After questioning from the Guardian, the City of Portland released a legal opinion from the city attorney that said that an anti-paramilitary statute was “of limited utility but it is certainly one to keep in mind as facts develop”. The city attorney added that there was no evidence of any group planning or training in the unlawful use of firearms, but that “it is a tool to keep in mind should we in the future have evidence that a group is intending to engage in these behaviors”. The chair of the Multnomah County GOP, James Buchal, called on Portland’s mayor, Ted Wheeler, to “provide protection” for Gibson and his rally in a press release. Buchal, who last year invited militia groups to protect Republican events in the city, said that the mayor had given Portland over to “leftist mobs”. Far-right media outlets, such as Alex Jones’s conspiracist Infowars network, descended on Portland on Friday. Infowars videos criticised Portland’s homeless, and demonised “antifa” protesters. Almost a year on from the death of the activist Heather Heyer, as she protested a gathering of white nationalists in Virginia, some groups are warning the protest on Saturday risks turning into “another Charlottesville”. Saturday’s rally is the 16th event organised in Portland by the group since April 2017. A Patriot Prayer rally in June was declared a riot by Portland police after counter-protesters and rally-goers exchanged missiles. Officers from the Department of Homeland Security fired nonlethal rounds and the march through downtown Portland degenerated into ugly brawls. Video from the event shows large groups of rightwing protesters kicking and punching lone, prone counter-protesters. One video, widely shared online by rightwingers, shows the Proud Boy Ethan Nordean flooring an anti-fascist assailant with a single punch. As at previous rallies, Patriot Prayer claimed leftwing provocation.