Visitors may wish to cross their fingers for luck before walking under a ladder into Spellbound, a new exhibition on the history of magic, at the Ashmolean museum in Oxford, to encounter a very dead cat, a unicorn’s horn, a medium’s ectoplasm and padlocks cut from the Centenary Bridge in Leeds when their weight foretold not everlasting love but the imminent collapse of the whole structure. The first object in the exhibition is a silver bottle that, if opened, will unleash dire but unspecified consequences. The curators are of course entirely unsuperstitious – despite the double life of museum director Xa Sturgis as a magician, the Great Xa – but they were nevertheless very careful not to dislodge the stopper of the surprisingly elegant silver bottle. It is on loan from the nearby Pitt Rivers museum, which was given it in 1915 by an old woman in Sussex. She warned: “They do say there be a witch in this and if you’re let un out there be a peck o’ trouble.” It has never been opened. The oldest objects are medieval, including a desiccated human heart in a silver case, but some are surprisingly recent, including a little medicine bottle washed up from the Thames in 1988, containing human teeth, clove oil, and coins dating from 1982 – presumably a spell attempted for somebody in mortal anguish from toothache. The now ubiquitous custom of attaching padlocks with love messages to bridges, their keys thrown into the water so they cannot be removed – at least until the maintenance engineer arrives with bolt cutters – is quite new, first recorded only about 15 years ago, Sturgis pointed out. “Although we live in a rational age, we do still think magically,” he said. “Not many of us would want to take a photograph of our mothers and then gouge the eyes out – just in case.” The exhibition includes just such an unnerving object, a 19th-century rag doll of an expensively dressed woman, found with a stiletto stabbed right through its blank face where its left eye would be. The exhibition features paintings, medieval sculptures, prints by Albrecht Dürer, rare manuscripts and contemporary art installations including a very magical shimmering body of a man, formed by the artists Ackroyd & Harvey by growing aluminium sulphate crystals. There are also some very modest not to say disgusting objects, including a toad pierced with thorns, and a lizard’s leg mounted in silver. When co-curator Malcolm Gaskill found a length of Helen Duncan’s ectoplasm in a Cambridge University library, he was so excited he wafted it in the air to see if it really looked like a spirit – and was severely rebuked by the librarian. Duncan was the last woman in England convicted and imprisoned in 1944 before the 17th century Witchcraft Act was finally repealed in 1951. The ectoplasm was really a length of artificial silk – the description by the celebrated ghost buster Harry Price of the condition of one length of fabric that had been used in a seance, and his guess as to how she managed to conceal it, is too disgusting to quote. The Ashmolean museum is better known for high brow and high art exhibitions, including recent shows on Raphael and Rembrandt. This is the first to attract a reviewer from Sabat magazine on witches and magic, and a gallery attendant joked that they are expecting the entire population of Glastonbury to tip up. Spellbound, Magic, ritual and witchcraft, Ashmolean museum in Oxford until 6 January, 2019