Nascar’s CEO, Brian France, has taken a leave of absence after he was arrested on Sunday night for driving while intoxicated and criminal possession of a controlled substance. The 56-year-old was held overnight and released on Monday morning, according to police in Sag Harbor Village on New York’s Long Island. He is scheduled to appear in court on 14 September. “Mr France was observed operating a 2017 Lexus northbound on Main Street failing to stop at a duly posted stop sign,” read a police statement. “Upon traffic stop, it was determined that Mr France was operating said vehicle in an intoxicated condition. Upon search of his person, due to a lawful arrest, Mr France was in possession of oxycodone pills.” According to police, France’s blood alcohol levels were more than twice the legal limit and he struggled to keep his balance during a sobriety test. France became CEO of Nascar in 2003. His grandfather William HG France founded the organisation in 1948, while his father, Bill Jr, also served as CEO until he stepped down in 2000. “We are aware of an incident that occurred last night and are in the process of gathering information. We take this as a serious matter and will issue a statement after we have all of the facts,” Nascar said in a statement. Nascar’s substance abuse policy states that: “[Nascar] prohibits the misuse of alcohol, prescription drugs, and any other substance used in a manner that affects safety or impacts the integrity of the competition, including – but not limited to –illegal or performance enhancing substances.” In 2006, France crashed into a tree while parking his car at a Florida restaurant. France said he had been drinking a soda at the time and had accidentally bumped into the tree. A witness claimed she had seen France speeding before the incident and that he had fallen “over his own feet” as he left his car. France was not charged over the incident, although the local police chief later ordered an investigation to see if the Nascar CEO had been given favourable treatment due to his position.