Elijah Quashie, better known as The Chicken Connoisseur and now star of new Channel 4 show Peng Life, is almost supernaturally calm. It’s mid-London heatwave with temperatures hitting 33C, everyone is packed into a hot room at Channel 4’s offices and sweating through their clothes, but Quashie sits perfectly still, wearing a coat – A COAT! (a cream-coloured Nike Windcheater as it happens) – and is not even breaking a sweat. He’s not fazed by anything, from Star Wars actor John Boyega tweeting that he loved his YouTube series The Pengest Munch (“Wish I had this growing up! Lmaaooooooooo”) to the 175 boxes of trainers taking over at home in Tottenham (“I need to lose, like, 70,” he says). In fact, the only thing that gets him heated is chicken – specifically, Nando’s. Unlike the Love Island rejects who beg the company on Twitter for its legendary Black Card, which gives VIPs free chicken, Quashie is not fussed and wouldn’t accept a card. “Nando’s? The last time I ate from there I vomited,” he says. “I got down to the bone, I was seeing pink bits, and then it all just came up. My body speaks for itself.” He was, however, travelling at 90mph in a Lamborghini on the set of Peng Life at the time. Quashie started his YouTube series The Pengest Munch in 2015, which features detailed reviews of chicken shops in London, from the burger sauce to the seating to the construction of the burgers. Each episode, he visits a restaurant and order the same thing: chips, a chicken strip burger and wings. The worst crimes? Chips that don’t absorb the salt, wings that are pink near the bone and badly constructed burgers with “bare lettuce”, which will be rated “dead”, “problematic” “lacking” or a let down for the “bossman” (chicken shop manager). The most charming part about his reviews (one memorable line: “The burger caught me off-guard, ’cos it was hench … but man definitely chewed on a bone”) is their earnestness – he genuinely loves chicken shops and just wants them to serve good food. And he doesn’t feel bad about giving bad reviews. “I don’t care,” he says. “If you put out food that doesn’t bang, that was your decision. And it’s my opinion. I have to keep the integrity of my palette.” In 2016, his show went viral, and support from celebs including Radio 1’s Charlie Sloth led to TV appearances, getting flown to New York to sample the city’s chicken shops with A$AP Mob member Bari and more than 41m YouTube views. There’s a book, The Pengest Munch: In Search of the Nation’s 50 Favourite Chicken Establishments and he’s in a Samsung phone advert. And now he’s got his own show, Peng Life, where he’s joined by friends Nelson and Wilson to rate and review expensive haircuts, kebabs and watches. Celebs such as Jodie Kidd and Rachel Riley also appear, making you wonder: when was the last time Jodie Kidd ate at Chicken Cottage? Clearly, the brand was the plan from the start. Calling himself The Chicken Connoisseur, Quashie started a limited company of the same name, and adopted a “look” in videos. “A lot of people when they go to restaurants, they’ll dress up in shirts and ties,” he says. “I thought when I go [to chicken shops], this will be something special for me, where I dress up in a shirt and tie. I liked the juxtaposition.” It might seem as if he’s trying to highlight a class gap and pushing back on the snobby elitism of food critics going for £800 meals in Mayfair but, in his world, they simply don’t exist. He doesn’t read restaurant reviews or follow bloggers or influencers on Instagram. Restaurant critics Giles Coren and Jay Rayner are fans. Did he even know who they were when they Tweeted about him last year? “Nope, and I still don’t.” Savage. When he appeared on ITV News he was asked if he “ever imagined being a food critic”. He calmly replied: “Yeah, that was the plan from the beginning. If I start being a critic, I’m a critic.” He is also unlikely to be backing Jamie Oliver or food campaigners worrying that chicken shops are fuelling the childhood obesity crisis. “It’s down to the parents,” he says. “When I was in school there were some hench guys and they [practically] lived at the chicken shop. I’m sure those kids are eating a lot more Haribo and Pringles and doughnuts than [from] chicken shops.” And vegans? “Nah. Deep down, they want to be us! They’re making vegan chicken!” Nelson, his co-host, who is sitting in on the interview with twin Wilson, chips in: “The more vegans there are, the more meat there is for us. Keep going with the cause!” You can’t fault their logic. Quashie started because a friend, Elishama Udorok, was doing a BTec (a vocational qualification at college) in media and “was into cameras and stuff. We’d always go to the chicken shop at lunchtime and come back and debate which one was best.” The series, he says, was made for “people like me, my friends, people who I went to school with”. But taking a web series from online to TV is notoriously difficult – just ask Dapper Laughs. The more successful ones (Broad City, High Maintenance, People Just Do Nothing) worked because their creators retained a lot of behind-the-scenes control, while others failed because their niche audience (Miranda Sings) weren’t willing to follow them to TV. Quashie’s motivation when he started his YouTube channel, he says, was to be his own boss. And because of that, the move to TV sounds as if it has been a difficult one. “It wasn’t the plan to go to TV. When Channel 4 approached me in April 2017, it was like, meh,” he shrugs. “But there wasn’t anything more pressing to do. At the time, I was thinking they’ve obviously seen and chosen me to host the show because they want what I have made on YouTube to be brought to their channel. That’s exactly what they explained it to be – but on set it was a different case. In the end, it turned out to be something I should have seen coming but I didn’t.” While making The Pengest Munch, he and Udorok were in total creative control, but with Channel 4, “obviously there’s a director and a producer and they’ll have scripts and things they think they need to put in there, and I’m like: ‘Nah, you guys don’t understand how it’s going to look, it’s going to look better if I do it like this.’” He adds: “It was a case of: ‘Boy you have to do this, this is what Channel 4 wants,’ and if this my job and I have to do it – all right.” He hasn’t seen the first show yet, he says. “I’m not nervous, but I just want to see what it looks like. From being on set and [the producer and director] thinking and talking differently [to us] … I’m not sure if they’re going to leave in the best bits.” Whatever he thinks of the final product, could Peng Life become a hit, piggybacking on to a trend? Chicken shops have been co-opted by the mainstream in recent years: from rap shout-outs to YouTube series Chicken Shop Date and Drake, Kendall Jenner and Beyoncé endorsing Nando’s, chicken shops are inescapable. But restaurants are also disappearing as London’s working-class areas get gentrified. Chicken shops are becoming, well, Soho House Group’s Chicken Shops. “Places like that, they can’t even make the same chicken – it doesn’t taste as nice. It’s just not worth the money. Everyone there, they could go to a regular little chicken shop, spend £8 and they’re feeding the whole family,” Quashie says. “Chicken shops ARE the culture,” Quashie’s other co-host, Wilson, says, essential spaces for London’s teenagers to hang out. “They’re as well integrated into communities as a launderette or a dry cleaners,” adds Quashie. “No one makes them a big thing, but they’re always there when you need them. And at the correct ones – not the gentrified ones – for a couple of pounds, you get a pretty decent substantial meal and you can’t get that anywhere else.” Quashie is strangely defensive about his age, which is a bit weird, like when your mum gets to a certain age and pretends to be “29 again!” every birthday. He won’t confirm it, saying it “isn’t a big deal. I could be 16, I could be 46. It doesn’t make any difference.” Clearly he wants to appeal to his core audience of teenagers on YouTube, but records at Companies House list his birthdate as May 1993, making him 25. While he looks incredibly young and could easily pass as a schoolboy, meeting him in person, and having interviewed hundreds of forgettable boybands filled with awkward, fidgeting teenagers, Quashie’s intelligent, fluent, carefully considered answers and steady eye contact is a dead giveaway. Despite his success, he says he’s “not even close” to being a millionaire, but YouTube fame means that he now lives a bit like a budget Beyoncé. “I get seen and spotted everywhere, I can’t do the normal stuff,” he says. “Going to a shop or the post office and not getting hassled, that is a privilege I don’t have any more. It’s long. If I’m walking past a school, I get caught.” Sometimes when viral stars get TV deals, the moment can pass before the show gets on air, but Peng Life commissioner Becky Cadman isn’t worried as he’s literally stopping traffic. “When you go out with Elijah, it’s pretty full on. I went to the barber’s with him and this dad who was driving opened the car door, got all his kids out and they were all wanting a picture with him.” She hopes that, as well as the “16-35 demographic”, parents will want to watch the show with their kids. But his laidback attitude doesn’t always work: he was criticised in January 2017 when it emerged a rapper who appeared on the webseries had been jailed for assault and was on the sex offenders register. When asked about it, you’d think it would be a good moment for Quashie to distance himself or point out how certain corners of the media are determined to drag down the career of any young black male enjoying success. Instead, he keeps things vague. “At the end of the day, me and my friends still do what we do and we’re still successful with it. [A headline like that] doesn’t take anything away from a good episode.” Even though he’s got his own TV show, Quashie says he doesn’t watch TV (apart from Match of the Day) and sees himself returning to YouTube as his next move. “Channel 4 wants to rope in my demographic – on to their channel and into TV again. But for me there’s not much reciprocating. I don’t expect pensioners to be like: ‘Boom, yeah, I’m going to jump on YouTube, set up an account and subscribe.’” He needs a new cameraman – Udorok has got a job at Unilad – and then he plans to go international. “I might take a trip around Asia or Africa,” he says. He’ll probably skip having a Nando’s at the airport, though. Peng Life starts on Friday 10 August, 11.05pm, Channel 4