Art is more often a conversation than a monologue. Great and not-so-great artists have always wanted to surround themselves with paintings and objects that can speak to their own creative efforts. The most famous example of this desire perhaps is Henri Matisse, who as a young and struggling painter bought a small canvas by Paul Cézanne, Three Bathers, in Paris in 1899, for the then enormous sum of 1,200 French francs. He pawned his wife, Amelie’s, jewellery to help fund the downpayment and paid the dealer in ongoing instalments. For the subsequent 37 years Cezanne’s painting would be the first thing Matisse looked at in his studio each morning. Other artists have been more eclectic than Matisse in what they chose to surround themselves with. On the death of Edgar Degas in 1917 more than a thousand of the paintings he owned were auctioned, including masterpieces by Ingres and Delacroix and Van Gogh. The first Royal Academician, Joshua Reynolds, lined his walls with Rembrandts and Poussins, in the belief that some of their genius might rub off. Lucian Freud had a Corot over his mantelpiece, as well as numerous works by his friend Frank Auerbach in his house on Kensington Church Street, London. Not all the work that artists decide to live with is chosen for its profundity, or its market value, or its directly inspirational qualities, however. Often, as the interviews with contemporary artists on these pages suggest, the paintings and sculptures and drawings they co-exist with in their homes and studios have a sentimental significance; they are gifts or collaborations or a reminder of friendships that have been important to their life or to their practice. Like the rest of us, I guess, they have ongoing struggles with William Morris’s dictum – “have nothing in your house that you don’t know to be useful or believe to be beautiful” – and they live with the results. Tim Adams A fine layer of clay dust coats everything in Rebecca Warren’s east London studio, leaving its mark on anyone who enters there. Nominated for the Turner prize in 2006, Warren is best known for her voluptuous, craggy clay sculptures but she also makes collages and vitrines of intriguing found objects. She once said that an artist’s studio is “like a slightly crazy shrine to your own thought processes”, and here beneath the dust lie pompoms and cat books, clay lumps and bright balls of wool. When we meet, Warren is about to move house, her art collection carefully bubble-wrapped in preparation, but she’s keen to talk about one special painting, Hours (2010-2016), so has hung it here to discuss over cups of tea. Tell me about this painting.It’s made by Fergal Stapleton, whom I met when he was at Goldsmiths and I was at Chelsea, around 1992. It’s great I met him because he had a very different way of approaching making art and I was finding it difficult after I left Goldsmiths, where I did my BA. His approach was that you could choose a material, clay for instance, and let the art develop out of that, and the meaning would follow later – because you had something brewing in your head anyway. You didn’t have to start with the meaning. We used to do collaborations together, installations in spaces. We would often turn up with very little stuff and try to make something very specific to the space. Do you think you both had to go through that collaborative process to then move in your own directions?It does seem like that. Over the years we went on different paths and I wanted to have more of a studio practice and to be able to make sculptures, things that I could send out into the world. Why have you chosen this particular work of his?When Fergal showed the series that this is part of, at Carl Freedman gallery, I suddenly thought he’d really hit on something. The paintings looked old, like they could be 16th-century or something, but mixed with this Fargo-esque, Coen brothers-style black comedy. We’re living through quite weird times and this feels like a dark painting in a dark moment. How does it make you feel? It’s compelling. I really enjoy the way he’s used paint. All the paintings in the series have this sort of indefinable thing about them. What are they? What are they doing? I suppose I’ve tried to do this in my own work – to leave the meaning quite open, quite strange and odd. But I’ve found that people try to pin you down. Sometimes I feel like, can’t I just make a sculpture? People are always relating my work to some male artist or bringing it back to some other thing, some other influence. Do you like to surround yourself with art that inspires you? Sometimes it’s quite ineffable, you don’t really know, you just see something you think you could look at for a really long time. I bought a Bill Lynch – he’s an artist who died quite young. He made nature paintings on bits of old ply board. He was interesting partly because he really couldn’t play the game. I think I’m interested in artists who find that quite difficult but are making art against the odds because they can’t do anything else. So for you it’s not just the work but the person behind it that matters?Yes, because the person shows in their work. If you had all the money in the world what art would you own?I love Fischli and Weiss. I’ve found them quite inspirational over the years. At Goldsmiths I saw this picture of a cat by them and I thought: “Wow, how can that be art?” It was liberating. I love Albert Oehlen’s paintings, I’ve got a little work by him. What else have I got? I’ve got a very nice collage by Georgie Hopton. I’ve got a great silkscreen by Christopher Wool which says: “And if you don’t like it you can get the fuck out of my house.” (And if, 1992.) Maybe a Kippenberger would be good? That would make me laugh. What about your own art – do you care about who buys it and where they put it?Yes, but to some extent you have to let that go. It can be tough. Generally I stipulate; something like, if it’s on a plinth then it should stay on a plinth. Sometimes you’ll see your work next to something else and it can be shocking, you’re not sure how it works in that context. What did you have on your walls when you were younger?My mum had a lot of Modigliani posters. Being young, I always used to be embarrassed by the nude women and would close the door if any friends came round. It was funny to go to the Modigliani exhibition at the Tate this year and actually see the paintings because I’d been mortified that everyone would think my mum was strange, and then I realised, okay that was quite cool. And has the stuff that you like to surround yourself with evolved over the years?I remember we had a really fantastic book of [Chaim] Soutine’s work. I was terrified of it when I was a kid and when I look at the works now I think they’re amazing. Maybe I was just so terrified by their brilliance? I had this moment recently where I realised it’s all kind of there, brewing. As a child I drew a lot of doubles all the time, twin ballerinas. What’s strange is that I had forgotten this, and when I was making twin dancers in clay 20, 30 years later, my mum reminded me about those drawings. Were your family quite artistic?My mum was into pottery. I suppose it was quite a bohemian kind of life. I know you’re moving but do you usually have a lot of art and ephemera at home?I’m quite tidy at home. I’m quite particular about that. You want the crazy mess to be in the studio and in the work. Imogen Carter Rebecca Warren’s work will feature in Elisabeth Frink: Humans and Other Animals at Sainsbury Centre for Visual Arts, Norwich, 13 Oct-24 Feb One of the leading figurative artists of her generation, famed for her dramatic canvases depicting the experiences of women, Paula Rego was born in Lisbon and moved to the UK as a teenager where she later attended the Slade School of Art. Here she met her future husband, fellow artist Victor Willing. They lived for some time in Ericeira in Portugal, where Rego had spent much of her childhood, before eventually settling back in London. Willing died from multiple sclerosis in 1988 but Rego still lives in a leafy corner of London in a home packed with books, pictures and mementos. “I’m not particularly good at home decorations,” she says. “My mother was but I don’t really pay any attention to that sort of thing.” Does she, like many artists, hang much of her own work at home? “No,” she says. “Hopefully I sell it!” You’ve picked out a painting by Victor Willing and another below it by Jonathan Leaman. How did these two paintings come to be hanging here?When Vic got very sick he couldn’t work on his large canvases any more and so he painted a series of heads. He could do these in bed. In this room. This one is Head VI. Jonathan’s painting was a present. It’s a sort of homage to Vic so I hung them together. Can you tell me about the two artists?I loved Vic’s work and admired him a great deal. He was a magnificent artist and very helpful to me. Jonathan Leaman is a very extraordinary artist, rather like an outsider artist full of magic and curious creatures. I first met him in 1984. He came to see me at Berry Street in Clerkenwell. I had a studio there with no windows. I was painting on my knees on the floor, doing The Operas, and he said something like “I can do that”, which is funny because it wasn’t at all like what he did. He left a book of drawings outside my door and I showed them to Vic and he was very interested. Jonathan came to visit many times. He and Vic would talk about painting. Jonathan is very knowledgeable and Vic enjoyed their conversations. Jonathan’s father also had MS. What do these paintings mean to you?Victor’s is a picture of bones, a skull head with long blond hair. Incongruous. Gruesome and funny. It’s more scary than comical. It’s magnificent. Vic said they weren’t portraits but impressions of people he’d met or seen. Jonathan’s is about Vic. Vic’s initials are carved into the plinth with the broken windmill. It’s like the windmills we had in Ericeira in Portugal. There’s a rotting apple and broken wings and a dead bird. A gentleman’s glove and a long bloody dagger. It’s beautiful. Both pictures remind me of Vic. What about the other painting by Victor (with a purple neck)? Tell me about that.That’s the last picture he did. Do you have a lot of art at home?There isn’t any space. I have things I’d like to hang but there’s no room. The things in my house are mostly gifts from friends and family. Personal things. If you could have any artwork in your home what would it be?I’d love Picasso’s Minotauromachie... It’s mysterious. When did you first start putting art on your walls?When I had the money. I remember we went to the Royal College of Art and bought one of Hockney’s graduation prints, Kaisarion With All His Beauty. I think it was £7. They sent two by mistake so I sent one back. I bought an Allen Jones around the same time but we sold them both later when we needed the money. Can you remember some of the first things you chose to hang – as a child perhaps? Or a student?I don’t remember hanging anything on my walls. I did sometimes paint on the walls. Once, during the second world war, I decorated the wall behind my mother’s stall when she was knitting items to raise money for British soldiers (my parents were anglophiles). And I painted murals at school. One of the first things I ever bought with Vic was a Goya print. Vic was finally coming to join me in Portugal and we met in Madrid. Has the art, or visual material, that you have at home evolved over the years?I sometimes hang different things but it’s not an evolution. It’s for a change. Are you a collector generally? Or are you a minimalist?What’s that? IC The ground floor of Michael Landy’s house in Shoreditch, which he shares with his partner and fellow YBA artist Gillian Wearing, is a large, open-plan space with desks at either end and a sofa in the middle. Serving as Landy’s “thinking studio” (his “working studio” is up the road in Bethnal Green), it’s where he develops the ideas for his work, which ranges from large-scale installations interrogating western consumerism to small-scale botanical drawings. What’s striking about the studio is the fact that it contains almost no artworks at all. The one exception, hanging above a fireplace, is a sketch by the Swiss artist Jean Tinguely, whom Landy counts as a key influence – Landy’s most famous work, Break Down, in which he destroyed all his worldly belongings, was partly inspired by Tinguely’s self-destructing 1960 work Homage to New York. Tell me about this drawing. Why have you chosen it?I got it as a present when I had a joint exhibition with Jean Tinguely at Tate Liverpool in 2009. It was a really lovely gift, and I’ve got history with Tinguely. In 1982, when I was a textile student in Loughborough, I went to see an exhibition of his at the Tate. He made kinetic machines out of bits of junk, and it was an absolute revelation to me, as a young person, to see people laughing and interacting with these machines. I’ve tried to harness that feeling in some of my own work. This looks like a sketch for one of those machines…This is for Heureka, a piece of public art he made in 1964 [it now stands by the shores of Lake Zurich]. He didn’t make many outdoor pieces, but this was about 8m tall and had moving parts – he’s trying to create a sense of movement here through his marks [on the paper]. It’s a hard-ground etching, you can still see the impression of the plate around it. I never met Tinguely but this kind of represents my whole relationship with him. This is the only artwork hanging in this studio. Do you notice it every day?No, I don’t really notice it, though sometimes it’ll pull me in. I prefer things that I find neutral, I don’t want anything that’s too in-your-face. I don’t have many artworks. I’ve got etchings upstairs, my own etchings, but they don’t ask anything of you. I don’t have things up in my studio, I don’t have references, or postcards. People wouldn’t really know I was an artist. It’s like I’m trying to get rid of any signs of human existence, eradicate it altogether. Why do you have so few artworks on display?It’s something to do with order. That’s why I like to destroy things. People think of destruction as some kind of disordered mess. I actually think I’m trying to create order out of destruction. You’ve destroyed other people’s artworks as part of your work. How did they react?Gary Hume gave me a clown painting before I did Break Down. When he heard I was going to destroy all my worldly belongings, including artworks, he said: “Can I have that painting back, Micky? I’ll give you another one.” I said OK, and he gave me – he told me afterwards – an inferior painting. After he saw Break Down, he said he felt mean-spirited, so he gave me the original painting back. I destroyed it in front of a German film crew. So you did own some artworks prior to Break Down. Were they on your wall?No, they were in drawers or boxes. I’ve never had artwork on the walls. I do have artworks again now, but they’re all in boxes. Are you happy to have them?I forget about having them. You don’t get that glow of ownership?No. It’s funny, because I’m a maker of things. If everyone thought the way I think, the art world would be out of business. Would you feel upset if somebody stole this Tinguely drawing?Not particularly. Not because I don’t… …not because you don’t like it?Yeah. It signifies a lot – about my relationship with Tinguely and how he really inspired me to become an artist in the first place. If Gillian wanted to put art on the walls upstairs, would that bother you?It wouldn’t bother me. But she’s never mentioned it. Which is strange because we’ve been together for 25 years. We’ve certainly never had any of her art on the wall. But she keeps more things than I do. I don’t really keep my own work. Does she have a similar sense of order?No, Gillian’s messy. But over 25 years I’ve kind of curbed that. When we first went out together, she couldn’t keep tops on pens, or tops on bottles in the fridge. We share a studio in Bethnal Green: she’s upstairs, I’m on the ground floor. She’s been on her own in there for the past few weeks, so I’ll have to phone ahead to be sure it’s clean, or reasonably clean before I get there – for my own sanity. She has to do a quick tidy up. If you could have any artwork in your house, what would it be?I’d like Tinguely’s Homage to New York – to be able to put that on in my front room watch it destroy itself all over again in 27 minutes. Although I’d have to clean up the mess afterwards. Killian Fox Michael Landy’s new show, Scaled-Down, is at Thomas Dane Gallery, London, 1 Oct-17 Nov Winner of the 2017 Turner prize, and professor of contemporary art at the University of Central Lancashire, Lubaina Himid lives and works in a handsome terraced house in Preston overlooking the River Ribble. It’s full of interesting objects – wood carvings, tchotchkes and brightly coloured fabrics – arranged about the house with thoughtfulness and care. Her own works, which explore black British identity in vivid paintings and cut-outs, are mostly confined to the studio on the first floor. When curators call up to take a look, they pass – and admire – strategically placed works in the hallway by underexposed artists of Himid’s acquaintance. On this occasion, she has singled out works by Tracy Hill, Rebecca Chesney and Magda Stawarska-Beavan, whose Mother Tongue IV screenprint is the first thing you see when you come through the front door. You’ve picked out a screenprint by Magda Stawarska-Beavan. Tell me about her.She’s a Polish-born artist who is based up here and runs the print room at the university with Tracy Hill. I was keen to talk about her work because not enough conversation goes on about artists working outside London. It was the same with me: I was always showing my work, but it took a Turner prize for the wider public to understand that it existed. Why this particular work?What I love is that I can hear things when I’m looking at it. It’s based on conversations that Magda had with her child from when he was very tiny to when he was three or four. He’s talking about space rockets and stuff in Polish and English, but the English – like the word “spaceship” – is in phonetics. Sometimes, going in and out of this room, I catch a word and it sticks with me. I love the apparent simplicity of it, but also the obsessiveness of printing the actual lines on plain paper and then printing the text line-by-line, not all in one go. You’ve also picked out works by Tracy Hill and Rebecca Chesney. Tell me about them.Tracy’s work is called The Waste. She goes out into the mosslands with a 3D digital scanner, scans the landscape, feeds that into the computer and makes an etched plate. So the end result, even though it comes from something very digital, is very old-fashioned – this is black print on white paper. What you get is the movement and the wetness and the sound of the place – for me it’s a swishing, windy sound. In Rebecca’s work, which she made during a residency at Yorkshire Sculpture Park, she’s drawing the sound of the bees. Do you hear bees as you walk past?I see the drawing more than I hear the bees. Maybe I can hear the sound of the pencil going bzzzzzzzz. None of these artists is interested in the romanticism of motherhood or mossland or bees, they’re very much in touch with the realities of it. They’re not your rural landscape artists, or portrait-of-mother-and-baby types. They’re really bold explorers and investigators. Are there certain types of art that appeal to you but which you wouldn’t want to have in the house?It’s a funny thing, I own a lot of work by black women artists, such as Sonia Boyce and Claudette Johnson, but I keep it at the archive space that I have at the university – I want it to be seen in an academic setting, to be part of a wider network of conversations. Also I don’t like to have too much of my own stuff in the house. It’s disconcerting. So I mostly keep it in my studio. When did you first start putting art on your walls?My mother always had paintings on the wall. She was a textile designer so she was constantly talking about art and beautiful things. She was never very keen on me just sticking up posters, but I was a bit geeky so I had exhibition posters and postcards rather than pop posters, and that was allowed. Mostly they were posters from exhibitions we went to see, starting from when I was six or seven. Have you inherited your mother’s taste?Oh yes – and lots of the things in this house are hers. I think our dream house, our dream interior, are the rooms of Kettle’s Yard in Cambridge: Middle Eastern rugs, comfortable long sofas, bowls of pebbles, white curtains, beautiful porcelain. An English modernist interior I suppose, designed so that it’s lovely to look at, without much thought given to comfort. If you could have any artwork in your house, what would it be?A Bridget Riley, absolutely. I’d have one of her gouache paintings on paper. It might have to go in my bedroom. It wouldn’t be about showing off that I had it, it would be about secretly knowing. There’s a difference. Is there a certain type of artwork that you keep in your bedroom?Strangely, there are works of mine in the bedroom, but they’re not works that I’ve shown. They’re experiments with painting, plants and patterns, very quiet things. I don’t get too agitated about them because they were never intended for something. Otherwise I’m full of doubt: are they good or not? [laughs] It’s that “big ego, low self‑esteem” thing that artists have. KF “I’d probably describe myself as a minimalist – in the way I make pictures at least,” says Birmingham-born mixed-media artist Idris Khan, who was appointed OBE in 2017. “It’s all about reduction.” Funny, then, that the beautiful 1760s townhouse in Islington he shares with his artist wife Annie Morris and their two young children is packed to the rafters with art – from luminous Chris Ofili prints and Francesca Woodman photographs to Ann Stokes pottery in the kitchen and a Conrad Shawcross sculpture on the living room table. Khan’s own early photographs, in which he used layering techniques to draw out the essence of various texts, are mixed in with the rest, as are Morris’s more colourful pieces involving misshapen balls and painted pegs. Amid this joyous cacophony, the work that Khan singles out is perhaps the wildest of the lot: a hallucinatory painting by the Calcutta-born artist Raqib Shaw, whom Khan counts as a close friend. If you’re a minimalist, is the decoration of the house all Annie’s doing?She brought the idea that being surrounded by other artists’ work is inspiring. It can trigger something. And it’s nice because as soon as people come into the house they feel like they’re part of our world. You’ve chosen a painting, Arrival of the Ram King at the Shattered Gates of Xanadu, by Raqib Shaw. Tell me about him.I met Raqib in 2004. He was showing with Victoria Miro and I’d just started with them. We met at a garden party outside the gallery, he looked me up and down and said: “You’re the new Pakistani on the block, are you?” Then he invited me to his studio. He was a few years older and he knew the ins and outs of the art world: how to work with galleries, how not to get taken advantage of – things you don’t necessarily get taught at art school. And it was very inspiring to see him work. He’s really pushing the boundaries of painting. His work’s not for everyone, it’s very mad and surreal. When did you get this painting?It must have been before his first Pace show in New York in 2013. Annie and I were around at his studio all the time, talking late into the night, and he was generous enough to give us this, among other things. He does the outlines in gold and then pours enamel paint into each part and scrapes it around with a porcupine quill, making these amazing swirls. What is going on in the painting?It’s a lot to do with Kashmir, where he grew up – the beauty of it, the war-torn Kashmir. His work is very autobiographical. It starts with him leaving Kashmir, then coming to London and dealing with the art world. Some of the characters, the really evil ones, are from the art world. So maybe the ram king is the artist and the creatures around him are the dealers. It’s very dramatic. What does it make you feel? Do you notice it every day?Yeah, I really do. It has pride of place over the mantelpiece. But for me it’s much more about my friendship with Raqib and the world he inhabits. If you could pick any artwork to have in the house, what would you choose?I’d love to live with an Agnes Martin. Maybe The Islands series, they’re amazing. I’m inspired by the way that she created them all in solitude, the way she let her mind focus on one thing, pushing that to perfection. I admire artists who are very dedicated and stick to one thing. I’d like a Cy Twombly as well. Are there any artworks you admire but wouldn’t want in the house?Not really. Even darker, harder-to-live-with work can be exciting. That said, Thomas Ruff’s porn pictures would be quite tricky with kids around, even though they’re amazing. What’s it like having kids in a house that’s so jam-packed with art? Don’t you worry about things getting destroyed?They are really well trained actually. Since they were three they’ve been saying to their friends, don’t touch the art. Although the Yayoi Kusama pumpkin cushion we bought from the Tate did get ripped; the kids jumped all over it. Did you have art on the walls at home when you were growing up?Absolutely not. Annie couldn’t believe it when she came to my family home in Birmingham because there was literally no art on the walls. What was the first artwork you acquired?My tutor in Derby was the photographer John Blakemore. He made these incredible still lifes with cut-up flowers. I ended up printing his work for him, and as payment he gave me one of his pictures, Dissection of a Tulip. Did you get pleasure from owning it?Yeah. But I’m not sure any of this is about ownership, it’s more about what it brings to you, the memories it triggers. I don’t see us as collectors at all. We never buy for monetary reasons, what’s important is the emotional attachment. That’s the thing about art: it’s inspiring, and it also triggers feeling. KF Idris Khan has been commissioned by the British Museum to make 21 drawings for their new Islamic Gallery, opening in October