Little pasta is cooked in this house in the summer months. Most of my favourites are sleeping quietly in their storage jars in the cupboard: the varieties that hold sauce in their nooks and crannies; the wide, beefy ribbons of pappardelle that tangle their way through a ragu sauce, and the sheets of dried lasagne, which have been in their box all summer. When the weather is warm I prefer the tiny beads of fregola, like little pills in shades of brown and cream, or orzo, or the fine, thinnest of noodles. Sauces, if you can call them that, tend to be cooking juices or stocks, or simply olive oil and lemon. There is not a cream sauce in sight. We ate this light, fresh-tasting summer fish dish warm rather than hot I cooked a pot of fregola, the fat Sardinian couscous, the other night, its nutty colours coming from the fact the little dots of dough are toasted before drying. I then let the drained pasta soak up the cooking juices from a pan of sweet, plump cod cheeks that I had fried briefly in butter and olive oil and tossed with pine kernels, orange and lemon zest and parsley. Like mograbia, the rounder, plumper and untoasted version, the little beads excel in soaking up dressings and cooking juices. They are particularly useful to throw, cooked and drained, into the fat and meat juices left in the roasting tin while the Sunday roast is resting. The cod cheeks were good value – nuggets of juicy fish with snow-white flesh all too often ignored on the fishmonger’s slab. As sweet and chunky as a scallop, they deserve to be used more often. (I could have used pieces of cod fillet, cut into 3-4cm chunks, instead.) I also tweaked an old favourite this week. I have loved summer pudding since the days when I made it throughout the summer for a London restaurant. The delicate nature of the red berries and their soft corset of juice-saturated bread is one of the delights of late summer. I am particularly fond of the recipe when it is beefed up with a splash of fruit-based alcohol, the intensity of blackcurrants rather than purely red fruits, and served hot from the oven, with cream. We ate this light, fresh-tasting summer fish dish warm rather than hot, its flavour somehow even better having rested for 10-15 minutes on the side of the hob. If fregola had proved elusive, I would have used fat beads of mograbia, sometimes sold as giant couscous. Italian grocers shops can usually come up with them. Serves 2-3 pine kernels 50gvegetable stock 1 litrefregola 300glemons 2oranges 2olive oil 3 tbspbutter 40gcod cheeks 500gparsley roughly chopped, a handful Toast the pine kernels in a dry, shallow pan until golden. A regular shake of the pan will stop them browning unevenly. Bring the vegetable stock to the boil in a deep pan, pour in the fregola and bring back to the boil. Lower the heat and leave to cook for about 15 minutes until tender. Drain and set aside, running a few drops of olive oil through them with a fork to stop the little beads sticking together. Cut both ends from one of the lemons, place the fruit on its end, then slice downwards to remove the peel and white pith. Turn the fruit on its side and cut into 4 or 5 round slices, then cut each slice into 8 small pieces. You want tiny nuggets of lemon throughout the fregola. Repeat with one of the oranges. Warm the olive oil in a shallow pan and add the butter. When the butter melts and is starting to fizz with bubbles, lightly season the cod cheeks and lower into the pan. Fry for 3 minutes on each side, turning them with kitchen tongs as necessary, until they are evenly pale gold. Finely grate the reserved orange and set aside, then slice the fruit in half and squeeze it over the cod cheeks. Remove from the heat to a warm dish. Fold the drained fregola through the juices in the pan in which you cooked the fish. Grate the zest from the reserved lemon then fold it through the fregola, together with the reserved orange zest, toasted pine kernels, a little salt and ground pepper, and the chopped parsley. The sloe gin is merely a suggestion. Its inclusion lends a deep, mellow fruitiness to the proceedings. I should add that we ate half of it hot and had the rest the next day, for breakfast, with a ribbon of sheep’s yogurt over it so no one could accuse us having pudding for breakfast. Serves 6 redcurrants and blackcurrants 500graspberries 350gcaster sugar 125g, plus 3 tbspwater 375mlsloe gin 100ml white bread 400g, slicedicing sugar a little to finish Pull the currants from their stalks and put them in a stainless-steel or enamelled saucepan with the raspberries, caster sugar and water. Place the pan over a moderate heat and bring to the boil. Lower the heat and leave to simmer for 7-10 minutes or until the berries start to burst and the sugar has dissolved. Pour in the sloe gin and remove from the heat. Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Remove any chewy crusts from the bread. Leave softer ones in place or cut them off as you wish. Place the bread in a shallow baking dish, approximately 22cm in diameter, arranging the slices uniformly or hugger-mugger as the fancy takes you. Spoon the berries and their juice over the bread, making sure that the bread is completely soaked with purple juice. Scatter 3 tbsp of sugar over the surface and bake for 25 minutes until the juices are bubbling and the top is lightly crisp in places. Dust with icing sugar if you wish, and serve hot. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater