I took this shot at Oriel College, Oxford, in 1984. I had heard that whoever won the summer rowing competition would set fire to a boat in celebration. Oriel had won seven years in a row at that point, and I remember there were complaints that it was all getting out of hand. The whole event was slightly mad. After a long, boozy dinner, groups of suited men would run arm-in-arm and jump through the blaze, or dash through the embers in their smart shoes. It was dangerous, but nobody seemed to care. At the time, Oriel was an all-male college, and the sense of machismo was palpable. Later in the evening, a chant broke out in one of the quads: “No women.” The college had recently decided to admit women, and apparently some of the students weren’t too happy about it. I don’t know whether they were just hamming it up or whether they meant it. I went to a state school in Oxford but I was never a student at the university. That world hadn’t really been photographed before, and it wasn’t easy to get into. I would wander in before last admissions to visitors, stash my camera in my satchel, and blend in with the students. For big events, I would leave notes in students’ pigeonholes, asking for contacts and finding out when secret parties were happening and who might be there. I loved the youthful extravagance of it all but I always had my favourite students. Nigella Lawson was working as a waitress in a local restaurant, and Hugh Grant had only appeared in one small film. They were incredible on camera, largely because they were just so good looking. I couldn't believe it when Tatler offered me a job. My shots were a send-up of the sort of thing they published It was my shots of that world that gave me my big break. In 1981, the Sunday Times ran a competition for young photographers and one of the categories was “The bright young things”. My submission was a series inside Oxford’s notorious dining societies. I won and I got a call from Tina Brown, editor of Tatler who went on to edit the New Yorker. She offered me a job as Tatler’s party and features photographer. I couldn’t believe it: the shots I had submitted were clearly a send-up of the kind of shots Tatler used to publish, but when I started the job something clicked. There was something endlessly exciting about the world in the 80s that I don’t think my later work quite replicated. I moved to New York in 1989 and shot for Vanity Fair and the New York Observer. The Vanity Fair years involved a lot of travelling: movie parties in Los Angeles, the downtown sets in New York City, even the political crowd in Washington. But I never felt as inspired as I had in the UK. There’s an irreverence and eccentricity to British parties that I never found over there. Ironically, perhaps, I’m not much of a partygoer myself. Although I think that helped. A lot of other journalists on that scene lost their way; the constant drinking sent them off the rails. People today are nervous about photos like this. They’re cautious of these moments of excess, the class implications and how images might come back to haunt them in later life. In the 80s, the only students who were worried were those going into the army – nobody else cared. But with the rise of smartphones, I’m not sure that people enjoy themselves in the moment in the same way. I’ve heard the boat-burning is flatter these days, more supervised. Some other documentary photographers were quite disparaging about my work. They felt I wasn’t critical enough of my subjects. And sometimes it was jarring, photographing parties in stately homes in Kent while the miners were rioting, but I never felt it was my role to judge. Looking back on this photo, it feels like it perfectly symbolises the 80s: the recklessness and risk-taking of hopping over this immense bonfire in their black tie – it’s the big bang, the Thatcher years and the rise of the City. Born: Doncaster, Yorkshire, 1956. Studied: “Foundation course at Oxford Polytechnic taught by Len McComb and Humphrey Ocean, followed by Fine Art at Winchester School of Art.” Influences: “Don McCullin, Bill Brandt and the fantastic photos published in magazines like Nova, the Sunday Times, Telegraph and Observer in the 70s.” High point: “Recently when my work was acquired by the Hyman Collection followed by the Parr Foundation.” Low point: “Photographing Jackie Onassis’s wake and funeral for Vanity Fair was the worst.” Top tip: “Keep all your pictures, including the outtakes.” • Dafydd Jones’s solo show, The Last Hurrah, is at the Photographer’s Gallery Print Room, London, until 8 September.