Indra Nooyi, one of the world’s most high-profile female chief executives, is stepping down from the top job at PepsiCo after 12 years. During more than a decade running the US company, Nooyi, regularly named in lists of the most influential women in business, sought to respond to shifting consumer tastes by adjusting the focus of the firm from sugary soft drinks and snacks toward healthier fare. She was only the fifth chief executive in the group’s 41-year history and will remain as chairman until early next year. She will be succeeded by Ramon Laguarta, a 22-year veteran of the company who previously oversaw global operations, corporate strategy and public policy and government affairs, and had spearheaded PepsiCo’s expansion in sub-Saharan Africa. The 64-year-old Nooyi has been with PepsiCo for 24 years, and is a leading figure in an elite but diminishing group of high-profile female chief executives at Fortune 500 companies. “Growing up in India, I never imagined I’d have the opportunity to lead such an extraordinary company,” Nooyi said in a statement. “PepsiCo today is in a strong position for continued growth with its brightest days still ahead.” Nooyi, who is said to get up at 4am, was born in Madras, now Chennai, and left India at the age of 23 to study at Yale, where she earned her master’s degree in public and private management. She went on to work for Boston Consulting and later Motorola, where she became director of corporate strategy and planning. She joined PepsiCo in 1994. Often choosing to wear the traditional sari at corporate events, Nooyi has often expressed pride in her Indian background, attributing her success to a tough upbringing by her parents and grandfather, who insisted that she always come in the top three in her class at school. “Although I’m a daughter of India, I’m an American businesswoman,” she once said. Nooyi’s departure leaves just 22 women as chief executives of Fortune 500 companies, a drop from 32 in 2016. Others who have left their jobs recently include Denise Morrison at Campbell Soup, Margo Georgiadis at the toy company Mattel, Sheri McCoy at Avon, Irene Rosenfeld at Mondelez and Meg Whitman at Hewlett-Packard. However, there are still twice as many women leading Fortune 500 companies as when Nooyi took over at PepsiCo in 2006. “We’re seeing the first women to break the glass ceiling reach the age of retirement,” said Betsy Berkhemer-Credaire, author of The Board Game: How Smart Women Become Corporate Directors. “It’s a very difficult ascent of the patrician mountain, and corporations should be grooming their next tier of executives to include women, so that at least one woman has a chance to move into that senior executive role.” Nooyi helped steer PepsiCo away from a dependence from sugary soft drinks and snacks such as Doritos and toward healthier but less profitable baked chips and water brands like Lifewtr and Bubly. It recently acquired Bare Foods, a maker of baked fruit and vegetable snacks, and was early in the coconut water market with its Naked brand. The proportion of PepsiCo’s revenue coming from healthier food and beverages has risen from 38% in 2006 to 50%. Under Nooyi’s watch, PepsiCo’s revenue grew to $63.5bn, from $35bn in 2006. 