Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad must be running out of anniversary gift ideas. This year they became the most prolific opening bowling pair of all time. They are currently sitting on a combined nest egg of 984 wickets. Barring an act of catastrophic misfortune – and I’m too partisan an England fan to jinx them by giving you an example – they will become the first opening bowlers to take 1,000 wickets between them. It could happen by the end of this India series. It could, without straining the imagination, happen by next Monday. It is an almost mythic number. And if there’s one thing that we passive-aggressive sports fans like to fight with, it’s numbers. So, naturally, people are arguing about this one’s meaningfulness, and trying to place Broad and Anderson’s pioneering achievement in context. Today’s England cricketers play twice as many Test matches as they did in the mid-century, for instance. They also have the advantages of sports science and modern travel and noise-cancelling headphones. There are complaints that Broad and Anderson don’t perform as well abroad as at home; that they’re dependent on favourable conditions; that their strike rates don’t compare with the greats. These are all fair points. I have nothing against statistical analysis showing us the flaws in our thinking, revealing the world as it actually is. Raw and applied data keeps us honest; no one wants to be accused of promulgating fake (sports) news. I just wonder, sometimes, if it blinds us to what’s already there. What’s there is that we’re living in the era of England’s top two wicket-takers of all time. And through the most compelling bowling partnership of their time, on any entertainment scale you choose to measure, from seam movement to in-swing to Twitter burns. A lovely round number like 1,000 is both too big to ignore, and too arbitrary to compute. So perhaps the best way to contextualise Anderson and Broad’s achievement isn’t to compare it with other pairings – the  751 wickets of Donald and Pollock, the 787 wickets of Wasim and Waqar, the 924 of Ambrose and Walsh. Perhaps the best way isn’t to try and measure it against anything. Instead, remember back to your own memories of the two bowlers when they were picked – alongside Ryan Sidebottom – to take on New Zealand in 2007-08. Or even a few years before, when Broad was no more than a twinkle in a selector’s eye, and Anderson was lost in a miasma of advice and remodelled actions, and people whispered he’d never make it back to Test cricket. Think back to those days, and whether you predicted the 10-year partnership that followed. They have also given us so much more, not least the delightful odd-couple vibe that has accompanied on and off the field Because Broad and Anderson’s legacy isn’t just a statistical one. What they’ve given us over the past decade has been a heartening story of two sportspeople who came to lead simply by doing the thing they loved. Both of them have had to learn and grow, not just as sportsmen but as people. Anderson’s beginnings had the fate of child-actor written all over them, bursting on to the scene with his poster-boy looks and his teenage reticence to smile. There were plenty ready to write him off when he lost his bowling radar. But he found his way back, learning along the way that less was more. He avoided the fate of a Macaulay Culkin and became instead a Natalie Portman. Broad has found ways to manage and harness the angry competitiveness that once boiled over into brattish behaviour. He bore the badge of Ashes villain with remarkable grace and good sense. Unlike David Warner – or even his own teammate, Ben Stokes – he has kept his aggressive outbursts on the field. This pair have given us plenty of wickets. They have worked together to prise them out at crucial moments; they have delivered them in outrageous bursts of gunfire. They have been the team’s go-to siege-engine for a decade, have given the ECB and amateur sofa selectors one less thing to think about. They have provided the where-were-you-when moments that defined the post-2005 generation: Anderson’s 10-fer in the 2013 Ashes, Broad’s eight for 15 at Trent Bridge in 2015. They have also given us so much more, not least the delightful odd-couple vibe that has accompanied on and off the field. Their close buddy Graeme Swann jokingly describes them as a northern misery guts and a public schoolboy and Anderson and Broad have themselves admitted that they weren’t, originally, a natural personality fit. But their friendship has been as captivating a storyline as their bowling. One would hesitate, given the level of their banter on Twitter, to say that their friendship has matured, but it has certainly deepened to the point where it could sustain its own spin-off series. They have kept on giving in the hairstyle department too. Just when it seemed they had shed the boyband image of their 20s – and it had taken a while just for Broad to look old enough to vote – Anderson surprised us all this spring with his sudden tribute to Kiefer Sutherland in The Lost Boys. Anderson is now only six Test wickets short of Glenn McGrath, whose 563 currently makes him the most productive pace bowler in history. McGrath said this week that he thinks once Anderson breaks his record, he’ll be untouchable. But whether he’s right or not doesn’t matter. What matters is that we enjoy the action while it’s in front of us.