I do a podcast called Another Europe Is Possible, and this week we recorded an episode with the sociologist Brendan McGeever talking about the politics of a nation in decline. He said, en passant, “the white working class is a fallacy”. It wasn’t the standard complaint of recent years, namely: “Why do people always bang on about the white working class whenever they want to spirit up some soft nationalism or deliver some uncomfortable ‘truth’ about benefits?” McGeever made his assertion as an objective fact: white working class is a sociologically meaningless term. Not in the sense that there are no working-class people who are white, just in the sense that, since society has been multiracial, which is to say, for decades, the working class has been multiracial. There is no distinct category of working-class people who are white and face fundamentally different structural conditions from working-class people who are not white, which is what class is supposed to be about. That doesn’t mean there has never been any race-based division within the working class, though it’s weird to single this class out, when the upper class is most feverishly protective, racially, of its institutions. Why do we never say “white upper class”? It’s taken for granted that they are white. Which suggests that they are much more monocultural, and by design, than the class in which the lust for a monoculture is supposed to be a giant dirty secret. Why is there no “white middle class”? Because it would be considered racist to draw conclusions about people’s attitudes and beliefs, via their colour, in the middle class, where everybody is obviously completely normal. The only logical reason to differentiate within a class by skin colour is if you want to talk about the element that doesn’t like mixing with other ethnicities. But then “white working class” would mean “racist working class”. Anyway, to do that, you would have to ask the white working class its actual opinion, which the people who talk about them tend not to do. Who knows, they might not all think the same thing. Better to demarcate by employment status and GCSE results (these are also the key metrics of the “left-behind”, which is, again, racially coded: you are never “left-behind”, if you are black). The white working class’s meaning has expanded to make even less sense, embodying anything angry and Brexity, despite the fact that the class split of the referendum vote was relatively even. Anyone querying the term is automatically scorning the lived reality of working classness. If you live in a multicultural area, particularly if you are happy there, you may be white and working class, but you are no longer “white working class”. You’re metropolitan or, to give you your full title, metropolitan liberal elite. This term has a longer pedigree, but it used to mean the dozen people who had read Habermas and lived in north London. Now it means anyone who drinks coffee from a shop, and believes in the rule of law. It’s weird that there is a white working class, but no black working class. You don’t get your own category within the class unless you are white, though it is impossible to tell what the subtext is there (black people don’t truly belong in the working class? Black people, being victims of discrimination, automatically ascend to the liberal elite?) Sometimes deeper meaning is hard to infer when you are dealing with complete bullshit. Sometimes it would be quicker to just call it bullshit I believe a lot of the Freemasons’ decrees and regulations are word-of-mouth, or conveyed only with the eyebrows. Yet on one point they have been absolutely clear: “A Freemason who after initiation ceases to be a man does not cease to be a Freemason.” Also, a woman who transitions to become a man is then free to become a Freemason. They have become truly gender inclusive, except for one small thing: you still can’t join if you’re a woman. So far as I know, I’ve never met a Freemason; I’ve never been to a meeting, evidently, or overheard them in a Rotary club. I’ve never even been in a Rotary club. So I float this idea from miles away, practically from space: is it remotely possible that this is a giant, institutional troll? That there’s a major somewhere who’s foggy on the detail of what “transition” means, laughing his moustache off? The way the Sun would never drop Page 3, years after it had become pastiche and nothing to do with sex, just to stick it to the nags? Could it be that, after years of rather stale disputation with feminism and the very principle of gender equality, Freemasons are looking to liven things up a bit? It is so hard to take the fight to the feminist, when she is not allowed in. Then this sudden, intoxicating opportunity arises: the ladies are aerated about the all-female space. What mischief could be wreaked with the all-male space? I doubt they drilled into this very deeply. They are probably unaware that many feminists agree with their trans stance; they probably think they have got all the birds with one stone. But whatever the deeper truth of their intentionality – I’m only guessing, I’m happy to be quite wrong – I do not divine in this policy review the response to any urgent practical demand. John Cleese’s views are often vaguely familiar, like half-remembered dialogue from A Fish Called Wanda. But on Tuesday he said something I knew I hadn’t heard before: that they don’t show his sketches on telly any more because they are too funny. They would make all the other sketches look bad. It’s like something a young man pretending to be an old man in Monty Python might say, before demanding the return of joke National Service, lining up soldiers and bark-laughing at them to show how it was done. Did Monty Python ever end, or just morph into a real-time, lifelong performance art event? Is the joke on us?