None of us today would have heard of Beatrice di Portinari had Dante, Italy’s greatest poet, not decided to retain the suggestive name (“Beatrice” signifies blessings) of a Florentine girl whom he conveniently first met at the age of nine – forms of three represent the Trinity in The Divine Comedy’s innovative terza rima – as his celestial Guide. Beatrice takes over from Virgil. No pagan, however distinguished, may enter Dante’s paradise. Beatrice is the initially reproachful (“What right had you to climb the mountain?”) but eventually redemptive spirit who draws the purified poet into the heart of the eternal rose within which, in the bliss-filled closing lines of The Divine Comedy, Dante himself becomes annihilated and immortalised. But already my desire and my willWere being turned like a wheel, all at one speedBy the Love which moves the sun and the stars. Succinct but admirably wide-ranging, Ian Thomson’s richly illustrated exploration of Dante’s masterpiece opens with a brief account of the poet’s life both in Florence and later in the bitter exile during which he took revenge upon his native city. (Almost half of the inhabitants of his Inferno are Florentine.) The fun comes when Thomson unleashes his imaginative gifts. Playfully, he spots a modern Beatrice in the yearning lyrics that track a young beauty’s careless impact upon Brazilian beach-watchers (“But when she passes. Each one she passes sighs ‘Ah!’”). Ingeniously, he compares Dante’s castigation of a Florence fattened by banking and the sale of luxury goods to the outraged expostulations of Sir Harold Acton, when “weekend Surrey” arrived in Florence with vulgar expectations of Marmite jars and Twinings tea. A beguilingly light tone masks but never mars Thomson’s impressive scholarship. (His award-winning West Indian travel books are worth hunting down.) Quoting the Italian maxim traduttore traditore (the translator as traitor), Thomson shows how prim English clerics flinched at words like “cul”, meaning arse. They preferred “a sound obscene” to the candid blast of Dante’s farts. Dante, as he observes, was never so “mealy-mouthed”. Credit is nevertheless given to Henry Cary’s splendid blank-verse version of 1814 (Coleridge adored it), and to the heroic 13-year enterprise of Dorothy Sayers for Penguin Books. Thomson dislikes the snappily rhymed quatrains with which Clive James obscures Dante’s tripartite design. He’s uncertain about Steve Ellis’s plainspoken Hell (1994), Eliot, “who hovers like an Anglo-Catholic atmosphere over all modern versions”, is more gently treated. But it is Shelley, who was still translating Dante when he died, aged only 29, who wins Thomson’s highest praise. It’s fascinating to learn how the medieval obsession with Dante’s child-eating Count Ugolino gave way to the Romantics’ enthralment with Paolo and Francesca, skewered upon a single sword by a jealous husband for their incestuous love. Better still is Thomson’s chapter Dante at the Movies. Who’d imagine that a 1911 silent film version, titled Inferno, grossed a then staggering $2m in the US alone? Who can resist hunting down Dante’s Inferno (1935), starring Spencer Tracy and a chorus of lurex-tighted, trident-wielding Valhallarenes? Not this diverted reader. • Dante’s Divine Comedy: A Journey Without End by Ian Thomson is published by Head of Zeus (£18.99). To order a copy for £16.14 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99