Raised as I was in a household where the female to male ratio was 7:1 (or 7:2 if you included the cat), boys and men were mysterious to me. When you’re young, before you have a job, or a love life, or a house, or a gluten intolerance, you tend to define yourself by the things that you like. The list changes, but the polarising passion contained within it does not shift. The power of a love of purple is fuelled, in part, by a hatred of pink. The heat of your adoration for Blur is strengthened by the act of turning the radio off when Oasis is played. You know what you like. Perhaps you could achieve some romantic advancement by finding out what boys like. However, it’s hard to get near enough to one to find out – because if you’ve alighted on the mental evidence that suggests they don’t like you, your own liking patterns imply that they must really, really hate you. That’s the rule. Of course, everyone who has ever asked this question of the internet, or of their diary, almost always has had a specific boy in mind. It’s an unsolvable conundrum. We ask the question because we have found something lovable and attractive in an individual’s singularity – while believing there must be a simple spell we can cast, or a way of inverting a trait in order to appeal to them in a general and gendered way. You could ask, “Why don’t puppies like me?” and be told, “Because you do not smell sufficiently of sausages.” Drape a meaty boa of chipolatas about your torso, and your problem is solved! For a long time, I believed boys to be puppyish in their simplicity. They did not like me, and I could allow this to become a source of despair, or I could reverse-engineer every aspect of my personality in the sincere and misguided belief that I would eventually hit upon a fake trait that would make me irresistible to all men. I was – and am – an easily frightened, oversensitive sort of person. Perhaps boys didn’t like me because I did not watch enough horror movies. I now realise that “sitting through Cannibal Holocaust without vomiting very much” is a boast that only draws the tiniest group of admiring men, and none of them are people you would wish to walk home with in the dark. If you remember the British summer of 1976 we'd like to hear from you. What do you remember? How does it compare to this year? You can share your photos and memories by filling in this encrypted form. One of our journalists may be in touch and we will consider some of your responses in our reporting. You can read terms of service here. My other attempts to be popular with boys by doing the opposite of what I wanted included riding enormous rollercoasters and eating very hot curries. The results were exactly the same – almost no men responded to my efforts, and I vomited. At least I found a new answer to the question. Why don’t boys like me? Because I smell of sick. Boys will never like us as long as we are distracted by the plurality of the boys. Our culture warns us that if we try to play a numbers game, we can only lose. Consider that mid-century American euphemism, “popular”, which we think of as being liked for like’s sake but has come to mean something grubby and morally damning when held in the clumsy hands of the insecure. In Tales of the City, Armistead Maupin compares the gauche Mary Ann Singleton with her more outgoing friend from high school, Connie Bradshaw: “Connie’s waters had run fast and shallow. She had been popular.” Connie’s lingering “popularity” is evidenced by the array of aftershave found in the bathroom cabinet of her single-girl flat. As a woman who has wanted to know why boys don’t like her, I have been party to cruel and scathing conversations about “boys’ girls”. Oh, how I have longed to be one of those. As adults, we know there is an undeniable and wounding misogyny imbued in the label “slut”. As former teenagers, we know that sluts have status. When we ask why boys don’t like us, we are asking why we don’t have more power, and who among us hasn’t wondered about that? Ultimately, most of us never work out what the answer is. We just find one boy who really, really likes us, and we stop asking the question. The more enlightened among us will ask, “But do I like them?” We discover the only thing we can know about men is that there is no real homogeneity among them, and that we’re certainly likable enough to find out what they do like, if we ask nicely. In her defining essay on the subject, Joan Didion writes that if we seek self-respect, we can find “a separate peace, a private reconciliation”. For many of us, that reconciliation happens when we start to realise that our own likability is far less interesting than the way we respond to that of other people. If you are, ostensibly, a grownup, and you still want to know why boys don’t like you, it might be worth asking yourself just what it is that you like about them. More importantly, their liking of you is almost certainly contingent on your liking of yourself. • Daisy Buchanan is a columnist and features writer