The halo cockpit protection device found few fans when it was imposed by the FIA at the start of this season. Certainly on aesthetic grounds no one liked it but its role was to improve safety around the drivers’ head, an area identified by the FIA as one of the last remaining vulnerable areas of the car. It had the data to back up the decision to implement it, which changed the mind of some naysayers, including Lewis Hamilton. At Spa its worth was made clear to all. Whether the device specifically prevented Charles Leclerc from serious injury or worse in the crash with Fernando Alonso is irrelevant. Looking at the incident, it would have been a miracle, as the race director, Charlie Whiting, put it, were Leclerc not at least hit in the head but for the halo. Which is justification enough. There may be better looking alternatives to come in future but for now the halo as earned its place on every car. The clear power advantage Ferrari enjoyed in Belgium was a major step forward for the Scuderia and left Hamilton and Mercedes concerned about how they could catch up. Hamilton referred to the tricks they have on the car, which some interpreted as illegal advantages. Hamilton denied this and it was dismissed by Whiting. “We know quite a lot about the Ferrari car and there is no way Lewis would know anything about the Ferrari car,” he said. “If he says they’ve got a few tricks going on that car, well clearly they have got things going on which are giving it performance which all of us in the FIA are aware of and obviously are happy with.” The Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, conceded Ferrari were ahead but not just in power. His team was also losing time with poor traction out of the slow corners. They must be hopeful of better in the largely high-speed curves of Monza but Ferrari are strong favourites to win their home race. While Hamilton and Mercedes consider how to catch Ferrari, one aspect of their advantages may be as simple as the juice they are using to power the car. Shell brought a new fuel to Belgium, to go with the engine upgrade the Scuderia employed. It has been specifically developed with the Ferrari V6 engine to enhance its performance. Shell’s target is to make their fuel contribute to more than 20% of performance gains. The Shell motorsport technology manager, Guy Lovett, said Spa was the type of circuit that would play to the fuel’s strengths. “The regulations do allow for sufficient scope for innovation and that can be from different component and chemistries, how we formulate the fuels, the mix,” he said. Mercedes are more than aware of how important this can be. The potential gains from fuel have been estimated as up to three-tenths of a second. It is a formula Petronas now need to find. Despite losing all their points in coming out of administration, Force India’s rebirth as Racing Point Force India (or Force India as everyone still refers to them) could not have gone better. The team have some history at Spa, where they have always performed well. In their original incarnation as Jordan they took their first win here in 1998 with Damon Hill and also their first pole in the hands of Rubens Barrichello in 1994. Giancarlo Fisichella also took Force India’s first podium and points at Spa in 2009. They were on fire again this year. Esteban Ocon and Sergio Pérez did brilliantly in qualifying to take third and fourth and then in the race the pair showed no fear, going almost four abreast with Hamilton and Sebastian Vettel on the Kemmel straight. Ocon believed if he had had another metre he could have taken the lead into Les Combes. They finished fifth and sixth, immediately putting points on the board, overtaking Williams and going into ninth place. Unfortunately for Ocon he may not last much longer to enjoy the resurgence at Force India. Pérez is expected to remain but it is believed, unsurprisingly, that the head of the consortium that now owns the team, Lawrence Stroll, is eager to move his son in, perhaps as soon as the Singapore Grand Prix on 16 September. What happens next is still up in the air. Ocon is a Mercedes driver and they rate him highly. He is being prepared as the potential works driver to step in when Hamilton calls it a day. Wolff says he is confident they will find a seat for him, with McLaren looking to be the most likely candidates. It has to be hoped a drive can be found for the Frenchman as he is a genuine talent but he finds himself in a complex web of negotiations. Once the Stroll domino topples, however, expect swift movement all round, not least in Robert Kubica resuming his F1 career at Williams. 