Burnley have signed goalkeeper Joe Hart on a two-year deal from Manchester City for a fee in the region of £3.5m. The Clarets confirmed the transfer on their official website, revealing an undisclosed fee had been paid for the former England number one. Manager Sean Dyche was not expecting to be in the market for a goalkeeper this summer but injuries to Nick Pope and Tom Heaton - both England internationals in their own right - forced his hand. Hart spent 12 years as a City player but went from undisputed first-choice to fringe player after Pep Guardiola’s arrival and spent the last two seasons on loan with Torino and West Ham. The 31-year-old ultimately lost his place in England’s World Cup squad too, edged out by Jordan Pickford, Jack Butland and Pope for a place in Gareth Southgate’s plans this summer. Hart, who boasts 75 international caps and two Premier League titles, will wear squad number 20. City chairman Khaldoon Al Mubarak bid Hart a fond farewell. In a statement he wrote: “Joe Hart’s contribution to Manchester City cannot be overstated. “His 12 years at the club have seen him produce some remarkable performances and heart-stopping saves that will live in the memory for a long time to come. The very best of Joe Hart! #mancity pic.twitter.com/ixL8NhcgDw “His passion for and commitment to this club, evidenced by a remarkable tally of 348 appearances, means he will rightly be regarded as a City legend in perpetuity. “I want to personally thank him for everything he has given to us over very many years and he leaves with (owner) Sheikh Mansour’s and my heartfelt best wishes for the next step in his career.” City captain Vincent Kompany also offered a glowing reference of his former teammate. “Joe joined as a young lad from Shrewsbury and leaves a City legend,” said the Belgian. “When you look at the club he joined and the club as it is now, we have come so far during his time in Manchester and Joe has been a huge part of that. “It’s been an absolute pleasure to play alongside him for so many years and I know I speak on behalf of every City fan when I say I hope he means as much to his next club as he has meant to us.”