If Cardiff’s sojourn in the Premier League is to last, they need to find a goalscoring solution and fast. For the second successive match, they fired blanks but earned their first point of the season after Neil Etheridge saved Kenedy’s stoppage-time penalty to prevent 10-man Newcastle from smuggling a cruel victory. This stadium proved something of a fortress for Cardiff last season, having won eight of their previous 10 matches, but in their first top-flight match here since May 2014, the crucial finishing touches were missing in an otherwise slick performance. For Rafael Benítez, it was a miserable day at the office, underlined by the substitute Isaac Hayden’s straight red card for a challenge on the impressive Josh Murphy. In the buildup to this meeting, Benítez and Neil Warnock exchanged gushing compliments, at pains to wash away any remaining needle between them. In 2007, while in charge of Sheffield United, Warnock took exception to Benítez fielding a weaker Liverpool team at Fulham, arguing that doing so hindered his side’s fight for survival. They were later relegated but, before taking any questions at his pre-match press conference, Benítez congratulated Warnock on last season’s improbable promotion, while the Cardiff manager described the Spaniard, who has less than 12 months to run on his contract, as irreplaceable. Warnock made four changes to the team who lost on the opening day at Bournemouth, with Kenneth Zohore returning from injury to lead the line. The wily striker proved a real handful, using his frame to bully the Newcastle defence and he dovetailed with Josh Murphy, who was promoted to the starting lineup. It was in midfield that Cardiff most impressed, though, with the axis of Joe Ralls and loanees Víctor Camarasa and Harry Arter – both on debut – striking an efficient partnership in both directions. Arter, an ubiquitous presence, quickly endeared himself to home fans, recoiling the ball from the feet of Ayoze Pérez in one breath and picking out Zohore in another. Cardiff found joy down the Newcastle right, where Javier Manquillo struggled to get to grips with Murphy, who had his marker backpedalling time and again. Murphy created a series of half-chances, most notably when he slipped in Zohore who tried and failed to tee up Junior Hoilett. Newcastle were frustrated, huffing and puffing without the ball and stop-start with it. Other than when the lively Pérez, who almost latched on to a sweeping Jonjo Shelvey pass, they offered precious little. Cardiff were unrelenting, with Shelvey hacking Zohore’s low cross away from the grasp of Hoilett and Benítez recognised something had to change. He introduced the summer signing Yoshinori Muto in place of Pérez. If Beníitez was agitated, he was seething moments later when Hayden was sent off for crumpling through the back of Murphy’s legs. That forced Benítez into shuffling the pack, with Murphy’s twin summoned to fill the void at right-back, becoming only the second twins, following Michael and Will Keane, to duel in the top flight. Jacob Murphy immediately put on the afterburners to earn a late corner as Newcastle pushed for a winner but when Sean Morrison handled, Kenedy’s tame spot-kick was saved.