Hey There Delilah by Plain White T’s is many things. It’s a song. It’s a minor irritation. And soon, potentially, it will be a television series. It has been reported that – if Plain White T’s frontman Tom Higgenson gets his way – Hey There Delilah will soon form the basis of a scripted television series. If you have never paid attention to the lyrics, Hey There Delilah is about a struggling singer-songwriter who falls in love with an oblivious schoolgirl and imagines what their life will be like together once he is famous. It’s creepy. It’s the closest that pop music has got to an uninvited dick pic. If the series isn’t a psychological thriller, something will have gone badly wrong. Still, now that we appear to live in a world where you can make an entire TV show out of one song, here are five other ditties that deserve the same treatment. This one is a bit of a cheat, because Paramount Pictures bought the movie rights to Sk8ter Boi in 2003. Nothing came of it then, but perhaps that is because a feature film isn’t a sufficiently complex canvas upon which to tell Lavigne’s story. Perhaps someone like David “NYPD Blue” Milch could renew the rights and use the medium of prestige TV to do justice finally to this cautionary tale of a woman whose life is filled with tortured regrets because she didn’t get off with some floppy-haired oik when she was at school. If you like Game of Thrones, you are going to love this. A vast, sweeping epic about the fall of the Russian empire, this series will centre on the tale of influential throne-side mystic Grigori Yefimovich Rasputin. Most people looked at him with terror and with fear, but to Moscow chicks he was such a lovely dear. In all affairs of state, he was the man to please, but he was real great when he had a girl to squeeze. Spoiler alert: the series ends with the Russians shooting Rasputin dead. An Annie Hall for the modern age, Seven Days would be a seven-part chronicle of the genesis and death of a modern relationship. In episode one (Monday), our protagonist meets a beautiful stranger in the street and convinces her to go on a date with him. In episode two (Tuesday), the pair go out for a hastily arranged drink and we watch as their glimmer of quicksilver attraction blossoms into something that might just be true love. Unfortunately, to honour the source text, episodes three to six basically have to be pornographic films. Everyone likes The Affair, and its gimmick of telling the same story from multiple perspectives, so it makes sense to turn Where the Wild Roses Grow into a series. Elisa Rose is an innocent girl who falls in love with a mysterious man. In him, she sees security and protection. But, in her, the man sees only beauty that must be destroyed. Things end badly. Done right, a tragedy of this complexity could be prestigious on the level of Sharp Objects – only better, because things would actually happen. At 7am, Rebecca Black wakes up, goes downstairs and eats cereal. Afterwards, she walks to the bus stop to see her friends and discuss which seat they would all prefer to sit in. By 7.45, the bus is cruising so fast on the highway and Rebecca is struck by a sudden thought. Yesterday was Thursday and tomorrow is Saturday, which can mean only that today is Friday. Rebecca is so excited. She is going to have a ball today. Except she is not, because it’s the year 2032 and “Rebecca Black” is a pulsating box containing the memories of a dead girl and the box was bought by a rich capitalist as something for his dog to fart on. Welcome to season five of Black Mirror.