Everton are set to beat a host of Premier League and European clubs to the signing of Bernard with the Brazil international expected to undergo a medical on Merseyside on Tuesday. The 25-year-old is available on a free transfer and would become Marco Silva’s third signing of the summer. The winger, who has played 14 times for Brazil, is a free agent after leaving Shakhtar Donetsk when his contract expired at the end of last season. West Ham United, Chelsea, Milan and Tottenham Hotspur have all registered interest in Bernard this summer but were deterred by wage demands of £200,000 a week. West Ham renewed attempts to sign Bernard last week after being informed that his personal demands had lowered but it is Everton who are closest to finalising terms with the player and his agent, Kia Joorabchian. Marcel Brands, Everton’s new director of football, has led the negotiations over the past few days and the club expect the winger to join his compatriot Richarlison and the former Barcelona left-back Lucas Digne among this summer’s arrivals. Bernard will require a work permit, and a successful medical, to complete a move to the Premier League but Everton are confident he meets the criteria. He is due to finalise the deal on Tuesday. With Wayne Rooney and Davy Klaassen having left this summer – reducing the weekly wage bill by more than £250,000 – the new Everton manager has room for more creativity in his side. He is also anxious to strengthen in central defence and ideally would like two additions in that department before the deadline on Thursday. Yerry Mina is a long-standing target and Everton remain in talks with Barcelona for the Colombia international although have not agreed terms with the club or the player, who is also a target for Lyon. The Lyon president, Jean-Michel Aulas, claimed on Monday that Mina preferred to sign for his club, who can offer Champions League football this season, and not Everton. Silva also admires Jamaal Lascelles but Newcastle United appear determined to keep the 24-year-old defender at St James’ Park. Bernard’s imminent arrival comes after Silva assured Gylfi Sigurdsson he will play a central role at Everton this season with the Iceland international admitting his debut campaign at Goodison Park was “not ideal”. The midfielder became Everton’s record signing last summer after a protracted pursuit by Ronald Koeman ended in a £45m move from Swansea City. The 28-year-old was a priority signing for the former Everton manager, who regularly played him out of position on the left of an imbalanced team. Sigurdsson, who also played up front on one occasion last term, admits his varied roles and the high managerial turnover at Goodison made for a difficult start to his Everton career. But he expects a more productive second season having been told he will play in his favoured role by Silva. “That’s the way the manager sees it,” said Sigurdsson: “He wants me to play central which is nice. We’ve got some good wingers now with pace and hopefully we can utilise them out wide and with me playing down the middle. It was tough [last season] and obviously not ideal but you always do your best for the team and play wherever asked to play. Of course it was probably a little bit more than I would’ve wanted but that’s the way it is.” After Bernard’s switch to Goodison, West Ham are likely to move for Arsenal’s Lucas Pérez for around £4m while Fiorentina’s Carlos Sánchez is also a possible signing before Thursday.