Donald Trump has attacked basketball superstar LeBron James in a late night Twitter rant about an interview the LA Lakers player did on with Don Lemon on CNN. Asked by Lemon about the US president’s attacks on black athletes such as football player Colin Kaepernick, James said the president was “using sports to kinda divide us ... Sports has never been something that divides people. It’s always been something that brings someone together”. This prompted Trump to tweet: Lebron James was just interviewed by the dumbest man on television, Don Lemon. He made Lebron look smart, which isn’t easy to do. I like Mike! Mike is a reference to Michael Jordan and the eternal LeBron v Jordan debate. James and Trump have history. Last September, James called Trump a “bum” for rescinding his invitation to the Golden State Warriors to celebrate their basketball championship with a visit to the White House. “Going to the White House was a great honor until you showed up!” James tweeted at the time. In June, while still playing for the Cleveland Cavaliers, James said that regardless of whether the Cavaliers or the Golden State Warriors triumphed in the NBA finals, neither team wanted an invitation to the White House. When Trump said in 2017 NFL players should be “fired” for “disrespecting the flag” if they did not participate in the national anthem before games, James said: “He doesn’t understand the power that he has for being the leader of this beautiful country. “He doesn’t understand how many kids, no matter the race, look up to the president of the United States for guidance, for leadership, for words of encouragement. He doesn’t understand that, and that’s what makes me more sick than anything.” In an interview with the web series Uninterrupted in January, James said of Trump: “The number one job in America ... is someone who doesn’t understand the people, and really don’t give a fuck about the people.” James has also said he was happy to use his fame to call out the president. “While we cannot change what comes out of that man’s mouth, we can continue to alert the people that watch us, that listen to us that this is not the way.”