When Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad left the field contentedly just after midday, having mopped up the last four Indian wickets for a paltry 22 runs, they must have contemplated a gentle day of recuperation for their battle-hardened bodies before their next assault on the Indian batsmen. Old fast bowlers treasure such opportunities. By five o’clock they were back on the field charged with trying to bowl England back into the game having witnessed their batsmen scurrying manically around the crease like shoppers who had invested in only an hour’s worth of parking. The longest time spent at the wicket by any Englishman was the 68 minutes that Joe Root, their out-of-sorts captain, endured before departing grumpily after reviewing a catch to second slip. It was not entirely surprising, therefore, that when Anderson and Broad resumed their bowling duties they were below their best. From the tranquillity of 54 without loss just after lunch England had slumped to 161 all out and that included a last-wicket stand of 33 conjured by a stranded Jos Buttler. Within nine overs of their second innings India had raced to 50 without loss and Broad and Anderson looked grumpy with themselves and their batsmen. They had not anticipated so much toil so soon. Root had to look elsewhere for bowlers. By the close India were sitting pretty on 124 for two and a lead of 292. The ball swung throughout the first two sessions under a sky that was mostly slate-grey. Initially this inconvenienced the tourists but they already had over 300 on the board. Broad dispensed with Rishabh Pant and Ravi Ashwin with swinging deliveries while Anderson had the bonus of bowling to Mohammed Shami, who slogged, and Jasprit Bumrah, who during his solitary ball at the crease looked like a bad batsman out of form. A perfect morning for England’s senior citizens was completed when Alastair Cook and Keaton Jennings, despite a few edges, had progressed to 46 at lunch. The Indian team was early on to the field after the interval. This is not uncommon with football teams who have just received a roasting from their manager at half-time after a torrid performance. There is no concrete evidence to suggest that Virat Kohli or Ravi Shastri had read the riot act during the break but India were transformed in the field when play resumed. In an elongated session, because of early-morning rain and a last-wicket partnership, England lost all 10 wickets. Some fell to good deliveries, like Cook and Root, some were a little unlucky like Ollie Pope; half of them were dismissed by the unlikeliest of the Indian bowlers, Hardik Pandya, who finished with career-best figures of five for 28 from six overs; half were caught behind the stumps by Pant, who is having an eventful debut. England had managed to win three Tests in a row before this match despite the flakiness of their batting and because of the potency of their bowlers with a Dukes ball. Those bowlers cannot rescue them every time. Of the upper-order batsmen only Root and Bairstow have suggested permanence this summer so that England have been dependent on such as Sam Curran and Chris Woakes to dig them out of a variety of holes. Prolonged success is impossible without more contributors. The openers are not delivering. Cook edged a fine delivery from Ishant Sharma just after he had been dropped by Cheteshwar Pujara at slip. He is attracting good balls this summer but, at his best, Cook found a way not to get out to them. Next ball Jennings nicked another catch to Pant off Bumrah and, for all his obvious zeal, he too is not delivering. Pope is beguiling partly because no one knows quite what to expect. He unveiled one glorious cover drive before being caught down the leg-side off Sharma. Root remains the obvious banker and sadly he may be recognising how frail the batting line-up becomes if he fails to produce. Here he lacked fluency at the start of his innings and phlegm when it concluded. Root edged the first ball of Pandya’s spell and KL Rahul celebrated the catch at second slip. Root stayed at the crease and umpire Erasmus sought guidance from the third umpire after giving a soft signal of “out”. Umpire Dar up in the stands took his time and was happy to stick with that soft signal. Root departed shaking his head, though the batsman concerned is seldom the best witness in these situations. The naked eye, often as trustworthy as the slow-motion replays when assessing such catches, suggested the ball had carried. This was the decisive wicket. Firm prods from Bairstow and Ben Stokes were less controversially caught. The unlikely duo of Pandya and Pant dealt with Woakes and Rashid, which left Jos Buttler to take England past the follow-on target with a few of the gobsmacking strokes that have decorated his one-day innings for England. In the process he passed 1,000 runs in Test cricket. Pandya had bowled well but not that well against a batting line-up as gritty as a marshmallow. With a first-innings lead of 168 Shikhar Dhawan and Rahul began in aggressive mode against a lacklustre attack, who had been planning a bit of R&R. Eventually Rahul was bowled through the gate by an in-ducker from Stokes and Dhawan was stranded down the pitch against a Rashid googly and stumped by yards. Woakes remained wicketless but was England’s best bowler and reduced to scowls after Cook at slip had dropped Dhawan and Rashid had failed to dive in an attempt to save an edged boundary. If Woakes is scowling, it must have been a dire day for England.