The Victorian government has directed the state’s trains operator to remove Sky News from railway stations amid a sustained backlash to the broadcaster’s decision to interview the far-right extremist Blair Cottrell. Jacinta Allan, Victoria’s transport minister, revealed in a tweet on Thursday morning that she had told Metro Trains to remove Sky News from station screens in Melbourne’s city centre. I’ve directed @MetroTrains to remove @skynewsaustralia from all CBD station screens. Hatred and racism have no place on our screens or in our community. #springst Sky News is now shown on large screens in the underground stations of Melbourne’s city loop. Allan told radio station 3AW on Thursday morning the government had decided to pull Sky from station screens because there had a been “number of interviews that had started to go down a slippery slope”. She described the Cottrell interview as “the final straw”. “As the public transport minister, where it’s a public asset being used to televise particular content, I think I’ve got a responsibility to make sure that content is appropriate,” Allan said. Aside from Cottrell’s appearance, she referred to Mark Latham’s past on the network and the broadcast of an interview with the Liberal Democrats senator David Leyonhjelm which saw him accused of “slut-shaming” the Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young. “I must say ... I’ve been long concerned about the content and quality of what is put on those screens,” she said. “You don’t really have a choice but to watch them and see them.” Pressed by the host, Neil Mitchell, Allan said she had not watched the whole interview with Cottrell because she did not time have time “sit down and pore over every Sky News interview”. The move comes after the network interviewed Cottrell on Sunday night and the broadcaster was accused of “normalising racism and bigotry” by the former Labor MP Craig Emerson, who quit his role at Sky News following the broadcast. American Express, Huggies and Specsavers pulled their advertising from the network amid a social media campaign by the activist group Sleeping Giants Oz. Allan said those companies had also decided they didn’t want to “be associated” with Sky News. Sky News has been contacted for comment.