The drop in the pound against the euro and US dollar is bad news for anyone heading to Europe or America this summer. In April £1 bought you around €1.15, or $1.43. Today it is closer to €1.11, or $1.28. It means America is now 10.4% more expensive to visit, while the cost of a European meal out will be 3.5% pricier. It’s not all bad news. Those going to Turkey won’t believe their spending power. They are getting 52% more Turkish lira to the pound than a year ago, receiving £171 more of local currency for every £500 exchanged. Buying local currency before departure Don’t buy from a high street bank - they are nearly always an expensive way to change money. And never use an airport exchange desk on a walk-up basis unless you are desperate. All airport currency is expensive and one of the worst on Thursday was the Forexchange bureau at Cardiff airport, which was offering just €0.90 for each pound or €177 for each £200. The secret is to preorder for collection in person, or delivery, if you have time. For example, the walk-up rate on Thursday at Travelex’s Heathrow bureau was €0.97 per £1. But if you pre-book online four hours ahead the rate rises to a much more palatable €1.08. If you have time to get the currency delivered the rate rises to €1.10, from the Travel Money Club, although there is a £4.95 delivery charge. The Travelmoney.moneysavingexpert.com website lists all the latest deals. Using ATMs on arrival It might be easier, but it isn’t cheap, unless you have a bank card that offers fee-free cash withdrawals. Most Britons using a debit card at a foreign ATM will be charged a 2.75%-2.99% non-sterling transaction fee. On top of that there is often a separate ATM fee, which is sometimes calculated as a percentage of the amount withdrawn. At Barclays, Lloyds and Halifax it is £1.50, at TSB it is 1.5% and at HSBC and NatWest it is 2%. It all adds up. NatWest and HSBC charge their standard current account holders £9.50 for a £200 withdrawal from an overseas ATM. It usually makes sense to make fewer, larger withdrawals. Also watch out for local ATM providers applying their own extra fees. Debit and credit card charges Forget contactless payments while abroad because in many cases there’s a 50p-£1.25 fee each time you wave and pay, plus a currency conversion fee of typically 2%. The charges vary according to your bank/card provider. For example, use Santander’s debit card to make a €5 purchase, and it will cost an extra £1.37 - a £1.25 “purchase fee” and 12p currency conversion charge per transaction. Get a card that offers fee-free transactions Smart travellers carrying a Halifax Clarity card avoid all these fees. The Post Office credit card also allows fee-free purchases, and several banks offer fee-free ATM withdrawals. Nationwide FlexPlus account holders get this, as do customers of the fast-growing Monzo, of up to £200/month. Tandem offers a cashback credit card that has no fees for making purchases or withdrawing cash abroad. Some pre-payment cards are good in this area, but check the terms for hidden non-use fees. Beware the currency conversion con Lots of hotels and restaurants ask customers paying by card if they would like to be billed in sterling rather than in the local currency. These businesses are not being helpful – they are usually using “dynamic currency conversion” to make an extra 4% out of you. The practice is particularly in Spain, but is seen across Europe and further afield. It is now routine at many ATMs too. Always pay in the local currency.