The interim Argentina manager, Lionel Scaloni, has refused to say whether Lionel Messi will represent his country again. After a disappointing World Cup for Argentina, Messi indicated he would not play in the upcoming friendlies against Guatemala and Colombia, and is unlikely to play for his country again in 2018. On Tuesday, Scaloni said he did not know if Messi’s Argentina career is over. “I spoke to him and after that talk, he has not been called up for these games,” said Scaloni. “Honestly, we have not spoken about what will happen in the future. #SelecciónMayor Lionel Scaloni dio a conocer la lista de convocados para enfrentar a Guatemala y Colombia en Estados Unidos. pic.twitter.com/yivZX2KZ37 “We all know what he represents for us and we shall see what happens. I have a good relationship with him, it was a good chat that we had and we were very clear. He will not be in this call-up and in the future, we shall see.” The upcoming friendlies will both be played in the United States, and several high-profile players in European football, including Sergio Agüero and Angel Di María, will not make the trip across the Atlantic. Scaloni said Messi was the only player who said he did not want to be part of the squad. “No player told me he did not want to come to the Argentina national team,” Scaloni said. “All the decisions we have taken are for the good of the national team and to try to see what we can bring to the future. We have very clear in our minds that we need to add people to this new adventure. I spoke to the majority of the players and they all gave me their availability. We feel that we need these players right now. I feel it’s the time for renovation. I’m convinced that the time to call up these players is now.” Messi has retired from international duty before: he quit the team after the 2016 Copa America. However, after a campaign back home he returned for Argentina later that year. Scaloni was put in temporary charge of Argentina after Jorge Sampaoli was fired following Argentina’s exit to France in the last-16 at Russia 2018. Among the players who could make their debut in the upcoming matches is Giovanni Simeone, son of the Atlético Madrid manager, Diego Simeone.