In January I was sexually assaulted. On Tuesday, I was interrogated, ridiculed and had my journalistic integrity questioned by James Whale on his TalkRadio show as I described the experience, during what started as a discussion about flirtation since #MeToo. After hearing me talk of being orally raped – an expression James Whale can be seen horrifically laughing at in the YouTube clip of the debate TalkRadio itself tweeted (which has since been removed) – he proceeded to interrogate me on my behaviour in the aftermath of the assault. Whale and his sidekick, Ash Gould, concluded: “It’s worrying: men are afraid to approach women and young men are having less sex,” and, as a result, they “might not even do something that is perfectly innocent”. His interrogation of me became part of the problem, the reason why those who experience assault keep quiet about it This is the reaction I received after trying to sensitively discuss how a man jumped into the cab I was in, tried to kiss me and, when I pushed him away, pushed me to the floor of the cab, took his penis out and forced it in my mouth. What began as a typically strident exchange between me and a journalist known for his belligerent presenting style became a merciless exercise in how not to interview someone who has experienced a sexual assault. Whale’s initial argument, picking up from comments Jilly Cooper made last week, was that the post-#MeToo environment makes men afraid to flirt. As the author of a 300-year history of dating, and a consultant for current dating apps, I am immersed in the trajectory of dating behaviours and stand in good stead to comment. Yes, some men have had pause for thought since the #MeToo conversation began to argue the need for enthusiastic consent, but with centuries behind us of everything from lords of the manor exercising their droit du seigneur to the Weinstein case, it is long overdue. Whale, of course, begged to differ, and when I brought up the matter of the persistent rate of sexual violence in this country as proof we need more discussion around the issue of consent, he dismissed it. I then decided to open up about my own sexual assault in a bid to try to help Whale understand. I told Whale that I reported the incident to the police but they had told me what little chance we stood of catching the man, given I didn’t know his name; that any forensic evidence would by now have degenerated; and that any CCTV footage that might have captured images of him or me getting in or out of the vehicle in which he assaulted me might now have been destroyed (most CCTV footage is typically kept for only 30 days, I was told by the police – a fact that both Whale and Gould challenged). Driven to win the debate at any cost, Whale decided to question the details of my assault. “Why did you get into a cab with a man you didn’t know?” (I didn’t, I explained, he jumped into the cab I had hailed for myself); “Why didn’t you get the black cab’s licence number?” (I was drunk, I was going home, is this what Whale does every time he gets into a cab?); and: “If the police said they couldn’t help you, you shouldn’t have stayed there [the police station], you should have carried on [with your complaint].” Before the final, victim-blaming finger stab: “Are you not concerned that unless you went further with this then this brute could actually do it to other women?” Using every sneeringly dismissive and misogynistic trick in the book, he made the matter of my sexual assault an interrogation of my behaviour. When I attempted to cite my journalistic credentials as proof of being perfectly placed to talk with authority about both dating practices, and the matter of my own assault, he said: “It doesn’t matter what you are, you’re speaking as a woman.” He and Gould finished by questioning the validity of the 2013 ONS statistics of rape and assault I quoted at him. When the interview, for which I was not paid, finished, there was a “Thanks, Nichi” from a producer and then the line went dead. No checking in to see how I felt (I was shaking with fear and rage), no asking if I had any questions about what had just been said, and certainly no apology. I heard nothing further from the station until I called the producer myself the next morning and asked to make a formal complaint. He gave me the general complaints email address. Soon after broadcast, the entire debate was made available on YouTube and tweeted directly at me. It has since been mysteriously removed. TalkRadio has also produced its own news “report” of the debate, which confuses the order of conversation and even has the audacity to attempt to paint Whale as the “good guy” for inviting the cab driver who helped me out of the car, and whom I praised on air, to come forward. So what has society really learned post-#MeToo? That some men are afraid to flirt? Or that some men are so reluctant to accept that sexual abuse is a real, rife and deeply uncomfortable thing that they will do anything to minimise the conversation around it? Even if that involves aggressively questioning someone who is trying to detail their own assault to help other victims come forward – and writing them off as hysterical? Whale had the opportunity to let his listeners understand what it feels like to be sexually violated, to learn what may happen if you go to the police (who were nothing but supportive yet realistic with me) and to facilitate a nuanced discussion about what respectful sexual advances should look and sound like. Instead, his interrogation of me became part of the continuing problem, the very reason for why those who experience assault will continue to keep quiet about it. • Nichi Hodgson is a sex and relationships broadcaster