At 14 I was angry with my body. It had betrayed me. I wanted desperately to be invisible, walking through the school corridors unnoticed, but instead puberty had blasted my body into an unfamiliar spotlight. I shot upwards and outwards, sticking out everywhere. My body didn’t belong to me. A man stuck his hand up my skirt in a shopping centre. Another man flashed his penis to me with a Cheshire cat grin while I waited for a friend in our local park. Boys in my class exhibited a newfound curiosity about what was going on with their female classmates. They fired questions like they were eager scientists wanting to know what colour my underwear was, whether I masturbated when I got home or if I smelt bad down there on my period. Someone had carved “vagina fluid” on my locker and I worried for weeks that it was a direct message to me. Was I permanently leaking? Why couldn’t I stop my body from ruining my life? This morning the Children’s Society published a shocking report that reveals one in four 14-year-old girls in the UK have self-harmed. The report estimates that 110,000 children aged 14 in the UK may be self-harming, 76,000 of them girls. Gender stereotypes and worries about physical appearances are discussed as some of the main causes. Initially my self-harm arrived in the form of bingeing and purging food. I was trying to erase the outlines of my unwanted female form but the results weren’t effective enough. My weight fluctuated and no matter how many jumpers I wore I could still feel the eyes boring into my skin. The first time I drew a line of blood on the inside of my thigh I felt like I’d unlocked the secret to reclaiming my body. I could simultaneously punish the soft flesh of my leg, while acting out an element of control. No matter how many comments I’d get about my appearance, this action was mine, no one else’s. It was my secret ritual. As a teenager I didn’t have Instagram or a phone to find glossy images of femininity to compare myself with. I did have fashion magazines and sexualised young pop stars and the diet industry screaming about weight. I also had a neighbour, a girl in my class, who I’d go home with after school and we’d read her dad’s Playboy magazines until the soft porn TV channel came on at 9pm. I learned that sex meant short skirts, long legs and straight hair. Sex meant pleasing men. Sex often meant pain. I wasn’t interested in the sex itself but I loved the actresses. I’d spend hours drawing them in my room, putting different outfits on them. Imagining them on the runway. They weren’t always dressed like naughty schoolgirls; sometimes they’d be wearing business suits or superhero costumes. In French class one of my porn star doodles had fallen out of my notebook. Someone picked it up and announced to the whole class I was a dirty lesbian. It went from being gay to being branded a literal witch within minutes. Rumours started that I went home after school and drew naked pictures of everyone in my class while casting spells and brewing love potions. I felt shame, I felt like their words must have something to them. I must be dirty, gross and perverted. My sexual curiosity was immediately shut down and turned into something ugly. I turned to self-harm to punish myself. Covering my thighs, arms and stomach in angry red lines. I wouldn’t self-harm at school; I’d save it for when I got home. Where I was safe and where I could finally unleash some of that internalised anger. I hated the bullies in school but I hated myself more: why couldn’t I be normal? Teenagers living in our digital age have to endure an even more relentless type of bullying. I can imagine those witch chants continuing on Snapchat, being broadcast to people beyond my school corridors. Comments on girls’ bodies and sexuality infiltrate their home life. They’re non-stop. Both teenage boys and girls need to know they can talk to someone about their worries when puberty strikes like a bolt of lightning. We need counsellors in schools and easy access to mental health support should they need it. For me speaking to a therapist helped me to get out of my shame spiral. I saw my first therapist at 16 and I’ve seen many more since. Therapy helped to put my self-loathing into words so I could answer back. I slowly started to believe that I wasn’t gross, horrible or perverted. I was just me. Puberty is always going to be a minefield of physical and emotional changes, but we can ease some of the external pressures. We can teach our children that there are so many different ways to be a boy or a girl and that it doesn’t matter who you fantasise about when you’re tucked up in bed. Girls need to know that they don’t have to turn their anger inwards and that ultimately, their bodies aren’t the enemy. • Maggy van Eijk is the author of Remember This When You’re Sad. She writes about mental health, pop culture and motherhood • The National Self Harm Network offers a valued internet support forum for people who self-harm. Self Injury Support runs a self-injury helpline for women that is available Monday-Thursday 7pm-10pm on 08088008088; it also provides text and email support to women who self-harm. In the UK and Ireland, adults can always contact Samaritans on 116 123. Children and young adults may prefer to contact Childline on 0800 1111. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Hotline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14. Hotlines in other countries can be found here