More than 1,000 law enforcement officers lined the streets of Charlottesville, Virginia, on Saturday as the city marked a year since violent white supremacist rallies sparked a deadly attack and open fighting in the streets. The racist provocateur who organized last year’s far-right rally has moved on to Washington, DC, where he has received a permit to stage a “white civil rights rally” on Sunday in front of the White House. While no official far-right protests are planned in Charlottesville this weekend, many residents in the city were still shaken and on guard, even as many were also frustrated by what they see as the excessive security presence imposed by local and state officials. On Saturday, the streets were barricaded and the city’s downtown area closed to traffic. Law enforcement officers had set up checkpoints with concrete barriers and metal fences, and were searching bags for objects that might be used as a weapon. The University of Virginia, where hundreds of white supremacists marched with flaming torches last year, is restricting access to parts of its campus. Virginia’s governor declared a state of emergency earlier this week to help coordinate planning and response to the anniversary weekend. Charlottesville resident Cynthia Viejo, who came to a downtown mall to eat lunch with her wife described the security as “a little over-the-top, obviously.” As a local business owner herself, she said she wanted to support the barricaded local businesses. She had propped a sign reading “Love not hate!” on the table as she ate. On Saturday morning, small groups of people came to pay tribute to Heather Heyer, the 32-year-old killed when a car rammed into a packed street of counter-protesters in downtown Charlottesville on August 12 2017. Nearly two dozen people were also injured in the attack, which officials said was carried out by James Alex Fields, a 21-year-old white man from Ohio who had demonstrated with the white supremacist groups. Two state troopers also died that day in a helicopter crash near Charlottesville. The enduring memorial to Heyer on the block where she was killed was heaped with new bouquets, and the chalk messages of love had spread from the brick walls of the buildings across the entire street. “You did not die in vain. Some people are woke now,” someone had written in red chalk on the asphalt. Up the street, there was another message scrawled on the road: “The killer sped this way.” And in smaller letters: “pray for him, too.” Heyer’s mother, Susan Bro, spent the day at the foundation she set up in her daughter’s honor, which has given out scholarships and grants to a diverse group of young Americans working against hate. Bro had given one media interview after another in the past days and weeks. By early afternoon, she said, she was emotionally exhausted. She had a simple message for those seeking to honor her daughter’s life in the right way: “It’s time to get back to seeking racial justice.” In a dramatic change of tone from last year, when he said there was “blame on both sides” for the violence, President Donald Trump said on Saturday that he condemns “all types of racism and acts of violence”. The riots in Charlottesville a year ago resulted in senseless death and division. We must come together as a nation. I condemn all types of racism and acts of violence. Peace to ALL Americans! Local activists said that they were hoping for a quiet two days of memorials and remembrance in the city. But white supremacist groups have staged multiple visits and flash protests around Charlottesville before and after last August’s violent rallies, and the legal battle over whether the town can remove statues of Confederate generals from two local parks is still ongoing. University of Virginia students will hold a rally for justice on Saturday night, on the anniversary of the white supremacist tiki-torch march through their campus. A group of clergy who organize against racism will hold a service of remembrance at the city’s First Presbyterian Church on Saturday afternoon. On Sunday, thousands of counter-protesters are slated to attend multiple rallies against white supremacy in Washington, DC. The “white civil rights” anniversary rally organized by Kessler, a Charlottesville resident, is expected to attract no more than 100 to 400 people, according to the official permit for the event. Kessler had applied for a permit to hold his anniversary rally in Charlottesville, and had sued the city when they denied him the permit, but he dropped his battle with the city in late July. Kessler said on Thursday that he would be in Washington on Saturday, as well, and that he did not know of any plans for other events in Charlottesville. Many of the most prominent white supremacist leaders from last year’s rally have suffered setbacks in the past year, a result of forceful counter-protests, a series of lawsuits filed against different white supremacist leaders, movement feuds and infighting, and, in one case, prosecution for domestic violence. The counter-protests in Washington have renewed the debate over whether small demonstrations of racist extremists should be ignored, or greeted with forceful public opposition. It has also fueled ongoing public debate over the media’s role in covering white supremacists groups. National Public Radio faced wide criticism on Friday for running an interview with Kessler in which he recited white nationalist talking points and ranked the intelligence of different races on air.