It is hard to be surprised about anything we learn concerning the failure of building regulations and compliance that set the stage for the Grenfell fire. Yet news emerging yesterday that the government were categorically warned about the dangers of aluminium composite material (ACM) cladding in 2014 – before Grenfell Tower was refurbished – comes as a shock. We knew about the warnings soon after the fire, but it’s only now that Inside Housing magazine has been able to prove it, with minutes of a meeting obtained under the Freedom of Information Act. According to these, the government was warned: “There have been major fires in buildings in various parts of the world where ACM materials have been used for the cladding, with the ACM responsible for the external fire spread.” Yesterday, after police ended the site’s crime scene status, and lawyers acting for families at the Grenfell Tower inquiry told of the “urgent need” for interim recommendations, a spokesman for the Ministry of Housing, Communities and Local Government (MHCLG) told me: “There is nothing more important than keeping people safe in their own homes, and we agree fundamental reform of the regulatory system is needed. “That is why we are acting quickly, including consulting on banning the use of combustible materials on high-rise residential buildings, and making plans for changing the law to achieve meaningful and lasting reform of the building regulatory system, with strong sanctions for those who fail to comply. We are also restructuring building regulations fire safety guidance to ensure it is clear.” They are “acting quickly”. They are “consulting” about it. They have known about it since at least 2014. The refurbishment to Grenfell Tower was completed in 2016. The latest news proves that survivors, the bereaved and the wider community have been right since the start. Grenfell was a foreseeable, and entirely preventable, tragedy. It is hard to imagine what this must be like for families who sit in the inquiry room, listening to firefighters tell how they tried and failed to save lives. Yesterday, we heard a devastating account of an hour-long phone call between a firefighter and a young woman trapped by the fire. The crews couldn’t get to her floor because of the rapidly deteriorating conditions. The firefighter listened as first her son died, and then she lost consciousness. The silence was broken when the flames reached her. Her name was Zainab Deen. Her two-year-old son was Jeremiah. Both of them died. The government needs to get a grip on this crisis. It could impose a moratorium on combustible materials while it waits for the outcome of the consultation – it is unclear to me why it has failed to do so. The government’s green paper on social housing has not materialised, but we are told that it will be delivered “imminently”. It seems that as Grenfell has fallen out of the news, its place on the government’s list of priorities has sunk. Brexit, and internecine political warfare, dominate both main parties. It would be very easy for the government to introduce a moratorium on combustible materials As the Grenfell inquiry pauses for the summer, news earlier this week about the failure of fire doors manufactured by five different companies is spreading disquiet. It turns out that any of us who live in shared buildings with fire doors intended to keep lobbies and stairwells smoke-free are potentially at risk. Many of the materials added to Grenfell in 2016 were combustible at a low temperature. The aluminium composite panels were combustible. They included polyethylene that is not only combustible, but “melts and drips on exposure to heat, and can flow while burning”. The Celotex RS5000 insulation panels added to the vertical columns have a “low ignition time” according to the opening statement of Richard Millett QC, lead counsel to the inquiry; Professor Luke Bisby’s report says that the insulation “may support rapid fire spread of adjacent materials because it effectively insulates the cavity from heat loss”. The polymer membrane in the damp-proof course added to the building? Combustible. The insulation around the new windows? Combustible. The UPVC windows? The internal insulating boards? The cavity infill? All of it combustible at a low temperature. It is clearly not just about the cladding. The guidance about what is permitted is still unclear. This combination of materials has ended up on tower blocks and schools and hospitals up and down the country. And some of these products are still on sale, including insulation products of limited combustibility that were used at Grenfell. In response, an MHCLG spokesperson said: “As we have repeatedly made clear, the cladding believed to be on Grenfell Tower did not meet existing building regulations guidance. It should not have been used. We are now consulting on a ban.” The government could impose a moratorium, but one wonders how much they are listening to people like Sir Ken Knight, chair of its independent fire safety panel, who wrote to the MHCLG on 2 July arguing for a limited ban on combustible materials. Why are they waiting? The government knew about the issues with cladding before the fire. There had been fires before. Industry warned the Building Research Establishment about the unclear guidance, and it ignored these warnings. The same industry that the government expects to self-regulate continued to use unsafe cladding on Grenfell Tower. The MHCLG select committee has called for a ban on combustible cladding, and an end to conflicts of interest in the building industry. The Construction Industry Council has called for a self-imposed moratorium on the use of combustible materials in cladding systems on high-rise buildings. In April, the Association of British Insurers called for an end to the use of all but non-combustible materials in construction of cladding, and a “reformed testing regime that replicates real-world conditions to provide genuine evidence of how materials perform in a fire”. The Royal Institute of British Architects’ expert group on fire safety has called for a ban on combustible materials in the cladding of buildings of 18 metres or over. At the final hearing of the Grenfell inquiry before the summer break, Michael Mansfield QC interrupted the inquiry chair, Martin Moore-Bick, because of a widespread “sense of urgency” among the families he represents to help other families who live in tower blocks across the UK. There was no need to wait another nine months to make recommendations that could – and possibly should – be made now. It would be easy for the government to introduce a moratorium on combustible materials pending the outcome of the consultation, but it has chosen not to do so. It would be easy for them to introduce urgent fire safety measures in high rises: fire extinguishers, fire blankets, escape packs – as called for by Mansfield in his opening statement to the inquiry. While police and the inquiry deal with matters of truth and accountability, the government could – and should – look at making changes, now, to prevent another Grenfell. Otherwise, as the Grenfell survivor Ed Daffarn has warned: “Grenfell Two is in the post”. The government needs to listen on this. He was, sadly, right once before. • Seraphima Kennedy, a writer and academic, was a neighbourhood officer at Kensington and Chelsea Tenant Management Organisation