It is a part of modern cricket lore that all leg‑spinners should unveil at some point a mind‑bending new delivery. Shane Warne had the zooter and, latterly, the mysterious disco ball. At Lord’s Adil Rashid produced his own version over the four days of this Test. Perhaps we should call it the Black Hole, a delivery so mysterious it appeared not to exist at all, but to involve instead not bowling, not batting, taking no catches and failing to play any part at all in England’s victory. This remains a major part of the joy of Test cricket, the game within a game, the peculiar variables of a team sport that remains somehow not entirely a team sport. On Sunday afternoon, as England’s seam-bowlers continued to snake the ball around and the wickets fell, the prospect of Rashid taking no part in any aspect became oddly tantalising, a subplot of urgent interest. No, Adil, don’t warm up. Walk slowly. Keep your head down. A slight panic arose as the prospect was floated of Rashid having a go at the tail as the light faded. Increasingly he came sprinting in past his captain, haring up to high-five his teammates. As the final wicket fell to Chris Woakes Rashid could be seen – horrors – energetically windmilling his arms in the gully. Complete idleness here isn’t a first. The most famous of non-playing Test cricketers is probably Jack McBryan of Somerset, a prisoner of war during the first world war, who played once in 1924, didn’t bat or bowl or take a catch and never played again. In 2005 Gareth Batty did the same at Lord’s in a seamer-led thrashing of Bangladesh, his own contribution to that glorious summer, albeit one that has to date failed to yield an MBE. This was a little different. Rashid still counts as the most controversial selection of England’s summer, a pick so divisive it caused a great deal of chuntering rage in Yorkshire, hard as that might be to believe. And yet here he was a luxury item, a garnish, the Test Match equivalent of parsley or the crescent of crisps around your egg salad baguette. In fairness, however, it’s probably wrong to say Rashid did nothing at all. He walked at least nine kilometres from deep fine leg to midwicket through the 82 overs India batted. He was padded up to come in as England declared after a whirling cameo from Sam Curran, who batted for half an hour like a man swatting bats with a mop. Otherwise Rashid was a Rashid-shaped hole, a ghost in the flanneled machine. His one real contribution was to provide the game’s outstanding comedic moment on Saturday afternoon, stopping, staring and pirouetting frantically at mid-on as the ball skirled over his head from a Ravichandran Ashwin top edge. It was an endearing moment, just as there was something touching about Rashid’s vigil as he mooched dutifully from near side to far side like some restless Victorian ghost, a sprite of the lime-green turf. During the morning session he fielded a couple balls near square leg. At 2.12pm one finally went straight to him at midwicket. Around tea time there was even an odd moment as it began to rain and for some reason Rashid stayed ambling around as the ground staff hared on. Was he going to help with the covers? Not that there was anything surprising in any of this. It was an unusually fixed-gear Test, dominated by England’s use of the swinging ball. Plenty of others did next to nothing, not least India’s top order. Murali Vijay completed a pair in the morning and averages eight in his last eight innings in England. His fellow opener KL Rahul has done a little better. He averages 8.50. There is perhaps a wider point to all this. While Rashid was busy acting as a plus-one Yorkshire have played two T20 Blast games, both of which they have lost. Beyond this Rashid’s non-playing role feels like a small part of a wider oddity in an England team that has been largely untested by these opponents. Look down the lineup and there is no shortage of quirks and corners. Both openers remain a point of weakness. No 3 doesn’t really want to be at No 3. No 4 shouldn’t really be at No 4. The bloke who should No 4 is No 5 and keeping wicket. The bloke who should be keeping wicket is No 6 and should be No 7. Little wonder one or two things get a little lost in this state of talented, engrossing uncertainty. In reality the most pointed stat from Lord’s wasn’t Rashid’s blank but the 14 wickets taken by Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad, whose craft and edge continue to carry this England team through their annual home supremacies, whatever the shifting sands around them. There was still time for a nice moment at the end. As the players trooped off waving to the crowd Rashid could be seen clutching a stump as a victory memento, a little stab perhaps at coining cricket’s own version of the John Terry full-kit moment. It could have been worse. He could have run off with the ball. Come next week and Trent Bridge he might expect to get his hands on it for real at some stage.