Moeen Ali never lost faith in his ability to deliver at Test level, with his stunning return to the England team built on knowing that one bad winter did not make him a bad player. Day two at the Ageas Bowl saw Moeen back to his best with the ball, ripping deliveries out of the footmarks to claim his fifth five-wicket haul and gutting the Indian middle order in a similar fashion to his career-best six for 53 on this ground four years ago. His impressive display, which included four wickets in only 16 balls, sat in stark contrast to his Ashes tour when, bereft of confidence, he claimed five victims at 115 runs apiece and went on to be dropped midway through the following series in New Zealand. After returning from the Indian Premier League in May and playing for England’s one-day side, a restorative spell in the County Championship for Worcestershire – including a double century and eight wickets in Scarborough – brought back form with the red ball. Moeen, who also made 40 in England’s first innings, said: “It was a case of believing you are not a bad player after one bad winter. Many players have gone through that and for me it was about moving on. It makes you a better player and a stronger character. “I’ve loved being back at Worcestershire, having a good stint getting form back with bat and ball. It’s always nice to get a call-up when in decent nick as you can have that confidence coming into the game. It’s what county cricket should do. “Australia is a difficult place for a foreign spinner, no matter who you are. For me it was about getting over that and coming back knowing I have played India in England before, done well and there was no reason why not again. This role is my best, batting [No7] and as a second spinner. It gives me confidence and freedom, and I end up playing better.” On the match situation, with England looking to create a target on a surface offering bowlers significant assistance, Moeen added: “That will be difficult against their bowlers but we will have to fight hard to win this series here. After my first over I thought I would be in the game throughout this Test match, which was nice.”