“I’m so passionate about phones that I made a song about them, just so I could commission a 10ft phone replica for the video and keep it to have in my kitchen,” declares chart-bothering producer and artist Jax Jones. He’s talking to the Guide over the phone. “My connection with my phone is getting stronger every day!” Jones may be exaggerating slightly, but he does indeed have a ludicrous prop handset in his kitchen and it is, indeed, from the video for Ring Ring, his current hit with Mabel. He is not alone in his passion for phones, when you take into account Banx & Ranx’s summer anthem Answerphone (“When I call you, you don’t answer phone, na na”), Cardi B’s Thru Your Phone (a warning not to use one’s handset as a repository for incriminating evidence) and Dua Lipa telling the entire planet not to pick up their phones. It’s a grand tradition. From Glenn Miller’s Pennsylvania 6-5000 to Drake’s Hotline Bling, pop’s obsession with telecommunications is long and glorious; Lady Gaga committed to the theme so strongly she wore a phone on her head. Phone songs have taken in anticipation (Abba’s Ring Ring), spontaneity (Call Me Maybe), popular hobbies (Village People’s Sex Over the Phone) and smartphones’ woeful battery life (Maroon 5’s Payphone). And that’s before you consider phones’ real-world connections to pop. Decades before Spotify, the nearest teenage fans got to “on-demand” was Dial-a-Disc, where you would phone a number and listen to music looping on reel-to-reel tape machines. Mobile phones made their own impact: from the ringtone boom of the 2000s to the way the Walkman of the past is now built into all handsets, and even the way songwriters’ melody ideas are stored first as voicenotes. In the studio vocal booth, lyrics are read off a phone screen. “Phones are a very powerful trope,” acknowledges songwriter Jack Lee – and he should know. In the 1970s, he was a struggling musician in San Francisco. One afternoon, he received a call informing him that his phone line was about to be disconnected. However, there was time for one more incoming call, which informed him that a band were interested in covering one of his songs. The band were Blondie, the song was Hanging on the Telephone. From his home in Los Angeles, the 2018 version of Lee tells the Guide: “It changed my life, and it saved my life.” The song came about when Lee was a busker in need of original songs. Reading an illustrated book of Beatles lyrics, he saw that All I’ve Got to Do (“ … is call you on the phone”) was accompanied by a picture of a girl entwined in a telephone cord. “Don’t ask me the psychological implications, but two days later I was messing around on the guitar and I got the lightning bolt. Over the next year I put everything I had into writing that song.” Twelve months well spent: Hanging on the Telephone has since been covered by everyone from Def Leppard to Girls Aloud. In the 2012 movie Electrick Children, Julia Garner’s character experiences what she believes is a virgin birth as a result of hearing the song. “What the song captures,” Lee adds, “is the desire for connection and the frustration when you can’t make the connection. The intensity. The high stakes.” Beyond the drama, Lee says there’s something more subtle at play: “When young people got together in that period, there were things you could say on the telephone that you couldn’t say face to face. You could be more vulnerable. And that period lasted from the 1920s to the early 90s – a long time for the telephone to influence people’s lives.” But how true is this in the era of Generation Mute? In 2015, it was reported that phone use among young people had dropped by almost a quarter in just three years. Calling someone unannounced – or, God forbid, leaving a voicemail – is now an egregious attack on privacy. Let’s pick up the phone to Emily Warren, the co-writer of Dua Lipa’s New Rules. “Agreed!” she declares. “It’s a violation!” New Rules, she says, was inspired by the real-life predicament of co-writer Caroline Ailin, who was fielding texts and phonecalls from an ex. “We sat down to write a song that was a guidebook to ending that situation.” Over at Little Mix’s label Syco, A&R manager Guy Langley remembers being at a house party with colleague Anya. Both sets of ears pricked up when someone put on Curiosity Killed the Cat’s late-80s answerphone banger Name and Number. A short while later, the song had become a Little Mix single, How Ya Doin?. Langley says there were no worries about the concept of answerphones seeming outmoded. Actually, they embraced it: “The girls’ mantra from the start has been about referencing harmonies of bands like En Vogue; the idea of answering machines felt knowingly throwback.” In fact, Langley says, there’s a risk in trying to make songs too up-to-date. “We try to make lyrical content conversational but whenever you get too specific it starts to sound very ‘now’.” And not in a good way. “There was a time when the One Direction songs were being written and it was all ‘LOL’, ‘Message me back’, ‘BBM me this’, and it felt like an older generation trying really hard to connect with a young generation, and getting it wrong.” (Jax Jones concurs: “There is no room at all to talk about dating apps – that’s going too far. Something like: ‘You are the love of my life, for you I will swipe right’ – terrible. It’s Vengaboys territory.”) Langley adds that he has seen an increase in submissions whose lyrics dwell on phone addiction, reflecting Gen Z’s love/hate relationship with nearly every smartphone app except the phone function. It’s the topic of another of Emily Warren’s songs, Phone Down. “I’m obsessed with phones in songs, actually,” she admits. “In the two years I’ve become really bothered by and aware of phone use and social media use. Phone Down is specifically about a phone ruining an intimate moment. It feels like there’s a disconnect.” Explaining this disconnect (also referenced in the Clean Bandit and Marina single, er, Disconnect), Paul Lee, who conducts research into phone use in his role as global head of research at Deloitte, says that while people of pop-consuming age aren’t falling out of love with handsets, they are definitely moving away from voice-only communication. “But any text-based message is a simplification, stripped of emotion,” he explains. “For instance, ‘hello’ is five letters in an anonymous font when conveyed by text message. But when spoken it can convey an entire universe of emotions: curt, chirpy, angry, delighted … ” Or, in the case of Adele’s phone song Hello, it feels like a hundred emotions at once. No wonder she chose a pre-smartphone-era flip-phone for the song’s video. As for what might constitute a 2018 version of Hanging on the Telephone? Paul Lee has a plan. “It would be a song about a WhatsApp interaction that shows as being delivered and read – with two ticks – but is not responded to.” Putting this suggestion to Jax Jones has an unexpectedly positive reaction. “WOAH!” he bellows. “That’s excellent! That’s a CHORUS!” And he’s not just being polite; he immediately mentions a song he has been working on, called Sidepiece, and then he gets very excited. “The blue double tick! Imagine some big female pop star! Oh YES!” He goes quiet for a moment, then he starts rapping. “I sent you a text, you didn’t reply/ Got the two ticks, what am I?/ SIDEPIECE!” Could, through the power of hard-hitting journalism, the Guide have accidentally invented Little Mix’s comeback single? Watch this space …