As Nick Kyrgios was reminded again this week, his habit of digging holes for himself is invariably followed by people covering him in dirt. And the guy with the shovel in his hand on Arthur Ashe Court on Saturday night is probably the most lethal gravedigger in tennis, Roger Federer. The Swiss, who likes Kyrgios, could not hide his disappointment when he heard about the Australian’s latest bout of bone-headed self-indulgence – not to mention the intervention that saved him, by the chair umpire without a chair, Mohamed Lahyani. Whatever his soft side, though, Federer will bury Kyrgios if he shows the slightest slip in commitment or concentration when they meet in the third round. Remarkably Federer has not won the US Open for 10 years, having put five on the sideboard in a row before that. He last made the final in 2015, beaten by Novak Djokovic (slated to meet him in the quarters this time). Kyrgios, whose respect for the great man by some way outstrips his regard for his critics, might never win one – but he could turn their fourth meeting into the match of the tournament. While he has driven Federer all the way to the line in their three completed matches – eight of nine sets went to a tie-break – Kyrgios is in the unusual position of having to beat two players to get to the second week: himself and Federer. The day after Kyrgios escaped censure for not trying in the early stages of his match against Pierre-Hugues Herbert, Lahyani, who saved his neck although the player did not quite get it – also escaped with a mild rebuke. Certainly the incident set a small conflagration under the 50th US Open, the last major of the summer, as it contravened loose protocols of behaviour by player and official. As the United States Tennis Associated, which runs the tournament, put it in a laboured release: “After a comprehensive review conducted by US Open officials, including US Open tournament director David Brewer, tournament referee Brian Earley and others, the US Open determined that chair umpire Mohamed Lahyani’s conduct during Thursday’s second-round match involving Nick Kyrgios and Pierre-Hugues Herbert went beyond protocol. Lahyani was advised to adhere to proper protocols in all matches that he officiates moving forward. “Lahyani will continue to officiate during the 2018 US Open. His performance will continue to be evaluated, as will that of all chair umpires throughout the course of the US Open.” There have been bad school reports written better than that. But at least they responded and probably came to the right conclusion. Herbert lost on merit to a player who somehow shrugged off his cloying ennui after some kind words from the umpire. As Kyrgios had to admit: “It was not a good look.” The unknown will be how the episode on Court 17 will unsettle Kyrgios, whose truculent demeanour might be disguising deep-seated doubts about whether he is in the right sport (basketball, he says, is where his head is a lot of the time – nearer the clouds, certainly). He occasionally looks as if he is about to quit because he struggles under pressure and likes to give the impression he does not care. He does – but only when he wants to. That can be confusing for opponents, himself and even umpires. Bottom line: Kyrgios should not have disrespected his sport by failing to make a reasonable effort to reach a couple of big serves in the first set against Herbert, followed by sulking that led to him falling 0-3 down in the second. And Lahyani, a very good umpire who sometimes plays to the gallery, maybe should not have left his chair to talk to Kyrgios on a changeover, as it clearly gave the impression of favouritism. He did not intend it that way, or to look like it, but that is how it panned out. That will be the end of it, rightly so, as focus swings to Saturday night and Arthur Ashe Court. Federer will hope he is sharper than when they last played, in Stuttgart before Wimbledon, when Kyrgios almost won in a third-set tie-break. If what he needs to lift his spirits and his level is a great opponent, he has been delivered exactly that here. It is up to him not to waste the opportunity.