Oh, José. Manchester’s grumpiest man apparently has even more cause to be unhappy on Wednesday, because of a phone call from Germany, and whispers from within his own camp. First, the latter: according to the Daily Mail, Paul Pogba has told teammates/pals/people who are spinning a line to the Daily Mail, that he wants out, specifically to Barcelona. Which could of course be what they call a “negotiating tactic”, and it might just be a coincidence that the Sun reckons Poggo, as nobody calls him, wants a £200,000-a-week pay rise in order to stick around. Meanwhile, word from the land of schnitzel and flamboyantly cheap public transport is that Jérôme Boateng gave Mr Mourinho a bell on Tuesday to say “thanks, but no thanks.” The Bayern Munich centre-back looked like the only thing standing between Manchester United and an absurd panic purchase of Harry Maguire, but told José that he wasn’t keen on a move for – and you’ll like this – ‘football reasons.’ And that panic purchase of Maguire is a step closer, according to those in the know, because Leicester already have a couple of replacements lined up. The Dinamo Zagreb centre-back Filip Benkovic is on his way for £13.5m, and Freiburg’s Turkish international Çaglar Soyuncu is also supposedly on his way for £22.5m. It’s all falling into place for José. If by “all” you mean dramatically over-paying for a defender who is perfectly good, but is ultimately slower than mince and United wouldn’t be looking at twice if it wasn’t for the World Cup. Speaking of teams soiling themselves rather than dealing with the mess/smell simply firing cash out of a cannon, Chelsea have told Athletic Bilbao that they’re perfectly happy [gulp] to pay the [gulp] £71.5m [gulp gulp gulp] release clause for their goalkeeper Kepa Arrizabalaga. Of course Chelsea need a goalie given that Thibaut Courtois is about to punch his way out of Stamford Bridge and towards Real Madrid, and perhaps when faced with the alternatives (Jack Butland, Rob Green, Dmitri Kharine’s grey jogging bottoms) they thought that sounded like a bargain. But, as they apparently baulked at paying less for the more established Alisson earlier in the summer, they’ll be convincing exactly no one if they try to pretend this was the plan all along. Still, in slightly better news for Mauricio Sarri, Mateo Kovacic is heading to Chelsea as part of the Courtois deal, which is nice. Plus Everton think Kurt Zouma is the answer to their central defensive problems, and are confident of bagging him before the window SLAMS shut - that’s if they don’t sign Barcelona’s Yerry Mina, obviously. Across town, transfer shrewdie Daniel Levy has waited until Aston Villa are in their strongest negotiating position of the summer before submitting a £25m bid for Jack Grealish, a bid that may well be turned down, leaving Mauricio Pochettino with no new signings and looking, frankly, like a bit of a fool. The Celta Vigo midfielder Stanislav Lobotka is also on their radar, but PSG are in the mix there, which could throw a very expensive spanner in the works. It’s been a busy summer at West Ham already, but it could be an even busier last couple of days in the market: they’re sniffing around the Roma midfielder Maxime Gonalons (Everton and Crystal Palace apparently also on that case), while they’re this close to paying £5m for Arsenal’s Lucas Pérez. Elsewhere Watford want Southampton’s James Ward-Prowse, £10m the bunce mentioned in that one; for some reason Crystal Palace and Fulham both want Jordan Ayew, who is supposedly refusing to train at Swansea; Fulham are also looking at the Celta Vigo right-back Hugo Mallo; Burnley are keen – £10m keen – on the Nantes midfielder Abdoulaye Touré, and might sell Tom Heaton after the arrival of Charles Joseph Hart. Finally, let’s have a bit of Nabil Fekir. Lyon played Chelsea in a friendly on Tuesday night, from which Fekir was absent, but the French side’s coach was obviously asked about the one-time Liverpool target. “It’s too early to say,” he answered when asked if Fekir would be doing one before 5pm Thursday. “He wanted to leave at the end of last season, but came back to training yesterday and was happy. Who knows? There may be opportunities that come up before the end of the window. For now, he is a Lyon player.”