The man who threw acid over the TV presenter Katie Piper is to be released from prison after serving nine years of a life sentence. Stefan Sylvestre, now 30, from Shepherd’s Bush, west London, was sentenced in 2009 for the attack and was told he must serve a minimum of six years before becoming eligible for parole. Piper, who will appear in the next series of the BBC’s Strictly Come Dancing, was left permanently scarred by the attack. The 34-year-old’s obsessive ex-boyfriend Daniel Lynch arranged for Sylvestre to throw the corrosive liquid at her in March 2008. She has since gone on to campaign and raise awareness about acid attacks, sharing her story in the documentary Katie: My Beautiful Face. Lynch was jailed for life with a minimum of 16 years for sexually assaulting Piper and telling Sylvestre to throw acid over her. The pair had dated briefly before Lynch, a martial arts fan who had a previous conviction for pouring boiling water over a man, became obsessively jealous. The Parole Board confirmed Sylvestre was being released after an oral hearing, adding that Piper read statements in person to the panel. “Decisions are solely focused on whether a prisoner would represent a significant risk to the public after release,” a spokesperson said. “The panel will have carefully looked at a whole range of evidence, including details of the original evidence and any evidence of behaviour change.” The panel considered there were a number of factors that reduced Sylvestre’s risk of causing serious harm in the future, including the fact he was now 11 years older than when he committed the offence. He had been drawn into a criminal lifestyle in his teens and was involved with drugs. The board’s summary said a forensic psychologist told the panel there were factors that would protect Sylvestre from returning to crime, including his improved relationship with his family and his plans for the future. “Mr Sylvestre displayed empathy for the victim and expressed remorse and shame for his actions,” the summary said. A Ministry of Justice spokesman said: “Public protection is our priority and while we understand public concern, it is vital that we respect the independence of the Parole Board.” The board summary said Sylvestre became eligible to be considered for release on 8 April 2014, and had had a previous review in 2015.