Late-night hosts on Thursday discussed the prospect of Donald Trump sitting down for an interview with special counsel Robert Mueller and the formation of Space Force. ABC’s Jimmy Kimmel detailed the president’s Space Force. “From the Pentagon this morning, Vice-President Pence made it official, calling for the formation of a new and exciting branch of the United States military,” Kimmel said. He then showed footage of Mike Pence announcing the Space Force, part of US efforts to “prepare for the next battlefield where America’s best and bravest will be called to deter and defeat a new generation of threats to our people”. “That was not a scene from a movie,” Kimmel added. “The Space Force is actually happening. They’ve got plans, they’re finding money. Michael Bay is on board to direct the whole thing.” Kimmel went on: “I watched this whole announcement this morning and I was impressed by the fact that Mike Pence was somehow able to make an announcement about interspace warfare boring. That’s hard to do.” “Of course, no one is more excited about this than Darth Traitor, Donald Trump,” Kimmel said, reading Trump’s tweet. “Space Force all the way!” he wrote. “They’re already working on a logo for the Space Force,” said the host. “In fact, the Trump campaign sent an email to their donors asking them to vote on a possible Space Force logo.” After showing the options sent to Trump supporters, Kimmel said: “The logo for the Space Force should just be a picture of money being shredded and thrown at the moon.” “Trump remains on vacation, but it’s a working vacation, because he’s still lying,” began Stephen Colbert. “According to one reporter’s tally, Trump made 132 false claims last week, which is averaging 19 false claims a day, almost five times his average.” “That is impressive,” the host added. “How does he keep up that pace? Does he wear some sort of wrist tracker, the Fib-Bit?” Trump, Colbert continued, is “working on some fresh material”, referring to recent lies about new car plants opening up in Pennsylvania and supreme court justice Neil Gorsuch’s standing at Harvard Law School. “With his tendency to cheat on facts, it’s no wonder Trump’s lawyers don’t want the president to sit down for an interview with special counsel Robert Mueller,” said the host, showing a clip of a Fox News host saying Trump has no reason to do the interview, “knowing that if you tell one lie to Bob Mueller, he’ll move to file charges”. “Well this sounds crazy, but hear me out,” Colbert said. “He could not lie. But his lawyers know that’s not an option.” Colbert then referenced recent reports saying that Trump’s lawyers will allow him to be interviewed so long as he isn’t asked about the firing of James Comey or his conversations with Comey about the FBI’s investigation of Mike Flynn. “Those are the two things that you have to ask!” Colbert shot back. “That’s like saying: ‘You can ask my client Jeffrey Dahmer about anything you want other than murder and dinner.’” Seth Meyers focused on Trump’s web of business entanglements and attempts to avoid an interview with Mueller. “We are seeing a truly unprecedented level of corruption swirl around the president of the United States,” he began. “Rarely in our history have we seen a president so engulfed in scandal. It seems like everyone around him is on trial or under investigation.” Meyers continued: “Some of his closest aides and allies have been arrested, his lawyers have basically admitted that if he testifies under oath he might commit perjury, which is odd given that Trump repeatedly insisted during the campaign that it was Hillary Clinton who surrounded herself with criminals.” In footage Meyers showed from the campaign trail, Trump calls Clinton the “ringleader of a criminal enterprise”. “As we’ve seen over the last 18 months, if anyone’s been running a criminal enterprise, it’s Trump,” Meyers said. “He’s been looting the federal government for as much as he can get while he can get it.” Meyers then showed news coverage about substantial spending at Trump’s Washington DC hotel by federal agencies, Trump’s political allies and foreign governments. “Trump’s lawyers say they don’t want him to testify under oath because they’re worried Mueller will accuse him of perjury,” the host continued. “Although I guess we shouldn’t be surprised Trump’s lawyers are worried about perjury since they themselves have lied multiple times about key details in the case.” In clips Meyers then showed, Trump defense attorneys Rudy Giuliani and Jay Sekulow admit to not being familiar with various aspects of the legal proceedings. “It’s not good when your lawyers have the same vibe as a Panera cashier on their first day on the job,” the host quipped.