Drake. Cristiano Ronaldo. NBA basketball players Steph Curry and LeBron James. Chances are these aren’t names you associate with the cutting edge of small-screen entertainment. However, they are in fact among a number of unlikely celebrities who have turned TV producers in recent years. In the case of the perma-sad Canadian rapper, Drake, he’s behind Netflix’s upcoming reboot of the Ashley Walters-starring gang drama Top Boy, which previously aired on Channel 4 (the streaming service claims he “drove its resurrection”). And, if east London-based tales seem something of a leap for him, then Drake’s next project, the teen drama Euphoria, which bears more than a slight resemblance to the show which launched his own career, Degrassi, is perhaps a return to what he knows best. Meanwhile, Ronaldo and James have focused their attention on sports-themed projects. The latter’s production company, SpringHill, has helped create shows including the acclaimed semi-autobiographical dramedy Survivor’s Remorse, while Ronaldo is executive-producing a drama about a female football team. But why swap recording studios and arenas for the already over-saturated world of telly? For some, it really does appear to be a labour of love. Drake, already a huge fan of UK grime and rap culture, shared the Netflix announcement via Instagram with a Union Jack and a “hands in the air” emoji, like an excited teenager going on a school trip to England. For others, it’s a chance to “make a difference”. Curry’s recent venture with Sony encompasses “faith, sports and family-friendly content”, with Curry commenting that: “I’ve been blessed to have this platform and I want to use it to affect the world positively.” Similarly, James told CNN back in 2014 about how his own experiences had inspired Survivor’s Remorse, making it a cautionary tale of sorts (“in the black community … we would rather stay together and both struggle than one of us making it and us being happy for them”). As for Ronaldo, his children’s animation, Striker Force 7 feels like more of a canny brand extension à la everyone’s favourite alien/sports mash-up, Space Jam, rather than a vessel for anything deeper. But can any old celeb make a TV show, and should they? TV producer and writer Jon Macqueen, who worked on Comedy Blaps and Phoneshop, sees it as a natural fit for someone like Drake. “If you’re a creative and have the sort of clout that can get a show made by your involvement alone, I can imagine just seeing if you can pull it off is tempting enough,” he says. “Since Elvis, there’s been a tradition of musicians getting involved in film and – with the respect that TV can now command – it feels like an extension of the same thing..” This new wave of producers is – for the most part – ushering in neglected stories and new voices As for sportspeople, however, the path is slightly less trodden. “It’s probably a mixture of ego and brand-building, but maybe also a sense that they’ve got a story to tell as much as anyone else has, so why not?” asks Macqueen. And, as for the sense that these famous faces might lack the skills needed to work in TV, Macqueen is unconvinced. “In all honesty, I don’t think it matters,” he adds. “It’s not like Drake’s going to be staring at a shooting schedule wondering how they’re going to pick up the scene they dropped because there was a riot in Croydon. He’s going to be an exec producer among a small army of exec producers, above a juicy layer of producers”. Although this means that James probably didn’t spend every day on set for Survivor’s Remorse – a show described by US TV site Vulture as “sharply written, richly acted, and compelling” – it highlights perhaps the most exciting aspect of all of this unexpected celeb involvement in TV. Rather than getting involved in TV for reasons of vanity, it seems this new wave is – for the most part – ushering in neglected stories and new voices, without having to get involved with all the mundanity behind the scenes. While Ronaldo’s cartoon boasts a very early-00s Digimon aesthetic and looks, frankly, a bit rubbish, others are working on projects which otherwise may never have made it to TV (the latest SpringHill production is Shut Up And Dribble, a docu-series about the politics of sports, especially within the NBA). So, as long as Drake doesn’t insist on a teary-eyed cameo where he’s gunned down in a school corridor, he could well be swapping Grammys for Emmys.