A California woman said she had to drive herself to the hospital to give birth alone, after her husband was arrested by agents of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, or Ice. María del Carmen Venegas told a Spanish-language TV station, KMEX-TV, she and her husband, Joel Arrona–Lara, 36, were driving to the hospital for a planned C–section on Wednesday when they stopped for gas in San Bernardino, just east of Los Angeles. Surveillance footage obtained by several media outlets showed two vehicles immediately flank the couple’s van after they pulled into the gas station. Ice agents questioned the couple and asked for identification, Venegas said. She was able to provide hers but said Arrona had left his at home in their rush to get to the hospital. Venegas said Arrona–Lara has been living in the US for 12 years without legal authorization. The surveillance footage showed the agents handcuffing Arrona and taking him away, leaving a sobbing Venegas alone. Venegas remains at the hospital, where she gave birth to a son, her fifth child, the oldest now 13. “My husband needs to be here,” Venegas told another area TV station, KCBS-TV, on Friday as she held her newborn son. “He had to wait for his son for so long, and someone just took him away.” In a statement to KMEX-LA, Ice spokeswoman Lori Haley confirmed that Arrona–Lara had been taken into custody. “Mr Arrona–Lara, a citizen of Mexico illegally residing in the United States, was taken into custody Wednesday by Ice Fugitive Operations Team officers in San Bernardino, California,” the statement said. “Mr Arrona–Lara is currently in Ice custody pending removal proceedings with the Executive Office for Immigration Review.” Ice arrests of immigrants without criminal convictions have spiked 203% during Donald Trump’s first 14 months in office, NBC reported this week. Some cases have attracted national attention. In June, for example, pizza deliveryman Pablo Villavicencio was detained while delivering a bulk lunch order to the Fort Hamilton military base in Brooklyn, New York. Shortly after taking office in January 2017, Trump signed an executive order that stopped exempting “classes or categories of removable aliens from potential enforcement”. In April 2018, Attorney General Jeff Sessions ordered federal prosecutors on the US-Mexico border to adopt a “zero tolerance” policy towards undocumented immigration, a hardline approach that lead to the separation of thousands of families. In her statement to KMEX-LA, Haley said: “Ice continues to focus its enforcement resources on individuals who pose a threat to national security, public safety and border security. Ice conducts targeted immigration enforcement in compliance with federal law and agency policy. “However, Ice will no longer exempt classes or categories of removable aliens from potential enforcement. All of those in violation of the immigration laws may be subject to immigration arrest, detention and, if found removable by final order, removal from the United States.” Venegas’s attorney, Emilio Amaya García, director of the San Bernardino Community Service Center, did not immediately return a request for comment. But he told KMEX–TV Arrona–Lara was “not who Ice were looking for”. “Both the mother and child’s life, who is a citizen of this country, were put in danger,” Amaya García told the TV station. “It reflects the ignorance and lack of common sense behind the ‘zero tolerance’ policy, that does not consider humane reasoning.”