Ben Stokes could see his return to the Big Bash League blocked, with the Australian team who were leading the chase to sign him ruling out any formal approach until after a cricket disciplinary commission has reached a decision on any punishment. Although Stokes was acquitted of affray after a week-long trial at Bristol crown court, the Sydney Sixers, who have openly expressed interest in the England all-rounder, take a dim view of his role in a Bristol street brawl. Jodie Hawkins, general manager of the Sydney Sixers, one of Australia’s leading T20 sides, said the team had akeen interest in the 27-year-old but evidence from the Bristol trial of Stokes and two other men had caused concern. “I’ve been following it all very closely and I definitely think what’s gone on with Ben would be a consideration in signing him,” Hawkins said. “He’s been acquitted but it’s definitely not a good look. We had been interested in him because a player of Ben’s calibre is always on your radar but until this is all cleared up, and that includes the ECB disciplinary process, we wouldn’t even consider it.” It is thought the Cricket Disciplinary Commission, which acts independently under the auspices of the England and Wales Cricket Board, will convene in the coming days to discuss whether Stokes is guilty of bringing the game into disrepute but it could take months for it to reach a conclusion and decide on any action. “If the process wasn’t finalised [by the start of the Big Bash] many discussions would need to be had,” Hawkins added. “Cricket Australia would have to have a say, too.” The ECB will address winter plans if an official approach is made to Stokes. But the Guardian understands a no objection certificate (NOC) would be issued by his employer to play a short stint in Australian domestic cricket. Stokes, who was born in Christchurch, New Zealand, played for Melbourne Renegades in early 2015. But Cricket Australia may block his return, not least because the success of the Big Bash has been attributed to its appeal to families including young children. In 2016 more than half of the spectators across the tournament were families. The Big Bash is so protective of its “family-friendly” brand that no return has been granted to the West Indies batsman Chris Gayle who caused outrage in 2016 when he made inappropriate comments in a pitchside television interview with Mel McLaughlin, a female broadcaster. Sydney Sixers still have two spots available for international players, as do several other teams. “There was uproar at the time [of Stokes’s arrest] but I’m not sure what the public opinion is now,” Hawkins said. “I know a lot of teams are looking at finalising their international roster but I don’t know where they stand at the moment.”