It says much for Wolverhampton Wanderers that the last time Manchester City endured a match as frustrating as this away from home in the Premier League was in February. Pep Guardiola’s side had racked up seven successive top flight wins on their travels since drawing at Burnley six months ago but Wolves were in no mood to roll over just because the Premier League champions were in town. Nuno Espírito Santo’s side played with tremendous energy, belief and courage, and deserved a point that was celebrated like a victory at the final whistle. There was a slice of good fortune with Willy Boly’s goal, which went in off the central defender’s arm, but it was hard to begrudge Wolves that bit of luck on a day when they caused City plenty of problems with some superb counterattacking. Aymeric Laporte’s first goal for City, with just over 20 minutes remaining, brought parity and there were opportunities for both teams to win a thrilling game in the closing moments. Diogo Jota flashed a shot inches over, while at the other end Sergio Agüero’s free-kick hit the top of the crossbar. Guardiola would have known that this had the potential to be an awkward test and that was the way it shaped up to be. Wolves spent long periods without the ball but they were certainly not parking the bus and carried a threat whenever they broke forward, in particular on the right flank, where Helder Costa had the beating of Benjamin Mendy, the City left-back. From a defensive point of view, City were their own worst enemy at times, in particular Vincent Kompany, who looked badly out of sorts and was straying close to becoming a danger to his own team. Kompany had already been penalised for a deliberate foul when he cynically brought down Rúben Neves to earn an early booking. Shortly afterwards Kompany tried to bring the ball out of defence but his heavy touch let him down and Wolves were able to counterattack through Jota. Raúl Jiménez swept home at the far post but was correctly flagged offside. Another wayward pass from Kompany later in the first half, as Wolves made life uncomfortable for City by pressing them high up the pitch, completed a difficult opening period for the Belgian. For all that, City still had plenty of moments at the other end where they produced some superb attacking football. Agüero struck the post with a low right-foot shot less than 60 seconds after Jiménez’s goal was ruled out for offside and the combination of the woodwork and some terrific goalkeeping denied City in their very next attack. Controlling the ball on his chest, Raheem Sterling struck a swerving 25-yard half-volley that was arcing towards the top corner when Rui Patrício stretched out his right hand to tip the ball on to the bar. It was an outstanding save. Aside from his disallowed goal, Jiménez had one other chance for Wolves before the interval and may well reflect that he should have shown a bit more composure. About 12 yards out and with the angle against him, the Mexican wildly thrashed at the ball and his shot ended up going out for a throw-in on the far side. It was City, though, who were dominating possession, pushing Wolves back deeper and deeper, in particular in the first 10 minutes of the second half, when it started to feel like a matter of time before they would find a way through. That was the theory, yet Wolves were not following the script. Initially it looked as though Wolves had squandered a great chance to take the lead when Costa, running away from Kompany after Laporte had failed to deal with a routine throw-in, delayed pulling the trigger and saw his shot pushed into the sidenetting by Ederson. But from the corner that followed, João Moutinho played the ball short before getting it back and delivering an inswinging cross that exposed some poor City marking. Matt Doherty got the faintest of touches before Boly, attempting a diving header, nudged the ball over the line with his right arm. The goal was allowed to stand, yet City levelled within 12 minutes. Ilkay Gündogan, who was later replaced by Leroy Sané as Guardiola chased victory, swung in a fine free-kick from the right and Laporte, with a free run at the ball, headed powerfully home. Gabriel Jesus, another City substitute, headed Mendy’s cross straight at Patrício moments later and then came the two late chances for Jota and Agüero.