Cricket Australia, Barnaby Joyce and Sky News’s Outsiders program have all won the dubious honour of an Ernie Award – bestowed annually to the public figures guilty of the country’s worst sexist remarks. Cricket Australia lead the field with two awards, the Gold Ernie and the Sport Silver Ernie (nicknamed The Warney), for sacking employee Angela Williamson after she tweeted that the government should do more to provide safe access to abortion. Williamson, who worked as manager of public policy and government relations, was sacked after she called the Tasmanian government “gutless” for blocking a proposal to allow terminations in public hospitals after the state’s only dedicated private provider closed. The cricket governing body came home just ahead of former TV presenter Don Burke, who blamed Asperger syndrome for his repeated sexual harassment and bullying of multiple women. Burke had already won the Celebrity Silver Ernie for his comments, made to Channel 9’s A Current Affair, where he said he was “an Asperger’s person”. The CEO of Autism Awareness Australia, Nicole Rogerson, savaged his comments as “incredibly hurtful to those people on the autism spectrum and their families”. Former deputy prime minister Barnaby Joyce won the Political Silver for his comments about his daughters during the same-sex marriage postal survey. “We know that the best protection for those girls is that they get themselves into a secure relationship with a loving husband, and I want that to happen,” he said. Coalition stablemate Tony Abbott was also handed an Ernie, this year known as The Trump, for repeat offending. The former prime minister has won the award nine times since 2002. Sky News’s Outsiders won the Industrial Silver Ernie for their response to their broadcasting of sexist remarks against Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young. Liberal Democrat senator David Leyonhjelm told the program that Hanson-Young was “known for liking men”, after an earlier similar attack in the Senate, and his comments were then repeated in a text strap on-screen. Outsiders responded by apologising and sacking the female junior producer who wrote the caption, and who was the only woman on the show. The hosts, Rowan Dean and Ross Cameron, who conducted the interview, were not publicly sanctioned and appeared on the channel the next day. Leyonhjelm also continues to appear on Sky News. Sky News wishes to apologise to Senator @sarahinthesen8 for broadcasting appalling comments by Senator @DavidLeyonhjelm earlier today, and for highlighting them in an on-screen strap. A producer has been suspended pending an internal investigation. 25 year old woman gets suspended not the misogynists what a joke https://t.co/277DDj7T9f Sky News shared the award with the Coopers Hotel in Sydney’s Newtown, which ran a Facebook promotion campaign for their rugby coverage that told patrons to: “Keep calm and slap a bitch as we approach the finals of this year’s NRL!” Former industrial relations minister Michaela Cash won the Elaine, for remarks least helpful to the sisterhood, after she told a senate inquiry she was “happy to sit here and name every young woman in Mr Shorten’s office over which rumours in this place abound.”  In good news, former Sydney Swans player Brandon Jack was awarded The Good Ernie for saying that “rape culture is real”. “If you roll your eyes at these words, dismissing the idea as an overreaction by hypersensitive feminists, then you are part of the problem,” he wrote in the Sydney Morning Herald. “This is something we can no longer hide from - so please, don’t weep for your toxic masculinity.”  The nominees at the 26th annual #theernieawards @TheErnieAwards pic.twitter.com/uJXV71vAke Pleasure to present the #Ernies Media Award to Don Burke at tonight’s @TheErnieAwards #Ernies18 pic.twitter.com/HL3MBX15Om We’re ready to roll tonight. Tweet your boos and commentary at us throughout the night for retweets! pic.twitter.com/OWhkn8BZg3