On a New York City night in late summer, 1976, three former art students were playing at a club called Max’s Kansas City. Observing them from a ringside table were a couple who looked a little older than most of the club’s clientele, and a lot less cool. But there they sat, front and centre, staring at the stage with encouraging smiles, gazing in particular at the singer, a thin, twitchy figure who, in his polo shirt and conservative haircut, looked more like a CIA intern than your standard rock and roller. Although none of the band’s repertoire of original compositions had yet been recorded, the couple’s lips moved in unison as they sang along to the words of every song, the most striking of which started like this: “I can’t seem to face up to the facts, I’m tense and nervous and I can’t relax”. Anyone who had worked in a record company’s A&R department would have recognised the couple’s behaviour as an impressive example of the art of seduction – and, as it transpired, a highly successful one for Seymour Stein and his wife, Linda, the singalong pair. Within a year that song, “Psycho Killer”, would be the centrepiece of the group’s first album, released on Stein’s label, Sire Records. The name of the band, of course, was Talking Heads. That’s a story from personal observation, not from Stein’s new autobiography, in which he makes no claim to have foreseen such enormous success, as he and Linda tracked Talking Heads from club to club in an effort to persuade three young musicians sceptical of the established record industry that this Brooklyn hustler and his noisy wife could be trusted to help them get their music to a wider public. But he knew that something was happening. That was what he did. It was his gift, his vocation. The description of the author on the book’s jacket as “America’s greatest living record man” is an amusing reminder that Stein grew up in a world of hype. “A little bit of bullshit won’t kill anyone,” he says in the book, “especially if it’s half-true.” And the claim is at least within nodding distance of credibility, since his label provided the vehicle for the early careers of artists including the Ramones, kd lang and Madonna, while introducing American audiences to countless young British bands, from Fleetwood Mac and Barclay James Harvest to Echo and the Bunnymen, the Cure and the Smiths. Having grown up in an era of giants in the American record industry, he has good stories to tell about his encounters with them. Syd Nathan of Cincinnati’s King Records was his mentor, a man “always teetering on the edge of rudeness and obscenity” yet who had guided a former juvenile delinquent named James Brown to a life of gold records and private jets. Nathan knew the business from the inside, understanding the shady world of rack jobbers, promo men and radio DJs who could grease the path of a chosen record into the pop charts. Stein writes interestingly about others, such as George Goldner of the Red Bird label, where he continued his apprenticeship in the early 60s, promoting hits by the Dixie Cups and the Shangri-Las until Goldner’s racetrack debts ran out of control and he was forced to sign the label over to the notorious Morris Levy, a front man for the Genovese crime family. Goldner died at 49, Stein records, “of a broken heart”. All the truly great record men had good ears, even if, like Stein himself, they had no musical ability (“Sometimes it’s better to be a dumb fuck like all the other dumb fucks in the audience”). In his view, the key quality is the ability to spot a great song. Once you have that, all else follows. He reserves special scorn for Mo Ostin, the all-powerful boss of the Warner Brothers musical empire in the 1970s, who bought Stein up and eventually brought him down: a “black-belt politician” without, in Stein’s view, any feeling at all for music or musicians. Stein is candid about his cocaine use and his homosexuality, which he revealed to Linda shortly before their marriage but never divulged to his parents. Even at its most gossipy, the narrative bulges with insight into the musicians whose paths he crossed, from the delicate internal chemistry of Talking Heads and Madonna’s armour-plated ambition to his fruitful encounters with Lou Reed and Brian Wilson late in their careers, before his own career began to wind down in a tangle of boardroom politics. There’s a sad conclusion with the brutal murder in 2007 of Linda, from whom he had long been divorced, followed by the death from cancer of one of their two daughters. And last month, on the eve of publication, his departure from the presidency of his label was suddenly announced by Warner Music. After half a century, the corporate waters had finally closed over his head. Those who replace him will have their own tales to tell, but never one like this. • Siren Song is published by St Martin’s. To order a copy for £19.54 (RRP £22.99) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.