Of course it is the hope that kills you. Anyone who has followed England long enough knows that. Which was why the thousands of fans inside Edgbaston’s Hollies Stand were so damn happy on Friday lunchtime. Because England were flat out of it, had not enough of the stuff to make the match worth fretting over. They were 87 for seven, after another abject collapse. Their vaunted middle order, Jonny Bairstow, Ben Stokes and Jos Buttler, fell in five balls either side of the lunch break and everything was over bar the shouting. Which is what the Barmy Army were doing. They were belting out Please Don’t Take Me Home. But England’s batsmen were not listening. And then the kid came in and changed everything. Sam Curran followed his four for 74 in India’s first innings with a top score of 63. And then he had Ajinkya Rahane caught behind in India’s second. So that is a fifty and five wickets in his second Test, with another five still up for grabs. He nearly got one of them with an inswinger that beat Virat Kohli’s inside edge. But the review showed the ball was flying just over the top of middle stump. Curran has said he wants Ben Stokes’ job. “In the future I probably see myself batting somewhere in that role,” he said last March. “Number four, five or six is where I want to be” – which sounds a bit rich from a 20-year-old whose only century in professional cricket was in a 15-a-side warm-up match against an outfit called the Antigua Master Blasters. But those who know him from Surrey have always said he has the talent to do it. “Eventually he’ll become more of a batting all-rounder,” said his former teammate Chris Tremlett when Curran made his Test debut in June. “He’s the sort of player who could bat at seven for England.” There was a caveat attached, of course. “Eventually,” Tremlett said. “Give him a couple of years.” Well, “eventually” has come round sooner than Tremlett or anyone else imagined. When Curran faced his first ball, Ishant Sharma was on at one end, whipping the ball in with waspish swing, and Ravi Ashwin at the other, using all his magician’s tricks, his spell one long riff on all the many variations of seam and spin and drift. Between them they had done for England’s seven best batsmen. Ashwin had been toying with England’s left-handers, bamboozling them with his repertoire of arm balls and off breaks and carrom balls – until Curran came in. In his very first over at the crease he came forward and clipped Ashwin for four with a clean, crisp drive down the ground. It was the first time anyone had done that all match. And then, minutes later, he punched Sharma through the covers for another. Adil Rashid was in at the other end. Rashid, of course, is some bat and has made 10 first-class centuries. But he, just like the two grandees who came in after him, Stuart Broad and Jimmy Anderson, found himself playing junior partner to a 20-year-old, a lad so young that, when he was born, Anderson was already opening the bowling for Burnley in the Lancashire League. “When I was 20 I didn’t know what was going on,” Anderson said, “but he’s an impressive lad, has brilliant skills with the ball and talent with the bat.” More than that, Anderson added, “he’s got fight in him, the guts and determination to get us back in the match when we were down and out.” Curran and Rashid put on 48 together, just enough to leave the faintest maybe, just maybe, in the minds of everyone watching. And when Curran batted on with Broad, that maybe became more insistent. Broad has not always been so very sensible when he has been batting lately but here he did not try anything much more ambitious than the odd single while Curran cut and slashed, pulled and poked. Then, when he got to 37, he really started to play. Curran skipped down the pitch and lashed Ashwin back over his head for a six, then thumped him for four through long-on. So Kohli brought Sharma back into the attack, only to see Curran take two quick steps and launch a six high over extra cover. It was an astonishing shot, impetuous, brave and brilliant – the kind you try only if you are young or stupid. And it brought up his fifty, which made him the fourth youngest man to make one for England in Test cricket, after Haseeb Hameed, Jack Crawford and Denis Compton. There was one more four before he was last man out for 63. It gave England a lead of 193. And, there it was, that familiar old feeling – some hope.