The British foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, is to urge Donald Trump to face down Moscow’s threat to western values by imposing wider economic sanctions against Russia and agreeing new rules to protect the legitimacy of democratic elections. In a speech in Washington on Tuesday during his first visit since taking over from Boris Johnson as the UK’s most senior diplomat, Hunt will specifically call for tighter regulation of online political advertising and new measures to prevent cyber attacks on electoral machinery. Hunt will also throw out a challenge to Trump’s protectionist policies by warning a weakening of free trade will only damage western economies, and ultimately western political power. He will say the emergence of an international order based on the application of law rather than might had led to an exponential growth in trade, leading to extraordinary advances in economic and social prosperity across the globe. He will also call for Nato to set clearer red lines about Russia’s use of chemical weapons and incursions into foreign territory such as the annexation of Crimea in 2014. Without directly challenging the legitimacy of Trump’s election as president in 2016, he will point to the drawbacks in many recent democratic outcomes, saying: “The heart of any democracy is freedom of expression, which allows citizens to access independent information to help decide who to vote for. But the ubiquity of fake news, social media targeting and foreign attempts to manipulate elections have undermined confidence that this can actually happen.” Any tarnishing of Trump’s electoral mandate is highly perilous territory for a foreign politician, and Hunt will temper his criticism by saying western leaders should not deceive themselves that populism is merely a byproduct of social media spreading fake news. He will point to the deeper reasons behind Trump’s election, saying: “We are putting our heads in the sand if we blame social media by pretending that some of the causes of that resentment are not real – whether caused by the decline in real incomes for many Americans and Europeans, dislocation caused by changes in technology or the identity concerns of many voters caused by immigration.” At the same time, he will imply these trends reveal “a fraying domestic support for democratic systems” in the west. “Since the financial crash of 2008, many voters have started to question globalisation and reject political leaders they associate as defending it,” he will say. A former culture secretary, immersed in the debate about online political manipulation, he will propose tightening the rules governing online political advertising. “Given the importance of the online world for political communication the rules governing online activity in the runup to elections should surely be as strict as those elsewhere – and modern electorates should be given confidence the results cannot be influenced by the cyber activities of other countries.” Hunt’s remarks suggest he is prepared to back the case recently made by the former foreign secretary Lord Hague for a ban on online paid political advertising of the kind that has been imposed on broadcasters for decades. Hague acknowledged he had adopted the idea from a book by former Labour communications chief Tom Baldwin in which he described political advertising in social media as “the most lethal weapon in campaign communications ever invented”. The overall tone of Hunt’s speech is notably more pointed than the style adopted by his predecessor Boris Johnson. It is likely to be read as an intervention on the side of the anti-Russian faction in the often-feuding US administration, a side that has been slowly recovering ground after Trump was deemed to have misjudged his bilateral, two-hour, one-to-one summit with Putin in Helsinki in July. Following the summit, Trump implied that he trusted the Russian president as much if not more than his own intelligence agencies. Trump has always been reluctant to support wider sanctions against Russia. Before the summit Trump clashed with his Nato allies and implied he might accept the annexation of Crimea from Ukraine – a policy the US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, repudiated days after the summit. In the first direct political engagement with the Trump administration since the American president’s controversial visit to Britain two months ago, Hunt will on Wednesday meet Pompeo, as well as Jared Kushner, Trump’s son-in-law, and John Kelly, the White House chief of staff. Hunt will urge the EU to stand truly shoulder to shoulder with the US administration by going further to impose more comprehensive sanctions against Russia. The US Senate has not just targeted Russian industries, but also the assets of oligarchs close to Putin. Hunt will say: “Of course we must engage with Moscow, but we must also be blunt: Russia’s foreign policy under President Putin has made the world a more dangerous place.” Hunt’s talks on Wednesday will cover the denuclearisation of North Korea, the future of Syria and Yemen and the Middle East peace process. The two sides are likely to probe for potential common ground over the 2015 Iran nuclear deal, still supported by the EU, but torn up by Trump. The US is threatening to impose secondary sanctions on any EU firm that continues to invest in Iran, a move that is compelling EU private companies, including Total, to disinvest.