For 23 years Andrew Brunson quietly served the Lord in the ancient city of Izmir on Turkey’s Aegean coast. He built up the congregation of the small Resurrection church to about 25 regulars, taught his children how to scuba dive, organised movie nights and picnics and took pride in coming from a long line of pastors. Now, the evangelical Presbyterian missionary is at the heart of an international diplomatic and economic crisis which has seen Turkey’s currency go into freefall and led its president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, to accuse the US of trying to stab his country in the back. Brunson’s arrest in October 2016 and later indictment on charges of espionage and links to terror organisations have made him a martyr in the eyes of Christian activists who have enlisted the power of the White House. In recent months, Donald Trump has declared him a “fine gentleman and Christian leader” who is being “persecuted in Turkey for no reason”. Vice-president Mike Pence said Turkey should release Brunson or “face the consequences”. Mike Pompeo, the secretary of state, warned of “significant sanctions”. This month, they were enacted: the US doubled steel and aluminium tariffs, bringing to a head an economic crisis that had been brewing for months. Brunson, 50, grew up in North Carolina, the oldest of seven children in a deeply religious family. His mother, Pam, has said he nearly died from an illness when he was a child; “at the time, I gave him to the Lord for his purposes”. He moved to Turkey in the mid-1990s, and settled with his wife Norine and three children in Izmir, the country’s third largest city, with a liberal reputation. The Resurrection church is among a handful of Christian places of worship. According to his sister, Beth Herman, the family’s life was simple. “Grilling out, picnics, swimming, game nights, movie nights … in so many ways, the typical American family though living so far away,” she said last year. “In some ways, I believe living in Turkey has made them grow even closer as a family as they have had to rely so heavily on each other and establish their own traditions as they are in the religious minority.” Almost two years ago, Brunson was arrested and accused of plotting to overthrow the Turkish government. Five months later he was formally indicted on espionage charges and links to terrorist organisations. He was connected to the Gülen movement, which the Turkish regime holds responsible for a failed coup attempt in 2016. Thousands of people, including academics, public sector workers and journalists were picked up in a sweeping crackdown that followed the failed revolt. Brunson, who was initially held in a cell built for eight prisoners with 21 others, faced a jail sentence of 35 years. Evangelical Christians in the US swiftly took up his case, saying the accusations made against him were baseless and he was being detained and persecuted for his religious faith. The American Center for Law and Justice, a conservative Christian organisation, lobbied the White House and others over Brunson. It launched a petition in support of the pastor which declared that “Christianity is on trial”. Almost 600,000 people have signed it. Trump’s first tweet about Brunson, posted in April, said: “Pastor Andrew Brunson, a fine gentleman and Christian leader in the United States, is on trial and being persecuted in Turkey for no reason. They call him a Spy, but I am more a Spy than he is. Hopefully he will be allowed to come home to his beautiful family where he belongs!” Two further tweets followed, one saying he had “been held hostage far too long”, and the second describing him as “a great Christian family man and wonderful human being. He is suffering greatly. This innocent man of faith should be released immediately!” Last month Brunson was moved to house arrest at his home on the grounds of ill health, according to the Turkish authorities. He reportedly lost more than 50 pounds while in prison. He has told the court hearing his case that there was no concrete evidence against him. “The disciples of Jesus suffered in his name, now it is my turn. I am an innocent man on all these charges. I reject them. I know why I am here. I am here to suffer in Jesus’s name.”