A man has appeared in court charged with the murder of the midwife Samantha Eastwood. Michael Stirling, 32, was charged on Sunday after Eastwood’s body was found in a disused salt quarry near Caverswall, Staffordshire, eight days after her disappearance. Stirling, who is the brother-in-law of Eastwood’s former fiance John Peake, did not enter a plea during the three-minute hearing at North Staffordshire magistrates court on Monday. He spoke only to confirm his name, address and date of birth. No members of Eastwood’s family were present. The charge states that Stirling allegedly murdered Eastwood between 26 July and 5 August in Baddeley Green. Stirling had been held on suspicion of kidnap last week and was rearrested on suspicion of murder on Sunday as police continued to search his home in Bucknall, Stoke-on-Trent. Staffordshire police said two other men, aged 28 and 60, who were arrested on suspicion of assisting an offender, had been released on conditional bail while inquiries continued. Police on Sunday confirmed that Eastwood’s former fiance was not one of three men being held in connection with her murder. Eastwood was last seen at 7.45pm Friday 27 July when she was captured on CCTV leaving the Royal Stoke University hospital after a night shift. The footage then showed her driving towards home in her Volvo XC60 SUV and she was not seen again. Her colleagues raised concerns when she did not show up for her following shift. Eastland’s body was found during a search of the Tick Hill salt quarry in remote woodland in Caverswall. A postmortem was carried out on Sunday but the results have not been made public. In a statement released by Staffordshire police, Eastwood’s family thanked supporters for their efforts. They said: “The family of Samantha would like to ask that their privacy is respected at this terrible time. We would like to say thank you to all the people who followed Samantha’s story and tried their best to help.” Eastwood had reportedly been in a relationship with Peake for several years and the couple were to marry in June, but the midwife ended their relationship at the beginning of this year. On Sunday detectives were seen entering a house in the Northwood area of Stoke-on-Trent owned by Peake’s sister Katie Stirling, 32, and her husband, Michael. The house is now being treated as a crime scene. The home of Stirling’s parents Stephen, 60, and Carol, 60, in Bucknall, was also searched and a small white van was seen being taken away by police on Saturday. On Friday the sister of the midwife made a plea for her safe return, saying: “We miss you very much, we need you home where you belong.” Gemma Eastwood, 26, said her sister was “warm and generous with a great sense of humour” as she appealed for any information about the disappearance. Stirling was remanded in custody to appear at Stafford crown court via video-link on 8 August. 