Perhaps it is appropriate that the 100th playing of this major sees the US firmly in control of the US PGA. On a Friday where Bellerive was virtually defenceless, those carrying the stars and stripes marched to positions of prominence. Chief among them was Gary Woodland, whose second-round 66 meant the equalling of a 36-hole major scoring record at 130. It is hardly being disrespectful to suggest that Nick Faldo, the first to achieve that number, encountered a tougher backdrop at Muirfield in 1992. Bellerive is in Missouri and Woodland, who hails from the next door state of Kansas, would be a highly popular winner of the Wanamaker Trophy on Sunday evening. He would also be a shock one; since a share of 12th in this event in 2011, Woodland has gone 42nd, 74th, missed cut, did not play, missed cut and tied 22nd. What is the opposite of horses for courses? “I have a lot of friends out here,” Woodland said. “A lot of college teammates, a lot of people from college. My parents are here. My sister’s here. My wife and my little guy are here as well. It’s pretty special to be close to home where everybody can come out and watch because I have a lot of family who have never seen me play in person.” Kevin Kisner, playing in Woodland’s company, was not of a mind to let the big-hitter have it all his own way. Kisner’s 64 moved him to nine under par and only one off the lead. If the appearance of this duo at the leaderboard’s summit is something of a surprise, the same cannot be said for two of the men in closest pursuit. Golf’s cavalry – American of course – lurk with menacing intent. Brooks Koepka was two over par after six holes of his first round; recovery from there has seen the US Open champion sign for a 69 and 63 to move to minus eight. One adrift of Koepka is Dustin Johnson, the world No 1, following Friday’s 66. “I’m definitely wanting to get that second major win,” said Johnson, in what marks as close to a war cry as he will ever utter. Fowler had tied Johnson’s score before the arrival of an epic storm that led to the suspension of the second round until Saturday. Tiger Woods and Rory McIlroy were among those hauled from the course as the heavens opened and thunder cracked. August and the midwest always looked an ominous combination. Those of foreign persuasion have not entirely given up hope. Charl Schwartzel’s 63 was sufficient to send him to seven under and Thomas Pieters matched that aggregate after his 66, a welcome return to form for the Belgian, who has rather lost his way after a starring role in the 2016 Ryder Cup. Adam Scott’s 65 puts him at five under, alongside the Open champion, Francesco Molinari, and Jon Rahm. Credit is due to Rahm for saving par at the 17th after he was handed an unfortunate penalty for accidentally standing on his ball in the rough. Rahm is not known, after all, for taking such moments of adversity especially well. The Friday exodus included Sergio Garcia, Alex Noren and Paul Casey, as all pertinent exits with Europe’s present Ryder Cup scenario in mind. Bubba Watson’s second round of 78 meant he, too, crashed out after 36 holes. There was better news for Tommy Fleetwood, who birdied his last two holes to secure a weekend berth. That means prize money; given the aberration of midweek, when his Open winnings were mistakenly paid into the bank account of one Thomas Fleetwood of Florida, his namesake might be in for another windfall. Jordan Spieth’s chances of completing a career grand slam here remain odds against, despite scoring improvement on day two. The Texan added a 66 to his first round 71, thereafter admitting his exasperation with the course layout in St Louis, giving the distinct impression he does not regard this tournament as having a major feel. “I’m a little frustrated at this place in general,” said Spieth. “I think that it’s tough to come to a venue with bent grass greens and this kind of weather. This course would be phenomenal ... if it’s not playing so soft. And it’s not the rain that came on Tuesday, it was like that on Monday. So you just fire in and you get away with more, like you don’t have to be as precise. That’s frustrating in a major championship. That’s frustrating to me because I feel like that’s an advantage that I have. “So personally I would prefer more difficult and firmer, faster conditions on the greens. Having said that, I would have shot a much higher score yesterday, given you’ve got to be in the fairways in order to hold greens where they need to be. So I’m not saying that my score would be any better, I’m just saying what you would like to see in a major championship. I really like the golf course ..., you just can’t ... have firm, fast bent grass greens with this climate.” Spieth, needless to say, is an advocate of the US PGA’s switch to May from next year.