The film Academy has announced a number of changes to the Oscars, including the introduction of a new category. From next year, there will be an award for outstanding achievement in popular film, the first time a new Oscar has been introduced since best animated film in 2001. Details on eligibility have yet to be announced. In a letter sent to members, the Academy also announced that the telecast would now be kept to under three hours, which means that some of the 24 categories will be announced during commercial breaks and then edited into the ceremony later on. This year’s ceremony, which saw The Shape of Water take the top prize, ran to just under four hours. “We are committed to producing an entertaining show in three hours, delivering a more accessible Oscars for our viewers worldwide,” the letter reads. The moves are seen as new ways for the Oscars to appeal to a wider audience. This year’s ceremony saw the lowest US viewership in history and the contending films were mainly lower budgeted fare with solid box office returns. In 2009, the best picture race was opened up from five to a possible 10 nominees, seen as a way of bringing in bigger blockbusters. Since then, Avatar, Inception, The Martian, Gravity and Toy Story 3 have all received nominations. While details of the popular film category are yet to be announced, it could be a way for superhero films to finally break through, with the acclaimed box office hit Black Panther possibly making an appearance. In a later addendum, the Academy clarified that a film could be eligible for both the popular film and the best picture Oscar. The most recent induction of new Academy members was also seen as a way of broadening the institution with its most diverse set to date, including Amy Schumer, Daniel Kaluuya and Tiffany Haddish. The industry professionals included in the latest batch of invitees were 49% female and 38% people of color. Next year’s Oscars will take place on 23 February with early favorites including Bradley Cooper’s remake of A Star is Born, Barry Jenkins’ Moonlight follow-up If Beale Street Could Talk and the La La Land director Damien Chazelle’s Neil Armstrong drama First Man.