Arsenal’s majority shareholder Stan Kroenke has made an acceptable £600m offer to buy the whole of the Premier League club and which would take its value to £1.8bn, and insists his ambition is “to see it competing consistently to win the Premier League and the Champions League.” The American currently owns 67% of Arsenal, and has put forward a deal – published on the London Stock Exchange – which has been accepted and which will see him buy the remainder of the club’s shares, 30% of which are owned by the Russian billionaire Alisher Usmanov and his company Red and White Securities. Kroenke is acting through his own company, Kroenke Sports & Entertainment, which says it has received an “irrevocable undertaking” from Red and White Securities to accept the offer as soon as possible, and in any event by 3pm on Tuesday. The Arsenal Supporters’ Trust, whose Fanshare scheme before its closure in 2014 numbered more than 1,800 supporters and allowed fans to attend the club’s annual meeting, pose questions on finances and vote on policy, has branded the proposal a “dreadful day” for the club. A statement issued Tuesday morning read: “This news marks a dreadful day for Arsenal Football Club. Stan Kroenke taking the Club private will see the end of supporters owning shares in Arsenal and their role upholding custodianship values. “By taking the Club private Stan Kroenke will be able to implement the following detrimental actions: • Pay management fees and dividends without any check or balance. • No Annual General Meeting to hold the Board to account. • Remove the independent directors. • Place debt on to Arsenal to support his other business interests. “The AST is also extremely concerned to note that this purchase is being funded by a loan. “The most dreadful part of this announcement is the news that Kroenke plans to forcibly purchase the shares held by Arsenal fans. Many of these fans are AST members and hold their shares not for value but as custodians who care for the future of the club. “Kroenke’s actions will neuter their voice and involvement. It is in effect legalised theft to remove shareholder scrutiny on how Arsenal is managed. “The AST is wholly against this takeover. Arsenal remains too important to be owned by any one person.” KSE also owns NFL’s LA Rams, the NBA side Denver Nuggets, Colorado Avalanche of the NHL and Colorado Rapids in the MLS. “We at KSE are moving forward with this offer leading to 100% ownership of the club. We appreciate Mr Usmanov’s dedication to the Arsenal Football Club and the storied ethos and history the club represents. “KSE’s ambitions for the club are to see it competing consistently to win the Premier League and the Champions League, as well as the major trophies in the women’s senior game and at youth level.” In October last year KSE offered £525m to buy the 18,695 shares held by Usmanov. Kroenke believes taking the north London club into private ownership will increase their chances of success in the future. The statement continued: “The successful implementation of the offer will result in the opening of a new chapter in the history of the club in bringing 100% private ownership by KSE. KSE believes moving to private ownership will bring the benefits of a single owner better able to move quickly in furtherance of the club’s strategy and ambitions. KSE is a committed, long-term owner of the club.”