After 18 relatively trouble-free months the biggest challenge in Toronto Wolfpack’s short history begins this weekend. Rugby league’s transatlantic trailblazers have made light work of the professional game so far since their inaugural game in February 2017; winning League One at a canter last season, before finishing top of the sport’s second tier, the Championship, this time around. In any other sport a record of 21 wins from 23 games would be enough to ensure promotion but Toronto now head into the Qualifiers, the eight-team mini-league featuring Super League’s bottom four and the Championship’s leading quartet which will determine the final four places in the top flight in 2019. The top three teams after seven games automatically gain Super League status; fourth and fifth play-off in the Million Pound Game for the 12th and final spot. For Toronto, that all begins this Sunday with a trip to Halifax. Martin Vickers, head of the Wolfpack’s UK operations, says: “The club is hugely excited about the next seven weeks and the chance to play some top clubs.” With the disparity in funding between the top two divisions, being in Super League next season is seen as vital by some clubs but the Wolfpack, who are fortunate enough to be bankrolled by the Australian mining tycoon David Argyle, do not share that view, unsurprisingly. Vickers says: “The goal from the outset was Super League and we would love to achieve that sooner rather than later, but I wouldn’t describe being in the Championship next year as fatal. We have long-term partnerships which continue to thrive, we are collaborating strongly with local communities to get children playing rugby and we have a serious and sustainable long-term model.” The reaction in Toronto to rugby league, from schools through to match-day attendances, has been positive – and offers an insight into the potential the sport perhaps has in cracking North America. More than 8,200 fans watched their recent game against Featherstone and Vickers believes that is simply the tip of the iceberg for the years ahead. “From day one the response from the Canadian fans has been awesome,” he says. “It’s a breath of fresh air for the sport to see a huge city like Toronto embrace the game. It’s also great to see the amount of UK supporters coming to games, and the tourism board in Toronto recognise the economic impact the club is bringing to the city.” With Argyle’s backing, Toronto have not been coy in flexing their financial muscle. Established NRL players such as Darcy Lussick and Chase Stanley have arrived in Canada this year – but even with such investment promotion at this stage would be ahead of where the Wolfpack’s projected seven-year plan had them in 2019. Vickers says: “I’m fairly sure when our investment group sat down just over two years ago and put this project together, this point felt like a long time away. But it’s a great credit to everyone involved that the club has an opportunity to create history over the next few crucial weeks.”