Jürgen Klopp will have taken far more satisfaction from this narrow victory than the emphatic dismissal of West Ham on the opening weekend. Crystal Palace, always awkward opponents, were eventually seen off in south London to maintain the Merseysiders’ pristine start to the campaign and leave their manager chest-bumping his coaching staff as he celebrated on the sidelines. They have plenty of cause for optimism. This was never comfortable, even after the home side had been reduced in number after the otherwise excellent Aaron Wan-Bissaka’s right knee illegally thwarted Mohamed Salah’s counterattack on the edge of the Palace penalty area with a quarter of an hour still to play. It was also controversial inasmuch as the home side were incensed at Michael Oliver’s award of a penalty as half-time approached, even if Mamadou Sakho’s stuttered and desperate lunges at the loose ball might have done enough to send Salah to the turf. Roy Hodgson, usually loath to criticise officials, was still seething at that award long after the final whistle. Yet the victory ultimately served as an indication of Liverpool’s new-found prowess. In Virgil van Dijk they boasted the dominant defensive force on display, a colossus who matched and, mostly, dwarfed Christian Benteke in the air, with each tackle, interception or booming header a source of inspiration for his teammates. He certainly brought the best out of Joe Gomez at his side. The last time this team had visited Selhurst Park on a Monday night, in May 2014, they had retained vague hopes of claiming the title in a campaign’s death throes, only to capitulate dismally and ship a three-goal lead in the bedlam of the latter stages. With Van Dijk in their ranks, the current crop should never suffer such indignity. Then, at the Dutchman’s back, there was Alisson who, when an aggrieved Palace stirred after the interval in pursuit of parity, was imposing where previous Liverpool goalkeepers have merely wilted away. The Brazilian simply did what was required of him, but few of his recent predecessors have managed even that much. He dived to thwart Luka Milivojevic’s free-kick, flopped down on Benteke’s rare header, and was only bypassed by Andros Townsend’s attempt from distance that bruised the bar and a few fizzed centres across his six-yard box. This defence will have thrilled at a clean sheet thoroughly well earned. Given the thrashing inflicted by Manchester City on Huddersfield the previous day, and the relatively innocuous look to the schedule at the start of the champions’ title defence, Klopp’s team could ill afford any kind of slip here. He could bemoan the lack of rhythm in too much of their attacking play, and pinpoint his full-backs for failing to inject the required zest to their approach work, but they still retained bite. Their counterattacking always felt fluent and incisive. Witness Naby Keïta’s spin away from Townsend deep inside his own half, then run and lofted pass beyond Sakho to send Salah bearing down on goal. The Egyptian’s attempt was too heavy on that occasion, and ballooned over the bar, but he would still be decisive in each of Liverpool’s rewards. Hodgson was incensed by his first involvement, Roberto Firmino having slipped him into the box for Salah to hurdle Sakho’s initial panicked challenge – there appeared to be contact at that point – and the centre-half’s second stretch in vain for the ball, before crumpling to the turf. “It’s not a penalty,” offered the Palace manager. “I’ve been in football a long time and, if that’s a penalty, then the game has changed beyond all recognition. There’s no way he’s looking to foul the player. He’s trying to defend. There’s no way he’s looking to get contact on the player himself.” James Milner, unperturbed amid the furore, converted regardless. Hennessey subsequently admitted the award had “destroyed us” even if the hosts were driven forward thereafter by a sense of grievance, with Wan-Bissaka a threat down the flank in front of the watching Gareth Southgate and Wilfried Zaha increasingly influential. Their pressure might have forced parity even after the young right-back’s dismissal, with the substitute Max Meyer going to ground at Van Dijk’s challenge as he attempted to convert Zaha’s low centre, but the sting in the tail was eventually supplied by the visitors. The Dutch centre-half rose to repel yet another Milivojevic corner and, with Palace having cluttered the box, Salah and Sadio Mané sprinted beyond Patrick van Aanholt and away into enemy territory. The Senegalese, holding off the full-back as he stumbled, duly rounded Hennessey to poke in his third of the new campaign with virtually the last touch of the night. “We have won pretty much all my games here, but it’s still always really difficult,” added Klopp. “I’m not interested in sending a statement to City or not. I’m interested in winning football games.” To that end, this was mission accomplished.