Tim Soutphommasane will warn that “race politics is back” and criticise Turnbull government ministers for their rhetoric on African gangs and ethnic separatism in a fiery final speech as race discrimination commissioner. The speech, to be delivered at the University of Western Sydney’s Whitlam Institute on Monday, is a blunt assessment of the “resurgence of far-right politics” in Australia which lays the blame on politicians and sections of the media for promoting division for personal gain. In a copy of the speech, seen by Guardian Australia, Soutphommasane acknowledges that Australia has “good reason to boast that it is one of the most successful multicultural societies in the world”. But – borrowing another favourite phrase of Malcolm Turnbull’s – he warns there has “never been a more exciting time to be a dog-whistling politician or race-baiting commentator in Australia”. Soutphommasane argues there is a concerning “mixing of race and politics” with politicians “enthusiastically seeking debates about immigration, multiculturalism and crime”. Southphommasane cites home affairs minister Peter Dutton’s calls for “special attention” for white South African farmers, citizenship minister Alan Tudge’s claim that Australia is veering towards a “European separatist multicultural model”, Dutton’s suggestion Melburnians are afraid to go out to dinner due to African youth crime, and Turnbull’s claim there is “real concern about Sudanese gangs” in Melbourne. Soutphommasane says when he took the job five years ago he “wouldn’t have expected that the biggest threats to racial harmony would come from within our parliaments and from sections of our media. Yet here we are. “This is dangerous territory,” he says. “When politicians resort to using race in advancing their agendas, they inevitably excite racial anxiety and stir up social division. “They end up damaging our racial tolerance and multicultural harmony.” Soutphommasane says there is “simply no compelling evidence that Australian multiculturalism is in danger of veering towards ethnic separatism”. Where the seeds of racism are planted in political speech, they will bear bitter fruit in society He argues people born in Australia and New Zealand are also “over-represented in Victorian crime statistics” and questions why the race of offenders is deemed relevant for crimes committed by those from Sudanese backgrounds but not other crimes. Soutphommasane says the rhetoric is causing “much hurt and dismay” to African-Australians and Sudanese-Australians in particular, including a fear of rejection and incidents such as police called on young African Australians simply for walking together to sporting events by a public “fearing they were marauding gang members”. Similarly, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people and Australians from Arab, Middle Eastern and Asian backgrounds complain of being unfairly profiled. “This is how racism works. It creates doubts and divisions, and it drives its targets into retreat. “Where the seeds of racism are planted in political speech, they will bear bitter fruit in society.” Soutphommasane argues that racial fear is monetised by “sections of a fracturing media industry” which use racial controversies “as part of their business model” to grab attention and cling to their audiences. News Corp columnist and Sky News presenter Andrew Bolt’s recent column about a “tidal wave of immigrants” comes in for special criticism. Soutphommasane also criticises some Australian media outlets for “regularly fawning upon far-right political commentators from north America”, arguing that they are “avatars of white nationalism who are lauded as ... alt-right provocateurs”. The outgoing race discrimination commissioner brushes off suggestions that political correctness has shut down debates about race. He notes the Australian newspaper devoted hundreds of thousands of words to attacking the Racial Discrimination Act, cites “regular beat-ups on race in the Herald Sun and the Daily Telegraph”, nocturnal panels on Sky News berating multicultural political correctness; and the fact One Nation leader Pauline Hanson makes regular appearances on Sunrise and Today. Soutphommasane accuses the far-right – not multicultural communities – of exercising a form of identity politics through the use of terms like “mainstream Australia” and “middle Australian values” which are “code for something racial”. “We’re talking about an identity politics that is about reinforcing a hierarchy of voice and power in Australian society. “Complaints about anti-racism stifling free speech are about a resentment of minorities being able to speak up. They’re the complaints of snowflakes who can’t hack it when people challenge racism.” Soutphommasane suggested the “real political correctness” is the “parochial fragility” that explains the offence when racism is called out is “not that an act of discrimination occurred, but rather that someone was subjected to being called racist”. “People should look at it another way: if you don’t want to be called racist, you can start by not doing something racist.” Soutphommasane praises the Racial Discrimination Act, and particularly section 18C which makes it unlawful to “offend, insult or humiliate” people on the basis of their race or ethnicity. The Turnbull government’s unsuccessful push to amend the section resulted in an “outpouring of support” for the law, he says, crediting the Greens and Labor for “unwavering” support and a “number of Liberal parliamentarians” who also wanted it retained. Soutphommasane concludes by labelling anti-racism the “highest form of patriotism” and revealing that he questions whether Australia has gone backwards in his five years as race discrimination commissioner. “But my patriotism remains, and the first principles remain the same. “We reject racism because it is an assault on our values and our fellow citizens. We reject racism because it it diminishes our nation.”