The England cricketer Ben Stokes has been cleared of affray after a fight outside a Bristol nightclub. Following almost two and a half hours of deliberation, a jury of six men and six women at Bristol crown court acquitted the Durham all-rounder after he gave evidence saying he had acted in self-defence. Stokes was on trial alongside Ryan Ali, 28, whom he was alleged to have punched unconscious in the brawl near Mbargo nightclub in the early hours of 25 September last year. Ali was cleared of the same charge. A third man, Ryan Hale, 27, was acquitted of the charge last Thursday on the directions of the judge, Peter Blair QC. Stokes, 27, displayed little emotion as the verdict was read out on Tuesday, but his wife, Clare Ratcliffe, who was at his side throughout the seven-day trial, wiped away tears. The cricketer maintained that he had stepped in to defend two men, whom he claimed were the target of homophobic abuse by Ali and Hale, which was denied. Stokes alleged that Ali, who was holding a bottle, had replied: “Shut the fuck up or I’ll bottle you.” Stokes told the jury: “All my actions were in self-defence and fearing for my safety.” His lawyer, Gordon Cole QC, told jurors it was up to the prosecution to prove Stokes had not acted in self-defence, but there were gaps in the evidence that should cause the jury to be “massively concerned”. He said Stokes had been consistent that he had acted in self-defence from the moment of his arrest, which happened after a night out with his teammates after England’s victory over the West Indies in a one-day match in the city. The jury heard Stokes had no recollection of hitting Ali and could not remember what was said during the alleged homophobic abuse. He had denied being drunk, but told the jury he had had three to four beers, six vodka and lemonades and “a few Jägerbombs”. Ali, who sustained a fractured eye socket – the court was told he continued to have problems with his vision – denied there had been homophobic abuse. He said there had been “just banter” with the two men before he saw Stokes charging towards him in the street. Stokes’s lawyer had questioned if his client had been the focus of the prosecution because of his status. After the verdict, Tony Miles, the solicitor for Ali and Hale, said: “Both our clients are delighted it’s all over. They just want to get on with their lives.” An Avon and Somerset police spokesman said: “We carried out a thorough independent investigation into the events of 25 September before passing a comprehensive file of evidence to the Crown Prosecution Service [CPS], which subsequently made the decision to charge. “Having reviewed the evidence, the jury has concluded the actions of the defendants did not amount to affray and we respect this decision.” The two men who were allegedly subjected to homophobic abuse, Kai Barry and William O’Connor, did not give evidence and no statements were read from them during the trial. A CPS spokeswoman said: “The evidence of Mr O’Connor and Mr Barry was disclosed to the defence, but it was not deemed necessary to call them as witnesses in the case.”