Three days ago, Australia’s treasurer, Scott Morrison, was denying there was a leadership challenge under way. Now he’s won the prime ministership, 45 votes to 40 in the Liberal party, after he merged as the consensus candidate best able to gather votes from across the ideological divide that has convulsed the conservative side of politics in Australia for months. He will become Australia’s 30th prime minister. In a more orderly contest, Morrison would have been relying on the conservatives wing as his core support. A Christian and regular attendee at the Horizon Pentecostal megachurch in Sydney’s south, he’s a social conservative who led the charge on Australia’s tough immigration policy. But, having stood with former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull until his leadership was in tatters, Morrison emerged as the preferred candidate of the moderates, who have watched with horror as key rightwing MPs including leadership rival Peter Dutton and elements of the media sought to drag the party further to the right. Morrison, the son of a policeman wears his political ambition and his conservative credentials proudly. He voted no on same-sex marriage in parliament last year despite a national poll strongly supporting the change. He lists “church” as one of his interests in his Who’s Who entry and counts former prime minister John Howard as his political inspiration. Before he entered parliament, Morrison was a wheeler and dealer in Liberal right politics in New South Wales and was always going to go places. He was managing director of Tourism Australia and likes to joke he created Lara Bingle, the model now married to Australian actor Sam Worthington, by featuring her in Australia’s notorious ad campaign that featured the slogan “Where the bloody hell are you?” It was banned on UK television as too risque. On arriving in Canberra in 2007, Morrison quickly made it clear he was ambitious and by 2009 was rewarded with the controversial portfolio of immigration and citizenship by then leader Tony Abbott. Abbott described Morrison as a “great talent”, and he quickly became a battering ram in the Coalition’s strategy to win government. The message was simple: the Coalition would be much, much tougher than Labor on dealing with asylum seekers arriving by boat. Under pressure, Labor reopened the offshore detention centres on Manus and Nauru as the 2013 election loomed. When Abbott became prime minister he doubled down on offshore detention. Morrison was unflinching in the plan to “stop the boats”. Operation Sovereign Borders included a policy of turning back boats that attempted to reach Australia. “If people seek to get here the wrong way, they won’t get here,” he said. Kevin Rudd (2007-10) swept to power in a landslide after 11 years of conservative rule under John Howard. Enjoyed immense popularity as the bookish "Kevin from Queensland … here to help", but after he faltered on climate change (having previously described it as “the greatest moral challenge of our generation”), his convictions were questioned and his administration became increasingly erratic. Alienated his colleagues with an at-times abrasive manner, he was ousted by his own deputy … Julia Gillard (2010-13), Australia’s first (and only) female prime minister, who narrowly won an election after disposing of Rudd, but was forced to govern in minority. She was remarkably productive given the constraints of parliamentary numbers, passing significant legislation on climate change and addressing clerical abuse, but faced misogynistic attacks from the opposition and was undermined from her own side, led by … Kevin Rudd (2013), who assumed the foreign ministry under Gillard, but never put his field marshal’s baton back in his knapsack. He is widely regarded as having led a campaign of leaks against Gillard, destabilising her. Having failed in one tilt to return to the leadership, he succeeded at his second try. However, he had only three months in the job before losing the election to … Tony Abbott (2013-16), who was widely regarded as the best opposition leader in Australia, but an ineffective and inconsistent PM. His term was marked by an adoption of hardline asylum policies, an abandonment of climate change action, and poor economic management. After a series of gaffes and controversial "Captain’s Calls" (including knighting Prince Philip), he was unseated by ... Malcolm Turnbull (2016-18), a former investment banker and lawyer, who was seen as an urbane, articulate, centrist who could appeal to a broad swathe of the Australian population. But he was mistrusted by the conservative wing of his party, and openly derided by some as "Mr Harbourside Mansion", a reference to his grand house on the opposite side of Sydney Harbour to the PM's official residence. But it was Turnbull’s commitment to action on climate change that incensed the climate-sceptic right wing of his party, and he was stalked by his arch-conservative home affairs minister, Peter Dutton. However, Dutton’s attempted coup failed, and the numbers fell 45-40 for the treasurer … Scott Morrison (2018 to date), who as immigration minister had established Australia’s controversial hardline asylum-seeker policies – including indefinite detention on remote foreign islands. The son of a police officer and an active member of a Sydney Pentecostal evangelical megachurch, he voted no in Australia’s plebiscite on same-sex marriage, listed “church” as one of his interests in his Who’s Who report, and regards former prime minister John Howard as his political inspiration. Howard was prime minister for 11 years – a lifetime by today's standards. Ben Doherty In June 2014, he took his message directly to the refugees on Manus and Nauru in a controversial video. “If you choose not to go home then you will spend a very, very long time here,” he said. If the howls of criticism of Australia’s human rights record by human rights groups or the plight of detainees in offshore detention personally affected Morrison he didn’t let it show. He appeared to revel in the role of defender of Australia’s borders. Despite Abbott’s sponsorship, Morrison played a pivotal role in delivering the prime minister ship to Turnbull in 2015 – and became the treasurer. The new role allowed him to cast off some of the controversy. But in the treasurer’s role Morrison has been less assured. His reputation as a shrewd political operative was dented early by tax policy kite-flying exercises. Over time though, Morrison has warmed to the role. Morrison’s 2018-19 budget announcing personal tax cuts, an improvement in the deficit and little in the way of painful spending cuts was greeted warmly, though some economists queried its optimistic forecasts. And the economy has been kind to Morrison. His mantra of “jobs and growth” has been backed up by the statistics: GDP growth has been running above forecasts at 3.1% and unemployment edged lower to 5.4% in July. That left Morrison space to return to his favourite role: chief prosecutor of the “Kill Bill” strategy, which involves blaming Labor opposition leader Bill Shorten for everything. Morrison’s first challenge as prime minister will be to heal the fissures in the Liberal party. Then he needs to define what he wants to do.