In place of the Almeida theatre’s rows of tip-back seats are 10 semicircular gaming tables, each with a curve of seven stools. Though it is common to reorganise an auditorium to suit a show, £￥€$ (Lies), by the Belgian group Ontoerend Goed, removes any sense of a standard playhouse or, indeed, play. Thirteen black-clad performers serve as croupiers or financial advisers, but the busiest participants are the 70 ticketholders. Groups at each table form a bank and trade on global markets by gambling with poker chips. The experience most resembles an extreme game of Monopoly. Different rounds are ingeniously designed to offer more return for greater risk, and, on the bong of a gong, complications are presented, such as shorting, mergers and foreign bonds. One possible false note is that all institutions are expected to pay full tax to the central bank. One member of our team, showing what might be called an Amazonian attitude to her balance sheet, was punished by having to play for a while with special “naughty dice”. Potential objections to the project are that our interventions in the global economy are a matter of gambler’s luck rather than skill and that, as we are not playing with real money or consequences, the jeopardy is theoretical. However, a common critique of the financial industry is that it depends more on casino throws than economic theory, and many of those involved in the 2008 bank crashes admitted losing sight of the fact that they were playing with real lives and livelihoods. So the underlying unreality is the point. Though revealing nothing about the blackjack table of capitalism that wasn’t in the play Enron or the film The Big Short, the power of the show is that it immerses the audience in the psychology of those whose flutters shook the world. Early in the two-hour gameplay, a cautious investment strategy starts to seem boring, and competition with better-performing banks encourages ever-riskier punts and loans. We are tellingly experiencing a mindset that is played for real on global markets. • There are two nightly performances of £￥€$ (Lies) at Almeida theatre, London, until 18 August.