This week’s recipe is inspired by a dish I ate at Burma Burma, one of my favourite restaurants in Mumbai. Since Burmese food has been relatively hidden from the rest of world, every time I go to the restaurant, I compulsively try everything on the menu in the name of research. One thing I have learned thus far is that the salads are mighty and mouth-watering, and so it is that I offer up my memory of its mango, peanut and lime salad, so you, too, can enjoy this hidden cuisine. When freshly made, this salad is great by itself or with seasoned and fried tofu, but if left a day it will release delicious juices and is wonderful with rice noodles. You can hand-cut the long strips, but a julienne peeler is a perfect time-saving device for this salad. Make sure to buy the hardest, greenest most unripe mangoes you can find in the supermarket, because ripe mangoes will juice when you cut them. Prep 30 minCook 20 minServes 4 with tofu or noodles; 2 as it is 2cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and julienned1 red bird’s-eye chilli, finely chopped5 tbsp lime juice (ie, from 1½ limes) 1 tsp salt Rapeseed oil 1 onion, peeled, halved and thinly sliced 4 garlic cloves, peeled and thinly sliced 1½ tbsp chickpea flour 2 tbsp crunchy unsalted peanut butter½ sweetheart cabbage, finely shredded 2 unripe mangoes (500g) 2 medium carrots (200g), peeled and julienned 1 handful mint leaves, chopped 1 handful coriander leaves, chopped 1 large handful (60g) crushed salted roasted peanuts Put the ginger and chilli in a bowl, add the lime juice and salt, and leave to steep. Put a plate by the stove and cover it with kitchen towel. Heat five tablespoons of oil in a nonstick frying pan over a medium flame and, when smoking hot, add the onion. Separate the slices using a wooden spoon and fry, stirring once or twice, until brown and crisp. Scoop out with a slotted spoon and put on the prepared plate. Fry the garlic slices for two minutes in the same pan, until golden brown (be watchful, because they cook quickly), then transfer to the plate. In the remaining hot oil over a very low heat, stir in the chickpea flour to create a paste. Stir constantly for a minute, then add the peanut butter, stir for another minute, then take off the heat. Put the cabbage in a large bowl. Peel the mangoes and shave with a julienne peeler until you hit the stone; or, if cutting by hand, cut the cheeks from the stone on all four sides and julienne. Add the mango and carrots to the cabbage with the fried garlic and onions (reserving a handful of onions to garnish), toss, then pour over the chickpea peanut paste and the ginger, chilli and lime mixture, and toss again. Taste and adjust the lime and salt, if need be. To serve, transfer the salad to a plate, add the herbs, toss one final time, and top with the crushed peanuts and remaining fried onions.