It’s a simple, if loaded, test: not one of three major writers’ festivals underway or about to be held around Australia would this year schedule Germaine Greer, the 79-year-old feminist provocateur, whose new book, On Rape, will be published in early September. The decision by the Brisbane, Melbourne and Canberra festivals is either a relief or an indictment on timid programmers, but it signals a bigger debate: writers’ festivals – there are now more than 100 around the country each year – are changing fast, reinventing themselves as they wrestle with cultural flash points and competition. Greer, invited then uninvited from Brisbane’s festival last month, along with former foreign minister Bob Carr, hasn’t been silenced. A rival Brisbane event organised by their mutual publisher has sold out, and she has scheduled “On Consent” discussions in Perth, Sydney and Melbourne. But publicly-subsidised writers’ festivals baulked. Canberra’s new artistic director, Jennifer Bott, said, “theoretically, yes, I would program Germaine Greer, I chose not to this year”. She declined to say why, and pointed to numerous feminist panels at Canberra’s festival, which runs this weekend. Ann McLean, Brisbane writers festival’s acting chief executive, whose letter to publisher MUP disinviting Greer said her presence could be “possibly overshadowing” of other writers, is reluctant to elaborate, saying, “we triggered a discussion around freedom of speech”. She says the festival “offered publisher MUP some options about presenting Germaine, and they turned it down”, which MUP chief Louise Adler denies. Melbourne writers’ festival artistic director Marieke Hardy declined an interview to discuss her debut, her spokeswoman saying she was uneasy about questioning from journalist Virginia Trioli on ABC radio a week before. In that interview, she said, “I wouldn’t program Germaine Greer but I’m also not interested in placing things in the world that hurt people right now. I’m coming at it from a more altruistic perspective.” Hardy, well known as a regular presenter on the ABC’s now-scrapped The Book Club, told website Kill Your Darlings that her festival would be “a place where people can hug each other and a place where people are very human”. You could hear the literati spluttering across Melbourne. A writers’ festival as hug fest? “The common thread from publishers seems to be that this is not a writers’ festival,” said Adler. “This is a festival about performance and theatre and mourning one’s dead pet and people in search of a hug. “How that’s going to go down in the context of the 21st century where invading one’s personal space is problematic and you may well trigger me if you hug me? Good luck.” Melbourne’s 10-day, $2.5m festival opened on Friday night and there is considerable disquiet about the program from overlooked authors, as well as publishers and booksellers, but few in this small world are willing to speak as openly as Adler. Hardy hasn’t hidden her intentions to remake what a writers’ festival might be in an era where discussions with writers and thinkers are ubiquitous at venues such as Melbourne’s Wheeler Centre. And to seek a different tone, one that downplays a contest of uncomfortable ideas, normally festival staples. “The world is a really, really tough place and to find and create a space where we can be kind to each other is a big driver of mine,” she told Kill Your Darlings. There are big-name international writers, including the New Yorker’s Pulitzer prize-winning Ronan Farrow, whose work was central to sparking the #MeToo movement, and Ta-Nehisi Coates, whose book Between the World and Me established him as a powerful writer on race in America. There are plenty of local writers, including JM Coetzee, Michelle de Kretser, Michael Robotham, Alexis Wright and Tim Winton. But, as Hardy told the Age, “people are going to see a lot more theatre and performance and music. You will also see writers doing things that they don’t normally do”. Hardy’s influences are clear. In 2010 she, along with Michaela McGuire (now the director of the Sydney writers festival) created Women of Letters, a series of events where women wrote and read letters to the audience. It was often vulnerable and moving, and Hardy cites it as having shaped her ideas about the writers festival. There will be lots of original writing. Actor and writer Magda Szubanski will attend her own funeral, with eulogies written and performed by people she won’t be aware of ahead of time. You can attend a session where writers perform what they imagine the maiden speech of an Australian president might say if Australia becomes a republic. There will always be writers with current books who miss out on an invitation, and the Australian in particular has noted that its journalist Trent Dalton, the debut author of the “publishing sensation” Boy Swallows Universe, has been overlooked (he is appearing in Brisbane). No festival can please everyone, but the program found room to include “Australia’s most trusted spiritual medium”, Mitchell Coombes, to talk about life after death and conduct audience readings. There are more than 20 sessions on animals – cats, dogs, bats, elephants, horses, bees, snakes and the sex life of sea animals. If you’re so inclined, pet funeral director Caroline Higgins will lead a remembrance ceremony mourning dead pets. Whether guests are writers, let alone written a book, seems immaterial. Carly Findlay, billed as an appearance activist, speaker and opinion writer, has no book published (her website says she is writing her autobiography). She has been granted five sessions at the festival, including her “dream dinner party” and a session on the book that made her an activist. American singer-songwriter Neko Case appears in three sessions, and admitted to the Age that she’s not a good writer. “I only near-passed English 101.” Text Publishing publisher Michael Heyward was on the founding committee that set up the Melbourne writers festival in 1985. Adelaide launched the first festival in the 1960s and now “it’s like every little town has a writers festival”. Heyward says they are a “stunning achievement”, rivalling anything offered in the US, Europe or the UK. He is reserving judgment on the Melbourne festival. “Marieke should be allowed to run her festival, and then we can all form a view about it.” But his position is clear: “I’m on the side that will lament the separation of the writers festival from the celebration of the book. “You can conceive of a writers festival which is much more performance-based and which is about all different kinds of writing and that’s fine, but I work with people who sit by themselves in a room for three years not knowing whether they’re wasting their time entirely, and it is a heroic thing to write a book, and I want a writers festival to celebrate that.” Other festivals are playing around with programs, although not to the extent of Hardy. Canberra’s $400,000 festival is only three years old, and it is unsurprising that its focus is political. If there is criticism, it is that it is too chummy politically, with session after session featuring press gallery journalists and federal politicians. It is Bott’s first festival as artistic director and, like Hardy and McLean, she has worked in other art forms, including as the chair of the National Institute of Dramatic Arts. She is mixing it up somewhat, with the premiere of The Scribe, a documentary about political speechwriter Graham Freudenberg, and music from composer Andrew Ford. There are more panel discussions this year, she says, and a greater focus on Indigenous issues and writing. “Festivals shouldn’t just be about somebody’s latest book,” Bott says. “Ultimately writers festivals are festivals of ideas, so it gives you great scope to take some wonderful writers of different kinds, be they journalists, or fiction and non-writers, and have them address contemporary current issues.” She is careful to check that the program has political balance, and there are many conservatives, including former prime minister John Howard and Australian journalist Greg Sheridan – talking about his book, God is Good for You. She does not share Hardy’s view that controversy is something best left to others. “I feel exactly the opposite. I think it’s incredibly important to have controversy at writers festivals. The whole point of not programming in a singular voice is so that you get diverse audiences. Otherwise, it’s a club.” Ann McLean only joined the Brisbane festival as acting chief executive in March, and had to handle the Greer controversy, which highlighted how fraught public discussion can be issues such as gender, race and sexuality. Greer has made inflammatory remarks about trans women, questioned some elements of #MeToo and played down the idea that most rape is inherently violent. This is at the heart of so-called identity politics, where groups historically define political positions through identity – race, gender, sexuality. To its critics, it can be censorious, dismissing alternative views as racist or misogynist. All that is amplified by social media outrage, where the nuance of arguments is lost If writers festivals are not the place for such complex discussions, what purpose do they serve? Booker prize-winner Richard Flanagan was excoriating in the Guardian. “If they were to rename themselves “Festival of Safe Ideas”, or “Celebration of Conventional Thinking”, or “Festival Approved by Twitter Bots” I wouldn’t mind. But having dropped two writers because, it would seem, of what they have written, for Brisbane to call itself a writers’ festival smacks of false advertising.” McLean insists the festival has no problem with controversial ideas and says the Greer fracas was more complicated than how it was reported. She points to speakers such as Indigenous academic and leader Marcia Langton, whose views on Indigenous history and the need for a treaty with First Nations would “really stir some people up”. But would she schedule a speaker who was sceptical about the need for a treaty? “I would actually. We haven’t been pitched that book”. If it was, she said, you’d hold a panel discussion, and “make sure those authors are OK with that, and that were clear with the chair about what they were willing to talk about, because ... we are not Q&A, the last thing you want is a bun fight.” Writer Maxine Beneba Clarke, who is attending Melbourne’s festival, said on Q&A on Monday that festivals were changing. For years, they had been “these protected, very white, very middle-class spaces that are now starting to change. Artistic directors have always made these decisions ... and this (the Greer disinvitation) may be an example of where they’ve said, ‘You know what, we want this to change’.” Whether it must be one or the other is one question. Another is the fear of offending marginalised groups, of upsetting an audience. Hardy told the ABC that we were in “a very fluid transitional time”. There were “new boundaries being set, and what that means for writers’ festivals, broadcasters, everyone, I think we’re all in a period of listening and transition”. When she looks at other festivals, “I feel for the people putting it on and I feel for the people who are distressed by the inclusion of those people and I feel for the writers themselves”. It’s an approach Adler dismisses. “It’s not just the caution of it, it’s the sense of anxiety that it exhibits that ideas can be hurtful. Ideas that are problematic, difficult, upsetting, provocative, isn’t that the place of a festival? … They make you think again and you might even, God forbid, change your mind.” Heyward agrees. “People who hold views that generate controversy that causes us to assess our own position, our thinking, they should be part of writers’ festivals no less than anyone who disagrees with them vehemently. Otherwise, what is a writers festival going to be? Some fish bowl in which we all float around serenely not thinking about anything?” Many have welcomed the Melbourne festival’s approach, with the Wheeler Centre’s director Michael Williams praising its “playful, thoughtful, joyous and generous” tone. Writer Benjamin Law, a friend of Hardy’s, tweeted that this would be a “writers festival like no other”. Yet it is a challenge to spot a conservative writer or thinker on Melbourne’s program, someone who might question the conventional feminist take on #MeToo, or the need for a treaty with Indigenous Australians, or the horrors of Trump. But you can get a photo taken with a “rescue dog” and you can take your clothes off for a women’s only event where the audience and performers will be naked. And maybe that’s what people are yearning for in troubled times. “Catharsis and connection”, as Hardy puts it. She is doing it her way. “I’m not interested in making a writers festival like anybody else’s.” The Canberra writers’ festival runs until August 26 The Melbourne writers’ festival runs from 24 August – September 2 The Brisbane writers’ festival runs from 6-9 September.