This summer, the Turkish artist Banu Cennetoğlu installed on the streets of Liverpool the latest version of a project that has obsessed her for years. It is not a work of art, but a work of activism: a list of all the people who are known to have died attempting to travel to Europe to make a new life. She stumbled on this grim catalogue – which marks, where known, the names of the men, women and children as well as the places and manner of their deaths – in 2002, on the website of the charity UNITED for Intercultural Action. Back then, the names numbered 6,000. Now, there are more than 30,000. Cennetoğlu became convinced of the necessity for other people to see these names – to encounter the fragmentary stories of individuals as well as confront the sheer number of the dead. Over the past dozen years she has published the list, updated, on poster sites in the Netherlands, in newspapers in Greece and Germany, on billboards in the US. It was published on 20 June in a special supplement of the Guardian. It was then pasted on hoardings along Great George Street, Liverpool, as part of the city’s art biennial. It has been ripped down from that location, twice, most recently on Sunday. The motives of the vandals can only be speculated upon, but there are clues. Fresh posters have appeared pasted over the site: “THEY DON’T NEED OUR HELP” reads one. The list has never been defaced or damaged in this way before, in any part of the world it has been seen, and there is something immeasurably depressing and shaming that this should happen on its first showing in Britain. It is hard to imagine the failure of compassion that would impel any individual or group to do this, especially as the list is so modest: it asks nothing of passersby other than that it should be seen. But then, we are living in dangerously fraught times. The arts, in their broadest sense, can no longer be regarded as a dull backwater some distance away from the real business of politics. Culture is the new front line. Those within the “alt-right” are training their big guns on fresh targets: “liberal Hollywood”; the press; that defensively constructed catch-all, political correctness. Steve Bannon, Donald Trump’s former communications chief, “believes that politics is downstream from culture”, observed the Cambridge Analytica whistleblower, Christopher Wylie, when addressing the US Senate in May. Bannon, he added, had been seeking to “build an arsenal of weapons to fight a culture war”. Battles are being fought on dozens of fronts – from politically targeted messaging on Facebook to nakedly far-right “news” services with little regard for the truth, to the Hungarian government’s current draft decree banning gender studies MAs from the country’s universities. It is a war sometimes fought with insidious cunning: think of Boris Johnson’s recent insulting remarks about Muslim women who cover their faces, all shielded within the neat carapace of an apparently “liberal” argument – a calculated example of “alt-right unvirtue signalling”, as the commentator Anne McElvoy put it. It is a war that can be fought through the bland proxy of a deadening, obstructive bureaucracy: think of the Home Office’s “hostile environment” and the refusal of visas to writers invited to the Edinburgh international book festival to offer an hour’s entertainment and enlightenment to a (largely) British audience. It is a war often fought crudely, as it has been in Great George Street – and as it was this month, when masked attackers entered Bookmarks, a leftwing bookshop in London, upturning displays and damaging books. Iconoclasm is nothing new, and history has seen a great deal more than a few inept attempts to tear up books and tear down posters. From the Protestant religious zealots of 16th-century Britain who destroyed religious images, to the book-burners of the 1930s, to the Bamiyan Buddha-destroyers of the early 2000s and the Palmyra-topplers of more recent years, ideological rage has a habit of zeroing in on works of art and cultural artefacts. Nevertheless, that it should come to this in modern Britain sends a chill to the heart. I fear more rippings-down and rippings-up. I fear darker times ahead.