Campaigners for a second referendum will hold the first of a series of events outside London on Saturday to try to mobilise popular support for the plan beyond the capital. The Conservative MP Sarah Wollaston, the Lib Dem leader, Sir Vince Cable, and Labour’s Stephen Doughty will address a lunchtime event at the Colston Hall in Bristol, where tickets have sold out. Organised by the People’s Vote campaign, it will be followed by events in Edinburgh, Newcastle, Cambridge and Cardiff before culminating in marches to coincide with the Labour party conference in Liverpool and the Conservative conference in Birmingham. A local doctor and a 20-year-old gardener will be among those speaking in Bristol, as the organisers try to show that those in favour of Britain staying in the European Union no longer represent the establishment – an elitist charge that was successfully used by the Brexiters during the referendum campaign. Polling by YouGov on behalf of the People’s Vote campaign found that voters regarded Leave and Remain campaigners almost equally as part of a national elite. Leave campaigners were regarded as “the establishment” by 34%, and remainers by 35%. A source at the People’s Vote campaign said the organisation wanted to try to “give voice to millions of people who feel the establishment has screwed Brexit up over the past two years” and argue that “the likes of Michael Gove are the establishment now”. However, there has been a resurgence in activity by Conservative hard Brexit campaigners, who are unhappy at Theresa May’s Chequers compromise proposals, under which the UK would share a common regulatory rulebook with the EU on food and goods after leaving the EU. A new online campaign, Stand Up 4 Brexit, which supporters say is in favour of a clean Brexit, has rapidly grown in support in the past week, winning the endorsement of pro-Brexit MPs such as Priti Patel and Ben Bradley. Paul Everitt-Clay, a Tory activist, said: “We are encouraging people to speak out and reject the Chequers plans. They amount to a removal of every single one of Theresa May’s negotiating red lines, because we will be making ongoing payments to the EU, still be bound by its rules, and reintroducing free movement by another name.”