When Rose Mark retired from being a teacher, she and her husband decided to leave their bustling San Francisco neighbourhood to find somewhere they would feel safer. One problem: the booming local tech scene had turbocharged demand for homes, and they found themselves outbid time and again. As well as security, Mark craved a connection with her neighbours. Previously, she would be lucky to get a quick “hi” on the street. “I’m very friendly. I’ve lived in many different neighbourhoods in San Francisco,” she says. “I’d try to make friends but there wasn’t a sense of community.” Then, among the artist studios and loft apartments on the colourful streets of Jingletown, Oakland, Mark found an answer: the Phoenix Commons, a co-housing community for over-55s. Residents own their modest homes while sharing spacious communal areas, including a kitchen, movie room and a hot tub. The community is self-managed, residents work together in committees and each night a group volunteers cooks for everyone. The four-storey complex of 41 units is designed to foster a sense of community. Apartment windows face each other and walkways create a visible sense of life and movement. Mark was one of the first to move in, two years ago. She appreciates how much residents help each other, from sharing food to supporting someone through the death of a partner. “My friends jokingly call this the Commune,” she says. “If they could witness life here, it might allay some of their fears about giving up their independence. It is an incredible feeling of security, safety and peacefulness.” Co-housing is growing in popularity with young and old around the world. There are 165 co-housing communities in the US and another 140 in the planning stages. In the UK, Older Women’s Co-Housing (OWCH) in north London has a long waiting list and there are 20 other established co-housing communities, and 40 in development. Co-housing is a long-established part of the housing mix in the Netherlands and Sweden, where communities are supported by government, and the idea is growing in Australia, New Zealand, Canada and Japan. Interest in co-housing has risen since the economic downturn and as housing costs in cities surged. Many may argue it is a lamentable trend, but closer ties with neighbours can provide an antidote to the modern epidemic of loneliness, particularly among older people. Half a century ago in the summer of love, baby boomers were part of a seismic cultural shift, and now another is under way, this time revolutionising retirement. This generation of retirees are the healthiest ever and crave continued personal independence while maintaining community ties. News doesn't always have to be bad – indeed, the relentless focus on confrontation, disaster, antagonism and blame risks convincing the public that the world is hopeless and there is nothing we can do. This series is an antidote, an attempt to show that there is plenty of hope, as our journalists scour the planet looking for pioneers, trailblazers, best practice, unsung heroes, ideas that work, ideas that might and innovations whose time might have come. Readers can recommend other projects, people and progress that we should report on by contacting us at theupside@theguardian.com Robby Kiley, 75, a Phoenix Commons resident, describes traditional retirement homes as “landed cruise ships”, where meals and entertainment are provided at a cost. She worries that an absence of responsibilities leads to regression and decline. Phoenix Commons is self-managed, and residents must be able to live independently. That excludes people who require care but encourages those who want to continue to lead a relatively active lifestyle. “We’re always learning,” says Kiley. “Here you have to keep up.” Christian Zimmerman set up Phoenix Commons because, he says, it’s the way that he wants to grow old: in close proximity with his peers and not a passive consumer. “Living alone in an apartment is not the best way to live,” says Zimmerman, who spent 45 years managing retirement homes. “I don’t think a lot of people like it. I think they’re just afraid of the other things. They’re afraid that if they move into a community that they’re not going to get along with somebody, or they’re not going to get enough privacy. But what price privacy?” A couple of hours’ drive inland, in the university town of Davis, is another co-housing community, America’s oldest. Muir Commons was set up in 1991 by two architecture graduates, Kathryn McCamant and Charles Durrett, who had researched co-housing communities in Denmark. The design for the multigenerational Muir Commons fills a typical American block, but instead of regimented rows of houses facing the road, homes have been built at angles to each other with open and connected front gardens. Children run back and forth, enjoying a communal playground, an orchard and vegetable beds. Cars are kept out of the way in car parks, and there is a common house where the community eats together a couple of nights a week. Ben Finkelor moved in because he thought it would be good for his children. “You open your front door and they can play and there’s no cars,” he says. “You can share parenting. We have social activities. On Father’s Day we have a water fight – dads vs the kids.” He thinks his children benefit from interacting with older residents. “The intergenerational thing is very important,” agrees Ray Frank, 72, another resident. “I would never want to live in a community of people of essentially the same age. It’s such a delight to watch children growing up. And we’ve found that the kids here grow up with certain skills that most other children don’t develop easily. They learn how to talk to people of all ages.” Residents say the Muir Commons children have better social skills, and the older residents without children and grandchildren of their own get to enjoy a sense of family. According to Stephanie Cacioppo, a professor of neuroscience at the University of Chicago, loneliness among retirees in the US is becoming an alarming public health issue. “The availability of community programmes, behavioural interventions and online resources is increasing to address the problem of loneliness. Co-housing is one of these programmes that gives us hope,” she says. This article is part of a series on possible solutions to some of the world’s most stubborn problems. What else should we cover? Email us at theupside@theguardian.com