With just a simple script and a $40 virtual phone number, a hacker could automatically break into voicemail accounts at scale, and parlay that access into control over online accounts including WhatsApp or PayPal, or even track someone’s every move. Martin Vigo, a Spanish hacker who works in mobile security, presented new research at the Def Con hacking conference in Las Vegas, demonstrating how easy it could be for a motivated attacker to break into phone voicemails, and how much more damaging that security breach could be than simply letting an attacker listen to messages. Voicemails are still poorly secured, Vigo said, with many of the same weaknesses first documented more than 30 years ago largely unchanged in the back-ends of mobile carriers. All four major US carriers, for instance, have easily-guessable default pins protecting the inbox (most use the last few digits of the phone number the account is associated with, while one simply uses the same four digit code for every account). Even for users who change their passwords, there’s little extra security. Most carriers limit protection to short numeric codes, with the minimum being just four digits; they don’t have any prevention against brute force attacks, letting hackers exhaustively try every possible code; and they even make brute force attacks easier by allowing callers to enter three pins at once, separated with a hash symbol. The weakness of voicemail systems is well-documented, and many of the techniques Vigo described were famously abused by journalists at the now-defunct British paper News of the World. But Vigo added a further twist to the vulnerabilities, noting the ways they interact with security systems across the web. Users log in to WhatsApp, for instance, by requesting a text message and then entering a code into the app. But after a minute delay, they can also request the company call them and read the code out instead. By requesting that code when the target’s phone is unavailable – for instance, while they are flying, or on an underground train – it gets pushed to voicemail, where an attacker can then listen to it, enter it, and seize the WhatsApp account for themselves. Some companies attempt to short-circuit that attack. PayPal, for instance, lets users reset passwords with a phone call, but requires a four digit code to be typed into the keypad during the call, preventing an attacker from simply listening to a voicemail and gaining access. But in a second attack demonstrated by Vigo, he showed a way around that: setting the voicemail’s greeting message to a recording of the keypad tones tricks PayPal’s system into thinking it’s got through to a real person. “We just compromised PayPal,” Vigo declared, to applause from the audience. “What services are vulnerable? Password reset for PayPal, Instagram, Netflix, eBay, LinkedIn,” Vigo said. “Authentication for WhatsApp, Signal, Twilio, Google Voice.” Vigo recommended users defend against the possibility of such attacks by changing the default pin on their voicemail to a long code, or turning off the voicemail service altogether if they aren’t using it. He also called on online services to stop using automated calls for security purposes, and on carriers to end the practice of using a default password for voicemails.