Three people died in a shooting at a video gamers’ competition in Jacksonville, Florida on Sunday, police said. The lone suspect was among them. Jacksonville sheriff Mike Williams confirmed on Sunday evening that two people were shot dead and nine suffered gunshot wounds. The gunman killed himself. Two others were injured during chaos as people fled, Williams said. Officials did not immediately name those who died. Williams named the shooter as David Katz, 24, of Baltimore, Maryland, where an address was reportedly raided. The sheriff said the gunman “was here for the competition”. Asked if FBI and ATF agents were investigating the home in Baltimore believed to be connected to Katz, Williams said: “We are having … there is some cooperation going on in Baltimore.” Several dozen gamers had been playing or watching others play the Madden NFL19 football video game, which simulates American football. “The suspect used at least one handgun to commit this act,” said Williams. The shooting took place at a popular complex called the Jacksonville Landing. Searching the shops and restaurants in the aftermath of the shooting, the local sheriff said armed response officers found “many people hiding in locked areas”. Of the nine people with gunshot wounds, Williams said, seven were taken to hospital and two transported themselves. Mayor Lenny Curry also spoke at the briefing, saying: “Jacksonville is in mourning.” Earlier in the afternoon, the sheriff’s office announced the event to the world with a tweet: “Mass shooting at the Jacksonville Landing”. It added: “Stay far away from the area. The area is not safe at this time. STAY AWAY.” The warning was for media too. The sheriff then said: “Multiple fatalities at the scene, many transported. One suspect is dead at the scene, unknown at this time if we have a second suspect. Searches are being conducted. “We are finding many people hiding in locked areas at the Landing. We ask you to stay calm, stay where you are hiding. Swat is doing a methodical search inside the Landing. We will get to you. Please don’t come running out. If you are hiding in the Landing, call 911 so we can get to you.” In a Facebook post, datelined Jacksonville, Ryen Aleman of Robstown, Texas, posted: “Don’t wish anyone on this – the scariest moment of my life. Just thank God I made it out of there safe. Prayers for everyone that is out there right now.” The post carried widely circulated video and audio of what appeared to be a shooting interrupting a game of Madden NFL 19 football. Speaking to CNN, Aleman said: “Everyone ducked down. I got down and crawled to the bathroom.” He added: “I heard so many gunshots, 20 at least. I’m so shocked I can hardly talk.” The Jacksonville Landing area contains restaurants and shops and is situated along the St Johns river. A notice on the website of EA Sports stated: “This weekend, the first of four Madden NFL 19 Classic qualifier events will take place at the GLHF game bar in Jacksonville, Florida.” An eSports team, comPlexity Gaming, said on Twitter it was not an organiser but one of its players “was grazed in the hand” and was “away from the scene and safe”. The player, 19-year-old Drini Gjoka, was hit in the thumb by a bullet. He tweeted: “Worst day of my life”, then: “I will never take anything for granted ever again. Life can be cut short in a second.” In a message sent via Twitter, comPlexity Gaming founder Jason Lake told reporters: “We’re obviously shocked and saddened by this afternoon’s events. Drini managed to escape and run down the street to a nearby gym.” Speaking to CNN, Aleman described the venue as being at the back of a pizza restaurant. He described the use of a laser-aimed gun and said he thought two men had come into the venue through the restaurant and started shooting. Aleman said he saw at least six people on the floor who had been shot, and that there were 40 to 50 people in the venue, “just running around everywhere”. After he had been hiding in a locked bathroom for about 10 minutes, he said, the shooting stopped. “Everyone was crying,” he said. “I hear people yelling ‘Help me, I’m shot.’ I peeked out because I didn’t know if the gunman was still around. I was scared for my life.” Florida governor Rick Scott said local authorities would be provided with all required assistance. Senator Marco Rubio said federal authorities were involved. White House press secretary Sarah Sanders told reporters Donald Trump had been briefed on events in Florida. Scott said Trump had called to offer all necessary assistance.