Vladimir Putin cruised to victory in Sunday’s presidential elections in a result that was never in question. His fourth term as president will extend through 2024, making him the first Kremlin leader to serve two decades in power since Josef Stalin. With results still coming in, Putin looked set to exceed expectations with more than 73% of the vote. Turnout, which was seen as a measure of the Kremlin’s legitimacy in this uncompetitive campaign, was close to 60% as of 9pm GMT. The Kremlin had hoped to match the 65% who cast votes in 2012, and initially had sought 70% turnout. “Thank you for your support,” Putin told crowds on Manezhnaya Square just under the Kremlin walls, wearing a black down jacket with a fur hood. “Everyone who voted today is part of our big, national team.” Asked by a journalist about whether he would consider future runs for president, he responded: “What you’re saying is just silly … what am I going to sit here for 100 years?” Asked about the poisoning of Sergei Skripal in Britain, he said that Russia did not currently have chemical weapons, and that it would be “nonsense” to think Russia would launch such an attack in the lead up to an election. Putin said that if the substance used in the attack had really been a military nerve agent, then it would have killed anyone targeted on the spot. Russians had a choice of eight candidates, including the Communist Pavel Grudinin, whose title to a former state fruit farm has made him a millionaire, and Ksenia Sobchak, the daughter of Putin’s political mentor, who has presented a liberal programme. Putin’s campaign chairman also took a victory lap Sunday evening, declaring turnout to be high and needling London by suggesting that may be a rally-round-the-flag response to recent accusations over the Salisbury attack. “Right now the turnout numbers are higher than we expected. We need to thank Great Britain for that because once again they did not consider the Russian mentality,” said Putin campaign chairman. “Once again we were subject to pressure at just the moment when we needed to mobilise.” Turnout was the main focus of the campaign in recent weeks, with the Kremlin launching a broad get-out-the-vote campaign, which included selfie contests and raffles of iPhones and even cars for voters. The opposition declared a boycott and sent observers across the country to monitor the voting process. Vote monitors, organised by opposition leader Alexei Navalny and others, complained of ballot stuffing and other methods of increasing turnout in Sunday’s votes. Official from Russia’s elections committee said no serious violations had taken place.  