After requiring its female flight attendants to wear skirts for more than 70 years, one of Asia’s largest airlines has said it will let them don trousers instead. The Hong Kong-based airline Cathay Pacific has reached the agreement with flight attendant unions. It also covers other uniformed staff. In a statement, Cathay said: “Choice for our people is as important as for our passengers.” “It is imperative that our customer-facing colleagues not only feel pride in wearing the Cathay Pacific and [regional airline] Cathay Dragon colours but that they also feel comfortable and empowered to carry out their duties to the best of their abilities.” Flight attendant unions earlier this month called on the airline to drop its skirts-only policy. Cathay’s current uniform for female flight attendants includes a red skirt with two slits at the back, black stockings and black heels. “There’s sexual harassment, not only in the workplace but even in public transport, people trying to take pictures under their skirts,” said Pauline Mak, vice chair of the Hong Kong Dragon Airlines Flight Attendants Association. “We’ve been encountering a lot of cases by our members… so I think this is one of the reasons why we tried to do something.” Others wanted the airline to catch up with the times. “The stereotype of the flight attendant is very old-style already: looking pretty, full make-up and wearing a skirt. It is a good time to have a revamp of our image,” Vera Wu Yee-mei, chairwoman of the Cathay Pacific Flight Attendants Union, told Hong Kong media. The agreement came out of negotiations between union members and the company that concluded on Thursday. Mak said the option of trousers would be introduced at the next uniform refresh, which could still take another three to five years. Cathay Pacific and Cathay Dragon will join the few airlines in Asia giving their female staff such an option. After two years of back and forth with unions, British Airways agreed in 2016 to let all of its crew wear trousers.