Theresa May welcomed the decision by the European Union to wholeheartedly back the UK’s condemnation of Moscow over the Salisbury attack, as a series of leaders said they would follow the British lead and expel Russian diplomats. Speaking as she departed from an EU summit in Brussels, the prime minister confirmed that fresh evidence presented to the 27 other member states had encouraged them to unanimously agree it was “highly likely Russia is responsible” over a dinner ending in the early hours of Friday. “It is right that we are standing together”, she said. “We have been sharing throughout, sharing on intelligence channels what we can with our colleagues. What is crucial is that there was recognition around the table about the threat that Russia poses. “They recognised and agreed with the UK Government’s assessment”. At least ten member states, including Ireland, are poised to follow the UK’s lead and expel Russian diplomats over the affair. The president of Lithuania, Dalia Grybauskaiteė, said that “from the beginning of next week, a lot of countries, we will go for our national measures”. Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, said: “We are determined to react together, with the language we used here, but also possibly through additional measures.” The Danish prime minister, Lars Løkke Rasmussen, said his country would consider whether it should take unilateral steps. Boyko Borisov, the prime minister of Bulgaria, said: “We find ourselves at times worse than the cold war. During the cold war there were rules. Now I am not optimistic for the peaceful future of the world.” In response to developments at an EU summit in Brussels, the Russian foreign minister, Sergei Lavrov, accused the UK of trying to make “the crisis with Russia as deep as possible”. In London they “are feverishly trying to force allies to take confrontational steps,”, he told reporters on a visit to Hanoi, the Russian state news agency RIA Novosti reported. During a long dinner in Brussels on Thursday, information was shared not only from the UK security services but other member states’ intelligence services to shore up support for the UK. Leo Varadkar, the Irish prime minister, said: “We will now consider in the coming days whether we want to take individual action in relation to Russian diplomats in Ireland.” The taoiseach, who alongside the French president, Emmanuel Macron, had proposed that the EU endorse the opinion of the British government on the guilt of Russia, added: “Bearing in mind what the United Kingdom did was to expel 23 diplomats that they believed were not actual diplomats, were agents. So we would have to do an assessment just like they did before that ... We will make that decision, I would say, in the early part of next week.” The EU has also recalled its ambassador from Moscow for consultations over the incident it described as “a grave challenge to our shared security”. Britain and Russia have expelled 23 of each other’s diplomats since the use of a nerve agent on a former Russian spy and his daughter in Salisbury, which has sparked an east-west diplomatic crisis reminiscent of the cold war. May had expected to leave Brussels on Thursday night, but stayed on at the summit to discuss Donald Trump’s decision to give the EU a temporary exemption from tariffs on steel and aluminium imports. Meanwhile a Court of Protection judge has given doctors permission to take blood from Sergei Skripal, the former double agent, 66, and his daughter Yulia, 33, and to provide samples to chemical weapons experts. Mr Justice Williams said he had been asked to make decisions because the Skripals were unconscious and in critical condition. On Thursday the police officer who came to the aid of Skirpal and his daughter left hospital. Russia’s ambassador to the UK Alexander Yakovenko tweeted: “Glad to know that detective sergeant Nick Bailey has been discharged from hospital. Hoping for recovery of Sergei and Yulia Skripal, too”.