Cobblestone streets lined with brightly coloured colonial buildings, a jacaranda-wreathed central plaza, 16th-century ruins and with volcanoes surrounding it … Few cities in Latin America can match Antigua Guatemala (usually referred to as just Antigua) for postcard prettiness. But this Unesco-listed city is about much more than surface-level charm and Instagram opportunities. Founded in 1543 as the seat of Spanish power in the region, it served as its cultural, religious and economic centre for more than 200 years. The city was largely destroyed by earthquakes in the 17th century but many of the colonial buildings were rebuilt and have since been renovated. The remnants of others dot parks and gardens across the city. Despite its historic significance and its importance for religious festivities such as Semana Santa, Antigua is not stuck in the past. There is a lively cultural scene and even its historic sites often host free public events, such as the International Jazz Festival. With many restaurants and bars packed into its centre, the food and drink scene is also one to be savoured. Throw in a climate that’s pleasantly mild year-round and a low cost of living, and not surprisingly it’s become a magnet for expats and wealthy Guatemalan City residents wanting holiday homes. This has caused issues, with rising house prices forcing locals into satellite neighbourhoods, but the gentrification of the city has also resulted in improvements to its infrastructure and facilities, including roadworks to improve the flow of traffic and a new recycling programme. This (free) sculpture park dedicated to the work of Efraín Recinos, the so-called “Guatemalan Picasso” is one of the best places to see contemporary art in the city. In addition to 10 of his striking blue-toned, resin-mosaic-tile murals are sculptures in the lush gardens, plus work by other leading names of the Guatemalan plastic-art movement, such as Guillermo Grajeda Mena and Dagoberto Vásquez. The park’s highlight is El Triunfo de la Guatemalita, a sculpture of a woman perched on top of a clapped-out VW beetle, holding a torch aloft in her right hand. The piece represents the artist’s adherence to ideals of justice (the car belonged to Recinos in the 1970s and was burned in retaliation for his involvement in protests against government repression). The park is within the grounds of the five-star Hotel Casa Santo Domingo, which is also home to five art galleries that host contemporary art exhibitions throughout the year.• 3a Calle Oriente #28A, casasantodomingo.com.gt Antigua was declared a Unesco world heritage site in 1979 because of its Spanish baroque-influenced architecture and 16th-century colonial churches. The city is also one of the best kept examples of Latin American town planning: it was rebuilt after the earthquakes of the 18th century on a grid pattern inspired by the Italian Renaissance, with streets running from north-south and east-west. Get a bird’s-eye view of it by walking up to a park that overlooks the city: Cerro de la Cruz (north of the centre). Ask a taxi driver to drop you at the bottom: from there it’s a 15-minute walk to the top (due to past muggings, there is now a police presence from 8am to 4pm). Antigua is among the best places in Central America to learn salsa and the city’s undisputed dancing queen is Nancy Gudiel, who runs the New Sensation dance studio. Private lessons are US$17 an hour, or cheaper when bought as a package. The best bit is taking new moves out on the town, where watching locals spin and weave around awkward gringos is entertainment in itself. With a band playing Wednesday to Friday nights, Las Palmas has the liveliest dancefloor. Another major draw for visitors are the city’s Spanish language schools – there are hundreds of them. Don Pedro de Alvarado Spanish School has been operating for almost four decades and lessons are conducted in a flower-filled courtyard ($176 for 20 hours a week). The school also hosts salsa nights and communal meals. Just around the corner, on 1 Calle Poniente, is Antiguëña Spanish Academy, another reliable pick, although eschew the spartan classrooms in favour of a desk in the nearby walled garden if possible. Many schools now also offer follow-up classes over Skype for those who aren’t ready to say adios to their teacher when their holiday is finished. Local women in their embroidered huipiles (blouses) are walking advertisements for Guatemala’s textile heritage. It can take up to six months to create these pieces; the region-specific weaving patterns and techniques communicate everything from birthplace and social position to marital status and religious background. At the cavernous Nim Po’t near the Santa Catalina arch, the huipiles, table runners and woven homewares on sale are sorted by district, and the store purchases directly from the makers. There’s also a huge range of wooden masks, carved sculptures and other trinkets. For modern fashion with a Guatemalan twist, go down the road to Los Colores de la Tierra, which sells colourful bib necklaces made from beads and recycled textiles. Over on 4a Calle Oriente #5, Uxibal boutique turns out fashionable boots, sandals and bags. Antigua’s most photographed attraction is the mustard-yellow El Arco de Santa Catalina (Santa Catalina arch), the last vestige of a 17th-century nunnery. It was built so the women could cross the street without being seen and is virtually opposite the Iglesia de La Merced, a baroque yellow church, built in 1548 but restored in 1853. Its arabesque-patterned stucco is evidence of the Moorish design trend in Spain at the time. The attached former monastery is also worth a look (admission $2); stroll around the top of its thick walls and see the city’s largest fountain, which the monks used to farm fish in. A few blocks away is the 500-year-old Iglesia de San Francisco el Grande festooned with spiral columns. The site also includes a small museum and the tomb of Saint Pedro de San José Betancur, who was canonized in 2002. This posada is a reasonably priced sanctuary several blocks south-east of the central park. Rooms are arranged around a courtyard, while the decor leans towards dark-wood furniture, exposed roof beams and the odd religious icon. Guests have access to a large kitchen and a number of salons. This, combined with the strong wifi (not always a given among hotels at this price), makes it a popular option for long-term guests. There’s also a sister hotel on Avenida 3.• Doubles from $40 room-only, posadasanpedro.net This 12-room boutique bolthole has more trappings than the average Antigua hotel, featuring an art gallery, yoga studio, heated pool and rooftop lounge. However, the real highlight is its restaurant, overseen by Noé Sicán, one of Guatemala’s most highly regarded chefs. It’s the place to go for a romantic dinner.• Doubles from $100 room-only, panzaverde.com The 20 rooms here deviate from the usual Guatemalan template of vibrant colour in favour of Scandi-style minimalism and neutral tones. It may have an international feel but the Good Hotel fosters strong links to the community: all profits are donated to help disadvantaged children and only local labour is used (and paid fairly). This charitable approach mixes with the hotel’s modern comforts, such as rain showers, private patios, locally made toiletries – and great tapas at the bar.• Doubles from $120 room-only, goodhotelantigua.com This hostel, owned and run by Christopher Obrist and his US-born wife Emily, is a great example of the city’s new crop of budget accommodation. Similar to the Adra Hostel, Hostel Cucuruchos and Matiox, it offers a friendly atmosphere but not the relentless partying of many Antigua other hostels. Staff are helpful and the dorm beds more private than usual, thanks to curtains.• Dorm beds from $13, doubles from $50, mayapapayaantigua.com The meals served in the restaurant are hearty, healthy and made from local produce, the vibe is relaxed and the views from the guestrooms (some in treehouses) are glorious. Many come to Earth Lodge to enjoy a meal and the vista, especially on Sundays when there’s live music. A private driver can be arranged for the 20-minute transfer from town, although, be warned, the final stage of the journey involves walking 300 metres down a steep hill.• Doubles in a treehouse from $50 room-only, earthlodgeguatemala.com Wander through the main market to the central food court where you can spend a few dollars on typical stand-and-scoff mixtas (street food) such as pupusas (tortillas stuffed with fresh white cheese and pork crackling) and cheveres (hotdogs topped with chimichurri – lime-juice-dressed cabbage and hot sauce) or grab a stool at a stall for a more substantial meal. At night, go to Iglesia de La Merced where vendors set up shop, filling the air with the aroma of the empanadas, chile rellenos (peppers stuffed with minced meat and spices) and doblados (tortillas filled with cheese, meat and potatoes and topped with guacamole and salsa). For an indoor street-food experience, head to the family-run Taqueria Doña Lupita. A plate of three tacos is a wallet-friendly $2.70. There’s no menu and options are limited at this traditional eatery but – at $4 for lunch and $6 for dinner – it serves some of the best-value comida tipica in town. Dishes such as pork adobado (tenderloin marinated with paprika and pepper) and longaniza (sausages threaded with mint and yerba buena) are often on the chalkboard menu. Or go for the house speciality: roast chicken and garlicky potatoes grilled over the firepit.• 3a Avenida Sur #3, +502 5029 4647, on Facebook One of Guatemala’s most common dishes, pepian is often referred to as a Mayan curry. It is a rich, dark stew of meat, tomatoes and toasted spices, thickened with nuts and seeds. You’ll see it everywhere from food carts and at the back of tiendas (small shops such as La Canche Comedor) to fine-dining restaurants. But the Guatemalan owners of this bright and breezy restaurant have taken pains to ensure their version is authentic, and outstanding ($14.70). Eat on the rooftop terrace and wash it down with a tart tamarind margarita ($4.90) or the signature Quetzalteca Royale cocktail, a punchy mix of white rum, hibiscus tea and champagne ($5.60).• 5a Avenida Norte #31, +502 7832 5161, lostrestiempos.com Bagging a table at this cosy, candlelit restaurant near La Merced can be tricky (there’s only space for 30 or so) but it’s worth persisting: chef Hector Yuca turns out lovely French-inspired food. Along with steakhouse Las Antorchas, it’s the place to head when you’re craving a meat dish made with prime cuts. Try the beef tenderloin ($19.75) or the grilled duck served with roasted grapes and potato gratin ($22).• 1a Calle Poniente #9, +502 7832 9867, on Facebook This hole-in-the-wall is an institution in Antigua and has parted many a backpacker from their memories and weekly travel budget. In its candlelit nooks you’ll find an interesting array of literary types (thanks in part to the attached bookshop, Dyslexia, where if you buy a book you get a free beer), musicians, oddball expats and locals. Aside from the nightly live music, the main attraction is Ilegal, the mescal produced for the house by three artisanal Oaxacan distillers. There’s a two-shot minimum in the specialist lounge, accessed through a refrigerator door. American owner John Rexer can often be found occupying a bar stool; ask him about his early days running bootlegged liquor across the border dressed as a priest. Beers cost $3.80, measures of mescal from $4.70 to $7.50. • Avenida Sur # 11, cafenose.com One of the joys of Antigua is kicking back at a rooftop bar with a beer or lip-tingling michelada (beer, lime juice and spices) and enjoying the views over the streets and volcanoes. There’s a quiet bar at the top of the Antigua Brewing Company with craft beers on tap and a menu of rib-stickers, such as pulled pork sandwiches ($8.80) and quesadillas ($8.80). A glass of its Fuego IPA costs $5.40. The Lava Terrace Bar & Burgers on 4 Avenida Norte also has a large rooftop area, although be warned reggaeton can be pumping at all hours and it’s a magnet for party people come 5pm. For cocktails, Café Sky is a low-key, well-priced option above a tiki bar and hostel (try the Cojito – a coconut-flavoured mojito, $4.50) Owner Jose Mario “Chema” Aguirre has assembled a great team of bartenders at this tiny, misleadingly named cocktail bar. Tell them what you like and they’ll mix you something (cocktails cost around $3.40); if you’re feeling brave, ask for something made with cusha, a local spirit made from fermented fruit. San Simón joins onto the same courtyard as another popular watering hole, Cantina Royal, which has a fun ambience and often live music. • 4 Calle Oriente #5, on Facebook The decor of this swish bar and restaurant harks back to the days when it was a general store (opened in 1903). On the ground floor there are a few tables but the majority of the space is for an emporium-style wine and cigar shop. If the window seats are taken, head through to the courtyard or upstairs to the fairy-light strung terrace. Pick out a bottle of wine (prices range from $17 to $24). The creamy mushroom and parsley bruschetta ($6) and chorizo-spiked four-cheese fondue ($8) are tasty options.• Cnr 3a Calle Poniente and 5a Avenida Norte, on Facebook For a big night out this split-level disco is the place. It’s where touring DJs play when in town. Local beers (Gallo, Moza) cost $3.50 and cocktails $4.75, while bottles start at $54. Fuel up with the house tacos: fresh shrimp, heaped with guacamole and spicy pico de gallo, and rounded off with homemade chipotle sauce.• 5a Avendia Norte #30, lasvibrasantigua.com Flights from London to Guatemala City involve one or two stops and are available with BA, Aeromexico, Delta and United. It takes under an hour to reach Antigua from Guatemala City’s La Aurora airport. Arrange a shuttle bus at one of the kiosks in the airport or pre-book a transfer with Adrenalina Tours or Transport Guatemala; the journey costs around $15pp. Hotels can arrange private transfers