What were you hoping for?That I would be myself – despite the artificial set-up – and enjoy meeting someone new. First impressions?He’s shorter than me.And yay, we’re both late! What did you talk about?Work, the weather, and how poorly educated we are when it comes to refined French foodie words. Any awkward moments?I felt physically awkward for much of the time – I couldn’t get to grips with my chair. Good table manners?His lobster-cracking skills were questionable. Best thing about Neville?His adventurous nature – he’s quite the explorer. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes, although there might be an eyebrow raised, or two. Describe Neville in three wordsNice, English, chappy. What do you think he made of you?Different; unexpected? Did you go on somewhere?It was a bitterly cold snowy evening so we headed straight for our trains home. And... did you kiss?That would have been awkward. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Less talk about work and more about the meaning of life. Marks out of 10?I’d say a 7. Would you meet again?Possibly, but as a potential chum. What were you hoping for?A good amount of chitchat, moderate to intermediate drinking and some flirting. First impressions?Very pretty; very cool hair. What did you talk about?Travelling, jobs, religion. Any awkward moments?On the contrary, there were some nice lulls in conversation while we took in the skyline. Good table manners?Superb. Best thing about Lisa?Engaging; good conversationalist. Would you introduce her to your friends?Drinking is the rock my friends and I orbit around and she doesn’t drink, so no. Describe Lisa in three wordsSpiritual, open, wholesome. What do you think she made of you?I hope she thought I was a sound dude. Did you go on somewhere?Nope. I had to dash for a train. And... did you kiss?Just a hug goodbye. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?My palate isn’t sophisticated enough for the cognac I ordered with dessert. Marks out of 10?8.5. Would you meet again?Our interests don’t really converge on the spiritual stuff and drinking, so no.