The book I am currently readingThe Age of Anger by Pankaj Mishra. He uses Nietzsche’s Genealogy of Morals to help understand why everyone is so pissed off these days. He has a good theory, the Nietzschean idea of resentment – the fury of people who are excluded – and uses this to talk about radical Islam and Brexit. You could also apply it to Trump. The book that changed my lifeJames Baldwin’s The Fire Next Time. As a teenager from a mixed race background, I struggled with issues of race and identity and Baldwin had related all this to the race politics of his day. It gave me ideas of what I might write. The book I wish I’d writtenFrederick Seidel’s collected poems – they always make me laugh and they always move me. As I get older I read more and more poetry. The book that influenced my writingJack Kerouac’s On the Road. When I was a teenager and read it in my bedroom in Bromley, I thought this was a book for now – leaving the inheritance of the postwar settlement and making a new world. It inspired me. Karl Ove Knausgaard helped me understand what it is to have to mourn someone you didn’t like very much The book that is most underratedI recently found a wonderful book by Georges Simenon in a secondhand bookshop. It’s called The Train, and is about a man cut off from his family in Belgium at the outbreak of the war who begins a relationship with a woman he meets on a train. It’s about the fracturing of war and the possibility of love. Because of Maigret, people write Simenon off as a formulaic writer. To me he’s as good as Camus. The book that changed my mindThe Philosophical Investigations of Wittgenstein. I began to understand that language isn’t so much a picture of the world as a system in itself. This theory really possessed me. The last book that made me cryA Death in the Family by Karl Ove Knausgaard. The author and his brother clear out the filth in their father’s house – it’s a very beautiful and affecting description of what it is to have to mourn someone you didn’t like very much and who wasn’t very nice to you. The last book that made me laughYou’ll often find me in the afternoons lying in bed reading PG Wodehouse and laughing my head off. The book I’m most ashamed not to have readI haven’t read anything by Jane Austen. My shame is big. I can’t explain it. I’ve always had the impression they were books for girls, though of course she’s admired by many people of all genders. I dare say I’ll have to one day, and then I’ll have to eat my words. My comfort read Jean Rhys. Though her books are dark and disturbing, I’ve always admired her prose style. I like those evocative stories and novels of a down-at-heel girl walking around the cafes of Paris making conversation with strangers. • The Nothing is published in paperback by Faber. To order a copy for £6.79 (RRP £7.99) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99. 