Nobody is ever really ready to have a baby. You think you are, eventually, but it’s not until you actually become a parent that it becomes clear how preposterous that notion is. I can still remember, even at the ripe old age of 35, hesitating on the way out of the maternity ward, half-waiting for some sort of grownup to rush out and stop us. Surely they weren’t just going to let a pair of hapless amateurs leave with an actual live baby? But it turns out the essence of parenthood, and arguably of grownup life in general, is never really feeling ready for any of it and muddling through all the same. It’s like being kicked upstairs through a series of wholly undeserved promotions, feigning breezy competence in front of management all the way from the toddler years to the teens, and praying they don’t notice that you’re hopelessly out of your depth. So in some ways it’s hardly a surprise, still less a crisis, that the average age of parenthood should be creeping up and up; that the birthrate is falling now in all age groups except the over-40s, according to official statistics released earlier this week; and that within a year or so births to women in their 30s are expected to outnumber those to women in their 20s. There’s so much to be said for doing a bit of living first, for taking romantic or professional risks while you can and coming to parenthood older and wiser and resigned to the inevitable death of a social life – or, indeed, making a considered decision not to come to it at all. Older parenthood is now becoming the norm not just for the graduate middle classes, who have always left it late, but increasingly across the spectrum; the peak age for conceiving among women in the lowest-skilled jobs is now in their late rather than early 20s. And arguably, so what? If millennials are making a considered choice to grow up more slowly, to put parenthood off until they’re ready, in the full knowledge that leaving it too late carries a risk that it might never happen, then all power to them. I don’t for one moment underestimate the difficulty of feeling torn between an all-absorbing career and a ticking biological clock, but in a sense they’re the lucky ones; generations of women before us would have killed to have such choices. What does worry me, however, is whether for some of them later motherhood is becoming a warning sign of underlying economic distress. For as the Office of National Statistics puts it, delayed parenthood isn’t just about what it calls the “opportunity costs of childbearing”, or what is more popularly referred to as women putting their careers first. (Where do men put their careers, one wonders, for the whole of their 20s? Is the argument that they’re all secretly dying to change nappies, if only their girlfriends would just settle down?) Of course anxiety about whether parenthood will be the death of your career still looms depressingly large, even though in some ways it should never have been easier to pull off that particular conjuring trick. A young woman starting out in my old job now wouldn’t have the same sinking feeling of looking round the office and wondering where all the women of childbearing age went; at least she’d have the right to ask for part-time hours, and the option of her partner taking some paternity leave too. Then again, she’d arguably be lucky now to have got my old job in the first place. More likely she’d be freelancing instead, and all too uncomfortably aware that the path to paid maternity leave is hardly easy. This must be partly what the ONS means by citing “uncertainty in the labour market” as a hidden force behind falling fertility rates. But the other new culprit on the block is what it calls “housing factors”: what most of us would call the fierce desire to nest; to feel settled in a home, not hopping from rented flat to rented flat and constantly worrying about school catchments. Push that secure state further and further out of reach for young couples and it’s not surprising if they delay starting a family. The housing market is, as we learned this week, beginning to seize up even for those lucky enough to have scraped into it. Homeowners are moving less often, either because they’re elderly or because the cost of trading up – say, from a one-bed starter flat to somewhere with room for a nursery – is increasingly prohibitive not just in the expensive hotspots but in cold ones, where people aren’t building up enough equity to rise up the ladder. The lucky ones just stay put and extend the loft, but the unlucky will struggle to make the physical space for a family. A survey by the housing charity Shelter in 2016, the same year covered by the latest birthrate statistics, found that one in five people were putting off starting a family because of housing pressures. Tellingly, the last time birthrates among women over 35 rose this high was in the late 1940s, when so many younger couples’ plans to start a family would have been delayed by the war. What we’re experiencing now is obviously a much milder peacetime variant, something shaped as much by raised expectations of what’s needed to raise a family as by harsh economics. But all the same, there’s something deeply uncomfortable about the idea of lives being placed on pause for such avoidable reasons. If we must have a moral panic about fertility, don’t let it be over young women choosing to live a little before they have kids. Let it be over the ones who may be running out of choices. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist