In the early years of the 21st century, swaggering male antiheroes dominated the small screen. Depressive mob boss Tony Soprano, noble outlaw Omar Little in The Wire, and Breaking Bad’s schoolteacher-turned-meth-monster Walter White ushered in a modern “golden age” of television. Equating substance with brooding sociopaths, machiavellian power struggles and graphic violence, this was TV drama as an auteur-driven, testosterone-soaked epic. Defined in these terms, “serious” television offered minimal scope for women either on screen (female characters remained secondary in these sagas) or behind the scenes. The situation has not improved significantly. Last month – in response to a list of 10 ITV drama series planned for 2018 that included only a single project written primarily by a woman – more than 70 British female drama writers published an open letter of complaint. “Why are you not making drama by female writers?” they demanded. “Come on, tell us the truth. We can take it.” A swarm of startlingly original characters has been unleashed, unlike anything you see in pure drama Since the path to serious drama has been so heavily barricaded, women have found a side door to sneak through: the hybrid genre of dramedy, which is exactly what it sounds like – comedy shot through with heavier dramatic themes. Dramedy has become the home for raw female experience on TV – played for laughs, even if sometimes that means laughing through sobs or gasps. Shows such as Fleabag, Girls, Insecure, Transparent, The Mindy Project, Catastrophe, Crazy Ex-Girlfriend and Derry Girls all take advantage of the slipperiness of this genre, unleashing a swarm of startlingly original characters who bring to life the kind of stories and voices you simply don’t encounter in pure drama. The writers and performers convey the mixed emotions and muddy moods of real life in a devastatingly true way. Freeze-frame almost any moment in Fleabag and you’ll catch the pulse of that confusion under Phoebe Waller-Bridge’s almost translucent skin, her mobile expressions veering from seductive smile to self-loathing grimace in a twitch. Speaking to the viewer in conspiratorial asides, her red-lipsticked bravado and muttered drolleries paper over a maw of doubt and despair. “Either everyone feels this a little little bit and they’re just not talking about it, or I’m really fucking alone, which isn’t fucking funny,” she tells a bank manager who stops her from possibly hurling herself in front of a car. The women of Issa Rae’s HBO series Insecure are not so self-destructive, but their lives are no less messy and complicated. Rae got her start by creating a YouTube series called Awkward Black Girl, and on Insecure she twists her unease into a subtle portrait of friendship, ambition and independence. We watch the central character, named Issa and played by Rae, make her way through strained Tinder dates (“Your hair is different than in your picture,” one guy complains). There are also raucous outings with girlfriends and cringe-inducing conversations with her clueless white colleagues at a nonprofit youth organisation called We Got Y’All, who expect her to translate blackness for them. Her character is, as Rae once put it, “not black enough for the black people and not white enough for the white people”. Just as Fleabag breaks the fourth wall to address viewers, Issa expresses herself by freestyling raps about her daily dilemmas in front of the bathroom mirror. Melina Matsoukas, Insecure’s executive producer and director, told me she recognised in the series her own experiences “as a young black woman having to navigate through worlds where we don’t always fit in and we have to code switch”. This code-switching is something most women (along with many other people who are not straight white men) instinctively understand, even if they never think consciously about doing it. If you’re not in the majority, you are constantly shifting emotional gears and presenting yourself in personas that meet approval. Dramedy – that misfit, in-between genre – is the perfect platform for such a code-switching sensibility, because its elasticity allows for an ever-changing array of registers to coexist. In Broad City, Abbi and Ilana fart, puke, shave and stare at pregnancy tests – reclaiming potty humour from the boys Another defining quality of modern dramedy is a graphic intimacy about all aspects of female bodily experience. In his infamous 2006 essay, Why Women Aren’t Funny, Christopher Hitchens proposed that human bodily functions are the root of humour, and that the female half of the population couldn’t enjoy playing with “filth” because, as child-bearers, they must be the designated grownups. That shaky argument has been toppled time and time again in recent years, from The Mindy Project’s Mindy squirting breast milk in a rude colleague’s face to Crazy Ex-Girlfriend’s Rebecca singing about a urinary tract infection. There has been, in fact, a kind of televisual equivalent of the arms race, a competition in grossness. So far, nobody has topped Broad City, which opened one episode with a dizzying split-screen montage of toilet humour. Like a visual manifesto for the show, it jumpcut across six months of activity in each woman’s bathroom. We watch Abbi and Ilana check their breasts for lumps, fart, puke, shave, and stare at pregnancy tests, officially reclaiming potty humour from the boys. The term dramedy originates as far as back as the late 1980s, when it was used to describe US series such as The Days and Nights of Molly Dodd that injected heavy subjects into the lighthearted sitcom format, and later was applied to such series as Sex and the City and Weeds. The latter, created by Jenji Kohan in 2005 as a female riposte to The Sopranos, starred Mary-Louise Parker as Nancy Botwin, a middle-class widow who takes up marijuana-dealing to provide for her family and gradually mutates into a ruthless drug trafficker. Much of Weeds’ black humour comes from Nancy’s movements between worlds – between the anodyne suburban realm of the soccer mom and the edgy underground of growhouses and smuggling rings. Her dual identity means she’s constantly negotiating radically different rules and is always playing a role. But Nancy discovers she thrives on danger and uncertainty. Her drive to reinvent herself – spoiler warning – propels the series through crazy shifts, including the burning down of her entire town. The obvious comparison with Weeds is Breaking Bad. Shortly after Kohan’s series hit the airwaves, Vince Gilligan approached TV executives with a freakily similar idea: a small-town science teacher called Walter White takes on the alter ego of meth-manufacturer Heisenberg and taps into his own capacity for macho risk-taking and retaliation. But where Breaking Bad became the epitome of the celebrated golden age series, Weeds slipped through the cracks. It never quite got its due as the ground-breaking entertainment it was. Selfishness, ambition and recklessness were not things a mainstream audience necessarily enjoyed seeing in a middle-aged mom, unless they were played for laughs. It wasn’t something the mostly male executives commissioning shows wanted to see, either. The word “likable” has been the bane of female TV writers for decades, a creative straitjacket that demanded heroines be relatable, pleasant and positive role models. Mindy Kaling, creator and star of The Mindy Project, told me likability is “a poisonous word, because so often it’s attached to outdated standards for what is appealing about female characters for men. Sweetness, being agreeable, being put upon, having long, straight hair, et cetera – those are all likable qualities. Who cares?” Girls creator Lena Dunham, likewise, complained to me about this suffocating expectation “that female characters have to be perfect models of feminism or be really nice to each other – things we just don’t ask male characters to do. No one’s ever saying, ‘Walter White needs to be a better example.’” She turns to the example of her own character in Girls. “I would argue that Hannah Horvath as a character has been more debated – and called an asshole more – than characters who actually put out hits on people on television! All she is really guilty of is being complicated.” Perhaps that’s precisely what is so subversively unsettling about shows such as Girls or Fleabag or Chewing Gum: it’s unclear what viewers are meant to feel about these pushy, self-deluding antiheroines. But long live the confused and confusing dramedy queens, who turned a genre ghetto into a playpen. Like the bad boys of so-called serious drama, these difficult women have incited a TV revolution. • Joy Press is author of Stealing the Show: How Women Are Revolutionising Television, published by Faber and Faber on 8 March.