I’ve been a journalist since I was 16, and two years ago I gave up a staff job on an Irish newspaper to freelance for BBC radio with a view to moving into TV. My take-home pay averages £2,000 a month, out of which £700 goes on rent for a three-bedroom flatshare and £90 towards utility bills. Train fares to work make one of the biggest dents in my purse at £33 a week and I spend £20 a month on a pay-as-you-go mobile phone. I only spend on absolute essentials because I keep the rest of my earnings to fund my passion, which is yoga. I took it up while at University College, Dublin, as a way to get out of my own head amid the stress of exams. After three months I realised it had become a fundamental part of my life. It was a safe space to escape, and after a session with nothing but my own thoughts I’d always come back with a clearer vision. I started to go to three classes a week at a cost of €10 (£8.90) each, even if it meant getting up at 5am to catch up on work or sacrifice going out to lunch with friends. I had to take on a second job at a cocktail bar two nights a week on top of my weekend job at Jack Wills to pay the €30 a week. Once you’ve established the discipline it feeds into other areas of your life, which has helped me greatly career-wise. I haven’t had a holiday since I moved to London three years ago and I don’t miss that As I lacked the money to do a master’s degree in journalism but knew that was the career I wanted, I realised I would have to get my break via internships and earn my living costs with shop and bar work – I believe the yoga helped me focus on achieving that. I now do four or five classes a week if I’m working in London, or four over the weekend if I’m travelling for my job. I have a £108-a-month rolling membership of a yoga studio, which allows me unlimited classes. To supplement the yoga teacher training I have recently completed, I spend £40 to £60 a month on workshops that focus on specialised aspects of yoga. That’s the same as someone’s night out drinking cocktails. I’d say that my hobby costs me £3,000 a year, including travel to yoga festivals. The time and money commitment means I have to live pretty frugally otherwise. I rarely eat out. I might spend £8 a week going to the pub and, occasionally, I will go to a nightclub with friends, which costs about £20. I eat quite a basic diet and can live off £20 worth of food a week from the supermarket. I haven’t had a holiday since I moved to London three years ago and I don’t miss that. I can never switch off – in fact I don’t want to – when I go away. Yoga allows me to retreat from the world if I need to. I have no money put by, but the sacrifices are worth it. The yoga community in London has become my second family in an otherwise anonymous city and the disciplines of yoga and journalism overlap. One produces and one requires empathy, cooperation and the ability to listen. Yoga has made me into a warmer person. If only Donald Trump would take it up, the world might be a better place! As told to Anna Tims