 If you’re having trouble keeping track of all the staffers leaving the Trump White House of late, you could certainly be forgiven. A recent analysis by the Brookings Institution found that Donald Trump’s team has had a record number of departures, with a turnover rate twice as high as that of the Reagan administration. Trump himself is more sanguine. “People will always come & go … ” he tweeted this week, noting: “I still have some people that I want to change (always seeking perfection).” He added later: “So many people want to come in. I have a choice of anybody. I could take any position in the White House and I’ll have a choice of the 10 top people having to do with that position – everybody wants to be there.” Shortly after that, the White House announced the economic adviser Gary Cohn was resigning, the latest in a list of high-profile departures. 6 March 2018 Cohn probably lasted longer than anyone could have reasonably expected. In a White House aggressively staffed with family members and novice sycophants, the former Goldman Sachs No 2 was a rare, highly experienced professional. He was also a registered Democrat in an administration where bipartisanship has never been a particularly privileged part of the program. Cohn’s globalist leanings were always out of whack with Trump’s brand of economic protectionism, and he reportedly considered the president “dumb as shit”, according to the journalist Michael Wolff in his book Fire and Fury. Trump’s plan for tariffs on steel and aluminum were reportedly the straw that broke the camel’s back. 28 February 2018 Even in the Trump White House, where personnel attrition has become a defining feature, Hicks’s departure came as a surprise to many given her close relationship with the president, and meteoric rise within the Trump circle. Hicks, the administration’s fourth, and by far longest surviving, communications director, had zero political experience when she joined the Trump campaign team in Iowa in 2015, but quickly gained Trump’s trust for decisiveness and unflappability, traits Trump strongly admires. According to some reports, the president also boosted Hicks early and often on account of her looks. Hicks was instrumental in crafting the White House’s defense around the Trump Tower meeting between members of the Trump campaign and Russian operatives, and admitted telling certain “white lies” on the president’s behalf during a recent marathon appearance before the House intelligence committee. 7 February 2018 Porter, who served as a senior aide to Trump’s chief of staff, John Kelly, resigned after both of his ex-wives went public with reports of domestic abuse. Colbie Holderness, Porter’s first wife, told the Daily Mail that he was “verbally, emotionally and physically abusive”. His second wife, Jennifer Willoughby, made similar allegations and said she had filed an emergency protective order against Porter. It was later reported that Porter had been working with access to extremely sensitive government documents without a full security clearance, in large part because of the outstanding allegations against him. Kelly supported Porter personally as a friend and “trusted professional” but said: “There is no place for domestic violence in our society.” 13 December 2017 Omarosa, a Trump protege of Apprentice fame, never had an especially clear role in the administration, aside from being generally tapped by Trump for any issues involving black Americans. Sparing little time in her re-entry to reality television, Omarosa made waves weeks later on Celebrity Big Brother during a tearful confession with another contestant about why she joined the administration and how worried she was about its direction. “It’s going to not be OK. It’s not,” she said. “It’s so bad.” 29 September 2017 While many Trump departures have been dramatic and steeped in various flavors of soap opera-level intrigue, the departure of Price was much more typical of a presidential administration resignation. After it was revealed that the then head of health and human services had chartered private air travel for himself to the tune of more than $1m, Price apologized, offered to pay back the money and ultimately resigned. At the time Trump called Price a “very fine man” but said he did not like the “optics”, adding: “I’m not happy, OK?” Price was already on the ropes after multiple failed attempts by the Trump administration to deliver on its promise of repealing the Affordable Care Act. 25 August 2017 Like Steve Bannon, Gorka was a fringe rightwing presence in the Trump administration, and a person of questionable expertise on foreign policy and terrorism, the topics Trump tapped him to address. He frequently appeared as a surrogate for Trump on cable news, where he appeared to enjoy stirring controversy and making inflammatory statements. The New York Times reported that the president’s incoming chief of staff, John Kelly, personally forced Gorka out. Bannon was soon to follow. 18 August 2017 When Bannon left his role as White House chief strategist in August, he said that he would be “going to war for Trump against his opponents” from outside the administration. The former Breitbart publisher returned to the rightwing publication, saying: “I’ve got my hands back on my weapons.” But the political strategist quickly shot himself in the foot, providing some particularly spicy quotes about his former co-workers to Fire and Fury author Michael Wolff. Bannon quickly lost the support of Breitbart, Breitbart funder Rebekah Mercer and Trump himself, who gave his erstwhile aide the nickname “Sloppy Steve”. 1 August 2017 He came, he mooched, he got fired. Anthony Scaramucci’s 10-day tenure as White House communications director will forever be remembered for his questionable decision to call a New Yorker reporter and unleash a profanity-laden tirade against other White House staffers. The embarrassing debacle proved exciting for news media standards editors tasked with deciding whether to print the phrase “I’m not trying to suck my own cock”, and left the administration in search of a communications director who understood the difference between talking to a reporter on or off the record. 28 July 2017 It’s hard to point to a time during Reince Priebus’s seven-month stint as White House chief of staff that he wasn’t the subject of speculation about when he would be fired. The former Republican National Committee chairman was supposed to bring inside-the-beltway savvy to the Trumpian outsiders, but his tenure was largely notable for palace intrigue, political blunders and all-around chaos. 21 July 2017  Spicer spent his first day on the job as White House press secretary berating journalists for reporting accurately on the size of Trump’s inauguration crowd. And things only went downhill from there. Spicer’s time at the podium did provide the American public with some fascinating teachable moments on issues such as the proper term for Nazi concentration camps (hint: it’s not “Holocaust centers”) and the precise distinction between a wall and a fence. Spicer resigned after disagreeing with Trump over his decision to hire Scaramucci, thereby saving himself the humiliation of having to explain that whole situation to the White House press corps. 14 February 2017 The former general’s stint as national security adviser was brief – just 23 days – but Flynn’s presence still haunts the White House. That’s because Flynn, who resigned after it was revealed that he had misled the vice-president, Mike Pence, about his communications with the Russian ambassador, struck a plea deal in December with special counsel Robert Mueller. Flynn pleaded guilty to lying to the FBI and pledged “full cooperation” with Mueller in his Russian interference investigation. 31 January 2017  An Obama administration holdover, Yates served as acting attorney general while Jeff Sessions’s nomination for that office made its way through Congress. On principle, Yates declined to enforce Trump’s proposed travel ban, writing in a letter that she was not “convinced that the executive order is lawful”. Although she was fired within hours and accused of “betrayal” by the White House, a series of federal judges would go on to agree with Yates.