Kell Brook and Amir Khan, born 50 miles and seven months apart, remain as distant in their relationship as they ever have been, yet these fine former world champions are being thrown together for a defining showdown as they near the autumn of their parallel careers. Both stepped up in weight in 2016 to fight two middleweight monsters, Gennady Golovkin wrecking Brook over five rounds in London four months after Saúl álvarez knocked Khan cold in six in Las Vegas. Redemption for the losers of those mismatches could be at hand. Against all odds, they have ended up in the same promotional camp at Matchroom but each has serious challenges to overcome before Eddie Hearn can put together a long-awaited domestic contest, perhaps later this year or early in 2019 at welterweight. Brook’s audition arrives first, in front of his Sheffield fans on Saturday night, and it is a brutal one. Coming off a second straight defeat – against the awesome American welterweight Errol Spence at Bramall Lane last May – he has to convincingly beat an opponent, Sergey Rabchenko, whom he admits has tested him severely in the gym in the distant past. There is a belt at stake: the WBC’s “silver” title at light-middleweight, where Brook feels comfortable at last. However, for Brook the real victory will be survival in a business he once threatened to dominate. As he guards two repaired eye sockets, the swagger is diminished, although the determination seems to be in place. He has unwanted baggage. Last weekend in Darlington, a Sheffield fighter he and many others knew and liked immensely, Scott Westgarth, died after winning a 10-rounder at 31 years of age in only his 10th bout. Brook, an emotional man who admits to having considered quitting the sport after losing his world title to Spence, will have to clear his mind for the job at hand if he is not to avoid a career-ending defeat. Khan will watch with interest. The Bolton fighter has not fought since losing to álvarez and has had to wind down his ambitions in a return to Britain after five years campaigning in the United States. His comeback is a low-key 10-rounder in Liverpool on 21 April against Phil Lo Greco, a 33-year-old Canadian who has lost three of 31 bouts, including a three-round stoppage by Spence in 2015. Khan has by far the easier assignment – although both know every fight until and if they meet will be super-charged with tension. Around the same weight category, in Glasgow on Saturday tonight, the unbeaten Scottish light-middle, Josh Taylor, defends his WBC “silver” title against the seasoned but beatable Nicaraguan Winston Campos. He fights on Blain McGuigan’s Channel 5 promotion – which makes negotiations with Matchroom for a fight with either Brook or Khan problematic.