In Moscow last month I had a long and weird conversation with an intelligent 30-year-old Russian woman about Downton Abbey. How accurate a depiction of real life was it, she asked. What did British people think of it? I was tempted to claim that, yes, everything in Brexit Britain is exactly as depicted in Julian Fellowes’ period soap opera. We all scoff at the idea of a “weekend”, just as Dame Maggie (the Dowager Countess) does, we all have someone to do our ironing and live in stately homes with at least 37 bedrooms. In recent weeks I have been reminded of this conversation. Because just as false myths of Britons are peddled abroad, Russians in the UK have found themselves cast in a real-life McMafia where they are suspected of carrying a stash of nerve gas with them at all times in case they pass an Italian restaurant where they don’t like the look of someone. Superficially this stereotyping is funny. Until suddenly it’s not. A Russian friend interviewed for a British newspaper soon after the Salisbury poisoning found herself painstakingly explaining that not all Russians are oligarchs and/or spies. There are probably about a hundred people you could call oligarchs, she thought, maybe a few more you could call top-class spies – and yet there are around 144 million people you could call Russian. Russians are no more likely to, say, own a multibillion-dollar aluminium conglomerate or work for the security services than anyone of any other nationality. It just seems that way. In much the same way that it might seem to some people that British life is just like Downton Abbey. When your country’s leader is both very similar to an oligarch and used to be a member of the security services, it’s easy to see people might get confused. But Vladimir Putin is not Russia and Russia is not Putin. As Mikhail Zygar, formerly the editor of Russia’s only independent TV channel, Dozhd, wrote last week, Putin is part of a state-sponsored project to establish him as “a unique historical leader of Russia – able to unite fervent advocates of the Communist-era Soviet Union with those who dream of Russia’s pre-revolutionary empire, built on Orthodox Christianity”. That is a mission that involves extreme cognitive dissonance. And that kind of rewriting of history depends on finding as many common causes and common enemies as possible. All the Russian electorate took away from the events of this month was: ‘The UK has threatened Russia.' Those of us outside Russia have to be careful we don’t collude with this thinking. Over the past weeks I’ve been reading a flood of social media posts by Russians deeply upset at being portrayed as robotic ultranationalists hell-bent on polonium-poisoning the world into submission. They find this laughable and ridiculous but also insulting. A friend was asked, in all seriousness, “Is this what Russians do when they argue? Poison each other?” Russians at home and abroad resent the fact that people can’t seem to distinguish between “Russia” and “the security services”. And when relations become so tinged with resentment and conspiracy theories, anything that falls outside the political sphere becomes problematic. Maybe this narrative even causes us to lose our humanity a little. The poisoning of a spy is headline news, as are this week’s expulsions of diplomats by the US and EU. Yet a tragic fire in a shopping centre in Siberia, with more than 60 people dead, won’t make the front page. Meanwhile the kind of nuance-free Russophobia represented by the response to the Skripal case plays directly into Putin’s hands. The exiled oligarch Mikhail Khodorkovsky recently said that no one in Russia had ever heard of Sergei Skripal, “apart from a narrow circle of people involved in special services”. All the Russian electorate took away from the events of this month was: “The UK has threatened Russia.” It’s all as a Soviet-trained brain would want it – citizen against citizen, hunting for traitors in a phony war. It’s the sort of messaging that led to the closure of the British Council in Moscow last week, and is now shutting down cultural exchanges between Russia and the rest of the world. Similarly, in response to the Cambridge Analytica storm, the academic at the centre of the data harvesting, Aleksandr Kogan, laughed at suggestions that the fact he worked with St Petersburg University made him a suspicious character: “Anyone who knows me knows I’m a very happy-go-lucky goofy guy, the last one to have any real links to espionage.” But again, this is just what Putin wants us to think – that all Russian institutions are all-powerful and interconnected and ready to pounce with novichok in a heartbeat. This was the myth that kept the Soviet Union alive when all the time Chernobyl was waiting to explode, not because of strategy and guile but because it was poorly designed and inadequately maintained. When you see Putin flexing his pecs or unveiling a presentation about nuclear warheads, look for the weakness the show of strength is hiding. Keep in mind the fact that Russia’s GDP is outranked by Brazil’s. To protect what the Soviets used to call “druzhba narodov” (“the friendship of the nations”), we could always switch from Russophobia to Putinphobia. But there’s an issue there. The word “phobia” contains the implication that the fear is irrational. In the case of Russia, that’s probably true. In the case of Putin himself, the fear seems rational. It’s just hard to work out if there’s more to fear if he knows exactly what he’s doing or if – Chernobyl-style – he really doesn’t. • Viv Groskop is a writer, broadcaster and stand-up comedian, and the author of The Anna Karenina Fix: Life Lessons from Russian Literature