What a way for a player to prove his class and his commitment to a cause. Whether that cause be his team’s pursuit of points or his own desire to show that he is an elite player to whom the exceptional is routine, Riyad Mahrez delivered the last word here in glorious style, stepping forward seven minutes into stoppage time to curl a sumptuous free-kick into the net and salvage a draw for Leicester. It was the Algeria international’s first goal since the stand-off provoked by Manchester City’s attempt to prise him away from Leicester in January. He missed training for more than a week while he digested his disappointment over that thwarted transfer, but since returning he has got on with demonstrating why Pep Guardiola is among his many admirers and why Leicester were so keen to keep him. His goal here – a low curler from 25 yards around a four-man wall – could hardly have been better timed for his team. Nor more painfully timed for Bournemouth. Until the 97th minute Eddie Howe’s side were on course to claim three precious points in their bid to stay clear of the relegation zone. Claude Puel was delighted with what the goal said about Mahrez and the way Leicester handled the transfer hoo-hah. “He has given his best, the same as before the transfer window,” said the Frenchman. “I am proud of him and his team-mates. It was a good thing for the whole squad that he came back with a good spirit. When he came back into the team he had good support from the fans and I think they can see that Riyad is here with us and he can make the difference because he’s a great player but also because he has a good mentality.” Mahrez had also had Leicester’s first chance of the game, pouncing on a loose pass in the 14th minute and racing through on goal. On that occasion he was foiled by Asmir Begovic. That was the home side’s best chance in a first period in which they were second best. Leicester had struggled to pick a way through packed defences in their two previous league matches here – 1-1 draws against Swansea and Stoke – and Bournemouth were proving more pesky than those visitors: slicker and more adventurous. It was no shock when they scored before the break, Josh King with a penalty after being fouled by Marc Albrighton. The visitors’ first-half chances all came after Leicester lost Daniel Amartey to injury in the 20th minute and Albrighton had to shift from left-midfield to right-back. That position is not entirely alien to the Englishman but Bournemouth made it a harrowing reassignment. They first got in behind him through a sweeping move involving Callum Wilson and Charlie Daniels before the latter pulled the ball back to Junior Stanislas, whose shot from 15 yards flew past the top corner. One minute later King fired straight at Kasper Schmeichel after being teed up by Wilson. Leicester became increasingly dishevelled, losing the central midfield battle and finding it difficult to keep track of the elusive running of Stanislas, King and Wilson. That was never more plain than in the 35th minute, when, after disjointed defending in the face of another incursion by the visitors, Albrighton was beaten to a breaking ball in the box by King and wound up clunking into the forward. King sent Schmeichel the wrong way from the spot. It took an hour for Leicester to work up a head of steam. Then they threatened to overwhelm Bournemouth. Wes Morgan missed a couple of awkward headers from close range before Kelechi Iheanacho flicked a shot wide from two yards. Wilson cleared another off the line. “Once we’d weathered that mini-storm I thought we were going to be OK,” said Howe. “But you have to give credit to the moment that [Mahrez] produced. Knowing that it’s probably the last kick of the game, it’s a great strike.”