International pop star Cher brought Sydney’s Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras to a standstill, dazzling thousands of spectators by walking out into Taylor Square in the middle of the festivities. Cher, who was the headline act for the Mardi Gras after-party, had been rumoured to make an appearance during the parade and on Saturday night, the gay icon captivated the 300,000-strong crowd as she stepped out on to Taylor Square to the tune of Turn Back Time. The singer, sporting bright orange hair and a low-cut black top with a silver-embroidered jacket, mingled with her many fans. She said she loved the feeling of the parade and even chimed in about Australia’s passing of same-sex marriage laws. “It’s about time,” Cher told reporters. The American singer praised the Mardi Gras and said she wished she had attended one earlier. “I love that everybody is having such a good time and there’s no feeling of any kind of anger, there’s no negativity and that’s what I like most,” Cher said. “All the people with everything hanging out, and fabulous girls with their slap on and big hair and no clothes – I love it.” The Australian prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, posted a selfie of himself, his wife, Lucy, and the New South Wales premier, Gladys Berejiklian, with Cher on Twitter. Welcome to Sydney, Cher! @GladysB Lucy and I and all your fans thrilled to be with you at the 40th Mardi Gras & first since Australia achieved marriage equality. pic.twitter.com/EIYDaq2OTG “Welcome to Sydney, Cher! @GladysB Lucy and I and all your fans thrilled to be with you at the 40th Mardi Gras & first since Australia achieved marriage equality,” Turnbull tweeted. Turnbull described the parade as a “wonderful part of Sydney”. The parade itself dazzled about 300,000 spectators on Sydney’s Oxford Street. It was the first parade since same-sex marriage was legalised in Australia in 2017. The federal opposition leader Bill Shorten was part of the Rainbow Labor float with his wife, Chloe, and his deputy, Tanya Plibersek. He said it was a “fantastic atmosphere” and showed that Australia was making progress. Labor’s Senate leader, Penny Wong, Liberal senator Dean Smith and the federal Greens leader, Richard Di Natale, joined the Equality Campaign float. About 200 floats made their way up the popular city strip, among them 250 people who were involved in the 1978 demonstration and subsequent riot. One of them was 78er Peter De Waal who said Australia’s transformation had been liberating. Thank you #78ers. Thinking also of those of you who couldn't be at #mardigras2018 and who have died. Sending so much love, gratitude and #pride pic.twitter.com/JFmHzqV6jM More than 12,000 people took part in this year’s parade, including Australian model Jesinta Franklin who was on the Rainbow Swans float, reportedly the first float entered by a professional sporting team. More than 1,000 police officers kept a close eye on revellers as part of a huge security operation that involved strategically parked vehicles, an intelligence crew, mounted police, the riot squad and sniffer dogs. Amongst all of the glitz, glamour and sparkles of @sydneymardigras our @NSWAmbulance #paramedics are ready to assist anyone needing emergency medical care. Have fun and call 000 if you need us!#MardiGras2018. pic.twitter.com/XnbmmdqekG Five people were arrested during the night’s festivities in two separate incidents at Pitt Street and Hyde Park, a NSW police spokeswoman said. Three men were issued future court attendance notices for offences including resisting arrest, offensive behaviour, assaulting police and failure to comply with instructions.