Malaysia’s government has proposed legislation to outlaw fake news and punish offenders with a 10-year jail sentence, in a move described by critics as an attempt to crack down on dissent before a general election. The prime minister, Najib Razak, has been dogged by a multibillion-dollar corruption scandal involving an indebted state fund, and activists fear the new law could be used to criminalise critical opinions on government misconduct. A general election is widely expected in the next few weeks. The anti-fake news bill, which must be approved by parliament, calls for penalising those who create, offer, circulate, print or publish fake news – or publications containing fake news – with a 10-year jail term, a fine of up to 500,000 ringgit (£90,000) or both. The bill defines fake news as “any news, information, data and reports which is, or are, wholly or partly false whether in the form of features, visuals or audio recordings or in any other form capable of suggesting words or ideas”. It covers all media and extends to foreigners outside Malaysia if Malaysia or its citizens are affected. “This is an attack on the press and an attempt to instil fear among the (people)” before the election, the opposition lawmaker Ong Kian Ming tweeted. Government officials have said the law is needed to protect public harmony and national security. They have accused the opposition coalition of using fake news as a key weapon to win votes and warned that any news on the indebted 1MDB state fund that had not been verified by the government was fake. The US and several other countries are investigating allegations of cross-border embezzlement and money laundering at 1MDB, which was set up and previously led by Najib to promote economic development, but which accumulated billions in debt. The US justice department says at least $4.5bn (£3.2bn) was stolen from 1MDB by associates of Najib, and it is working to seize $1.7bn taken from the fund to buy assets in the US, potentially its largest-ever asset seizure. Najib, who denies any wrongdoing, has fired critics in his government and muzzled the media since the corruption scandal erupted three years ago. Critics say the anti-fake news bill will add to a range of repressive laws – including a sedition law, a press and publications act, an official secrets act and a security act – that have been used against critics, violated freedom of expression and undermined media freedom. “Malaysia has a long and troubling track record of using its legal books to silence dissent,” James Gomez, Amnesty International’s director for south-east Asia and the Pacific, said. “It is no coincidence that this law has been tabled with general elections just around the corner.”