Kris Boyd’s second-half goal gave Kilmarnock a 1-0 victory over his former club Rangers at Ibrox. The striker’s 20th goal of the season from close range in the 54th minute was enough to take the Premiership points back to Ayrshire. After losing to the league leaders, Celtic, last week, to all intents ending any pretence of a title race, it was another blow to Graeme Murty’s side, who ran out of ideas. Conversely, it was yet another impressive result for Steve Clarke’s rejuvenated team, who beat Rangers 2-1 at Rugby Park in December having drawn 1-1 at Ibrox in October. It was the Kilmarnock attacker Eamonn Brophy who had the first attempt on goal, firing over from 20 yards in the second minute, but the Ayrshire side soon found themselves on the back foot. Three minutes later the Rangers midfielder Sean Goss floated a free-kick from 25 yards past the Kilmarnock goalkeeper Jamie MacDonald’s left-hand post. In the 10th minute Rangers’ energetic playmaker Greg Docherty linked up with Jamie Murphy inside the Kilmarnock area but was denied by MacDonald as he stumbled getting his shot away, the Rugby Park keeper clutching Daniel Candeias’ corner. However, MacDonald should have been beaten midway through the first half when Goss picked out Russell Martin, in for the injured David Bates, with a wonderful cross, but the defender, six yards out, only glanced his header and the ball sped past the far post. MacDonald then got a touch on the ball as Jason Cummings, in for Alfredo Morelos, stabbed a shot towards the goal from a Candeias pass, but on a bitterly cold day in Govan it was all very laboured. The Rangers fans let their side know about it when Brophy missed a Kirk Broadfoot cross a few yards from goal just before the break. Goss was replaced by Jason Holt for the start of the second half but the visitors should have taken the lead after three minutes when Jordan Jones got to the byline and cut the ball back for Brophy. From 12 yards he sliced his shot wide. However, Killie did take the lead when Wes Foderingham could only palm a Youssouf Mulumbu shot into the path of Boyd, who knocked it over the line from a couple of yards with his last piece of action before being replaced by Rory McKenzie. Alan Power came on for Aaron Tshibola, with Morelos replacing Josh Windass to partner Cummings as the home supporters became increasingly agitated. Killie threatened to double their lead on a couple of occasions, while for Rangers it was huffing and puffing with Kenny Miller on for Candeias in a desperate last throw of the dice. In the 77th minute Martin’s header from a James Tavernier free-kick hit the bar before being scrambled to safety but the visitors did not have to withstand any concerted pressure and indeed retained their threat on the counterattack. Murty did not hold back regarding his charges when talking to Rangers TV afterwards. “We lost too many first and second balls, we were second to too many breakdowns and, as always, if you don’t take your chances, it makes it very difficult.” Conversely Clarke was understandably buoyant. “That was the seventh game in 21 days, which was a big ask for the players,” he said. “I haven’t got a word which could praise this group of players enough. As a coach I am really proud of them. They find a way to get results.” At Pittodrie, Graeme Shinnie capitalised on an Elliot Parish mistake to give Aberdeen a narrow 1-0 win over Dundee. Shinnie was in the right place to steer into an empty goal following the goalkeeper’s failure to deal with a cross from Ryan Christie. Aberdeen’s keeper Freddie Woodman played his part with a great stop to deny AJ Leitch-Smith five minutes before Shinnie scored. The Dundee manager, Neil McCann, did not hold back in his criticism of his goalkeeper. “It’s another calamitous goal we’ve given away. I’ve had a word with Elliot because I don’t think he should be coming for it. “He’s cleaned everybody out but not taken much, if any, of the ball, and Shinnie’s done what you hope any midfielder will do – taken a gamble and he’s got a tap-in.” Steven Naismith inspired Hearts to a comprehensive 3-0 win over Partick Thistle. The home side scored all three goals in a dominant first period, with Naismith setting up Kyle Lafferty before netting one himself. John Souttar added the third. Andrew Davies returned from injury to score the equaliser for strugglers Ross County in their 2-2 draw against Hamilton at Dingwall. County opened the scoring through Jamie Lindsay midway through the first half. But two goals in three minutes for the Accies swung the game in favour of the visitors. They were awarded a penalty in the 49th minute and Douglas Imrie, who had come on as a substitute at the interval, calmly put it away to level the scores at 1-1. The visitors were ahead when Marios Ogkmpoe found space on the edge of the box and got a shot away. County’s keeper Aaron McCarey let it slip past him and the visitors were in front seven minutes after half–time. Davies headed a vital equaliser although the point did not see County move off the bottom of the table.