Theresa May has promised to be “straight with people” and face up to the “hard facts” of the Brexit process, including that leaving the single market will mean the UK and EU enjoy less access to each other’s markets. The prime minister admitted on Friday that the UK would continue to be affected by the European court of justice after leaving the EU, and would be constrained in its ability to lower regulatory standards for some goods. She also said any deal would result in the UK leaving the EU customs union, but called for a new agreement that would secure “as frictionless a border as possible” and avoid a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic. In her third major speech on Brexit, delivered at Mansion House in central London after the weather conditions prevented her travelling to Newcastle, May said she understood there were difficult trade-offs ahead. “Before I turn to what a new and better model might look like, I want to be straight with people – because the reality is that we all need to face up to some hard facts,” she said.“We are leaving the single market. Life is going to be different. In certain ways, our access to each other’s markets will be less than it is now. How could the EU’s structure of rights and obligations be sustained, if the UK – or any country – were allowed to enjoy all the benefits without all of the obligations?” The prime minister, who has been accused of wanting to have her cake and eat it, added: “So we need to strike a new balance. But we will not accept the rights of Canada and the obligations of Norway.” She rejected claims that her “three buckets” approach to trade, in which some sectors would have better access to the EU market than others, was cherrypicking. “The fact is that every free trade agreement has varying market access depending on the respective interests of the countries involved. If this is cherrypicking, then every trade arrangement is cherrypicking,” she told an audience of ambassadors and business people. Claiming that every neighbour of the EU had differential access to the single market, May saud cherrypicking would be wanting “a deal where our rights and obligations were not held in balance”. She set out her hopes to remain part of EU agencies, including those involved in chemicals, medicines and aerospace, which would require Britain to abide by the rules and make an “appropriate financial contribution”. However, despite setting out some areas in which the UK accepted ongoing obligations, May was unswerving about Britain’s red lines, around ending free movement and being able to strike trade deals with third countries. She rejected a customs union with the EU – in contrast with the Labour party – by arguing that such an arrangement would be asymmetrical and prevent the UK from striking new trade deals after Brexit. Instead, she argued for two potential alternatives: a “customs partnership” in which the UK would mirror EU requirements on imports at its borders; and a “highly streamlined customs arrangement” using technology to minimise friction on the border. The first option has been described as unrealistic by EU officials, and even dismissed as blue-sky thinking by the Brexit secretary, David Davis. May said there would need to be a “strong commitment” that regulatory standards would remain as high as within the EU – a phrase watered down by Brexit supporters in her cabinet from a binding promise. Overall, she said, the Brexit process would be governed by five tests: “Implementing the decision of the British people; reaching an enduring solution; protecting our security and prosperity; delivering an outcome that is consistent with the kind of country we want to be; and bringing our country together, strengthening the precious union of all our people”. And she set out five foundations: “reciprocal binding commitments” to fair and open competition; an independent arbitration system; ongoing dialogue with the EU; ensuring the EU and UK have the means to consult each other regularly, and arrangements for data protection and links so British and EU workers could travel to each other’s countries within a new system. The director of the Resolution Foundation thinktank, Torsten Bell, said the prime minister was essentially laying out “as soft a Brexit as she can outside the single market and customs union” but allowing future prime ministers to take a harder stance if they wished. Senior leave campaigners in parliament seemed satisfied with the speech. Iain Duncan Smith, the former Tory leader, described it as “upbeat and clear” and called on the European commission to “stop playing games” and treat Britain as an equal partner. EU members (plus Turkey, Andorra, Monaco and San Marino) trade without customs duties, taxes or tariffs between themselves, and charge the same tariffs on imports from outside the EU. Customs union members cannot negotiate their own trade deals outside the EU, which is why leaving it – while hopefully negotiating a bespoke arrangement – has been one of the government’s Brexit goals. See our full Brexit phrasebook. “It was a good speech – it covered all the key items about leaving the EU, but also the single market and customs union, and ruled out simply adopting other options, such as Norway and Canada,” he told the Guardian. He said the prime minister wanted to secure a special relationship that seemed “reasonably and wholly achievable”. “There are negotiations to be done. It is now over to the commission but it is time for the commission to stop playing games and stop the megaphone and start negotiating as equal partners.”Sam Lowe, a trade expert at the Centre for European Reform, said : “Reality is starting to seep in. It is positive that she has come clean on the fact that we won’t be able to get everything we want. And indeed that there are trade-offs. “It remains a shame that while May has correctly identified that remaining close to the EU is economically in the UK’s best interest, she was seemingly otherwise unable to put forward a palatable [to the EU] means of doing so.”