Boris Johnson has been urged to apologise after it emerged that he attended the launch of local Tory campaign that has been accused of “dog-whistle racism”. The foreign secretary was pictured on a visit to Romford market, in east London, last December to help launch the “Keep Havering Safe” campaign before the local elections. The campaign went on to distribute leaflets claiming that a Labour victory would result in the borough becoming increasingly like an inner-city area with a “massive population” rise and a “crime wave” arriving from central London. It warned that the influence of London mayor, Sadiq Khan, could lead to the borough ending up “resembling Hackney, Newham, Camden and Barking” rather than “traditional” parts of Essex. Local Tory MP Andrew Rosindell revealed that Johnson had supported the launch of the campaign on his visit to Romford, although there is no evidence the minister knew about, or handed out the leaflets himself. The Conservative party chairman, Brandon Lewis, was also under pressure to intervene in the row after the local election leaflet, which one of the councillors behind it said was signed off by national party headquarters, came to light. Former Tory minister Nick Boles was among those who criticised the campaign, tweeting: “This leaflet is disgraceful. The individuals responsible should apologise, and withdraw it, or face disciplinary action. We cannot attack Corbyn for indulging antisemitism in Labour and allow messages like this to go unchallenged. @BrandonLewis over to you.” David Lammy, the Labour MP for Tottenham, called the leaflet “one long dog whistle about race”, saying it marked a return to the controversial tactics used against Khan when he defeated Zac Goldsmith to become mayor in May 2016. Goldsmith was heavily criticised, including by some Conservatives, for repeatedly raising what he said were Khan’s previous links to extreme Muslim figures and for not being sufficiently tough on Islamist terrorism. Lammy told the Guardian: “It is now contingent on Boris Johnson to apologise to Londoners for seemingly condoning this vile leaflet. I call on Brandon Lewis as party chair to do the same.” The local paper, the Enquirer, published pictures of Johnson paying a surprise visit to Hornchurch and Romford to support’s Rosindell’s campaign. It was understood to be an official CCHQ campaigning day to support the 21 Tory candidates running in May, and one of many that he does around the country. Rosindell, a staunch Brexiter, said at the time: “While Havering is an outer London borough, we don’t want the social problems which come with more migration from inner London. Havering has always been a low crime area with great community spirit.” An ally of Khan said: “These tactics didn’t work last time the Tories tried them and they won’t work now. The silence of Tory ministers on this is staggering – especially as it looks like Boris Johnson personally endorsed this campaign.” A Conservative spokesman said: “Romford Conservatives intended to highlight local concerns about housing pressures, high-density urbanisation and badly-run Labour councils in inner London. They have apologised for any offence caused and the leaflet has been withdrawn.”