The England cricketer Ben Stokes has appeared in crown court via video link from New Zealand and pleaded not guilty to affray. Dressed casually, Stokes greeted the recorder of Bristol, Judge Peter Blair QC, with a casual “hi judge”, before being told he would face trial during the height of the British cricket season. The all-rounder and two other men pleaded not guilty to the charge of affray during a 15-minute hearing at Bristol crown court on Monday. Stokes, 26, wearing a grey shirt, confirmed his name, date of birth and nationality and said “thank you” when the hearing concluded. The two other defendants, Ryan Ali, 28, and Ryan Hale, 26, appeared in person at the court. Stokes, Ali and Hale are jointly charged with affray in the Clifton Triangle area of Bristol on 25 September last year – several hours after England played a one-day international against the West Indies. The charge states that their “conduct was such as would cause a person of reasonable firmness present at the scene to fear for his personal safety”. A 27-year-old man allegedly suffered a fractured eye socket in the incident. Blair set a date in August for the trial, which is expected to last between five and seven days. “You must be here without fail for that trial,” the judge told Stokes, Ali and Hale. “You will remain on bail as before.” The judge ordered the three defendants to provide defence statements by 22 May. He said the courtroom in which the trial takes place must have CCTV-playing facilities. The case was prosecuted by Lucy Organ, with Gordon Cole QC defending Stokes. Stokes missed the Ashes after being suspended from playing for England. Without him, England lost to Australia 4-0. England declared Stokes available once more only after he pleaded not guilty at Bristol magistrates court in February. The England and Wales Cricket Board (ECB) announced that he would travel to New Zealand to join the squad after the court hearing. Stokes, of Castle Eden in Durham, and Ali and Hale, both of Bristol, will stand trial on 6 August. Hale wore a blue suit and tie, while Ali wore a grey suit and tie. England’s second Test against India at Lord’s starts on 9 August.