Late-night hosts on Thursday discussed Hope Hicks’ departure from the White House, Trump’s flip-flopping on guns and Jared Kushner’s conflicts of interest. NBC’s Seth Meyers discussed both Trump’s amorphous stance on guns and Jared Kushner’s rocky week. “Republicans including Trump spent eight years spinning unhinged fantasies about Obama trying to take people’s guns away,” he said, “and then yesterday, as Vice-president Mike Pence was discussing the idea of gun violence restraining orders, Trump just blurted out the exact thing he falsely accused Obama of doing.” “Republicans got their dream president and now he’s just blurting out their worst nightmares,” the host joked. “While Trump swings wildly on policy, his White House keeps getting engulfed in new scandals,” Meyers went on. “Just take the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser Jared Kushner, who’s already under fire for his business dealings, his lack of a security clearance and his inexperience.” Meyers then noted that this week reports surfaced that Kushner took a half-billion dollars in loans from various companies, including $184m from Apollo Global Management and $325m form Citigroup, after meeting with officials from those companies at the White House. “That is cartoonishly corrupt. How much more suspicious can Jared Kushner get?” Meyers asked. “He took millions in loans from companies he met with in the White House, tried to set up a secret channel to talk to Russia, can’t get a security clearance to complete a background check, and lurks ominously in the background of every White House photo like he’s the ghost of a boy Trump killed with an errant tee-shot.” “Yesterday, we learned about the resignation of White House communications director and step-mother-who-went-to-college-with-her-new-daughter, Hope Hicks,” Stephen Colbert began. “On Tuesday, Hicks told Congress that she sometimes tells white lies for Trump. For example, that she only does it sometimes.” “That news did not sit well with the president,” Colbert explained, “who reportedly berated Hicks and demanded to know ‘How could you be that stupid?’” Colbert went on to cite a Politico article in which a close friend of the president’s compared losing Hicks to Trump’s losing a limb. “It’s not just Hicks,” Colbert added. “Trump is reportedly freaking out about the way the media is jumping on senior White House son-in-law and haunted Ken doll, Jared Kushner.” Colbert then noted that, after losing his top-level security clearance, Kushner’s clearance is now reportedly lower than that of the White House chief calligrapher. Colbert added that national security adviser HR McMaster is also rumored to be on his way out. The host continued: “McMaster found himself in hot water with Trump last month when he told a German audience that Russian meddling in the election was incontrovertible, which violated Trump’s policies against acknowledging Russian interference and of using big words.” But the imminent departures don’t end there: “The guy who’s really upsetting Trump is attorney general and racist Dobby Jeff Sessions,” Colbert said, noting that Trump apparently calls the former senator “Mr Magoo”. “Quick note to anyone under 80,” Colbert said sarcastically. “Mr Magoo was a cartoon character 60 years ago and what was funny about him was that he was legally blind. Simpler times.” Comedy Central’s Trevor Noah discussed Trump’s open-door meeting on gun reform at the White House. “President Trump invited lawmakers back to his Apprentice set to discuss what can be done to stop gun violence,” Noah began. “If people came in expecting Trump to side with Republicans, they were in for a big shock, because Trump is unpredictable.” In footage shown by Noah from the meeting, Trump accuses Republicans of being “petrified” of the NRA. “If you thought Trump was going rogue when he attacked the Republicans and the NRA, wait until you see him supporting the Democrats,” Noah added. He then showed more clips, in which Senator Dianne Feinstein is gleeful when Trump agrees with her about assault weapons. “All the Democrats in this meeting were giddy: look at Amy Klobuchar when Trump shut down the Republicans’ concealed carry idea,” Noah joked. “All of a sudden she’s Jim from The Office.” “Trump is unpredictable. Just when you think he's gonna zig, he punches you in the nuts.”-Trevor on Trump's gun control flipsFull episode: https://t.co/nAWEc48RUa pic.twitter.com/S0vuEnbN7R “At one point, Mike Pence tries to step in and say ‘Calm down, people’, there will be due process before anyone’s guns are taking away,” the host said. But infamously, Trump replied to Pence by saying he’d rather “take the guns first, due process second”. “My mind is going to explode: Donald Trump just said, ‘Fuck your rights, I’m taking your guns.’ Isn’t that what he said Hillary was going to do?” “Before you get too excited, just remember what happened with Daca not too long ago,” Noah concluded. “Trump was at that same table agreeing with Democrats on immigration and then, two days later, Africans were from shithole countries and the whole thing fell apart.”  