That whoosh you heard on Friday night was the sound of millions of brackets across America simultaneously bursting into flames. The sporting spectacle whose overarching allure is chaos was finally graced with the mother of all upsets as University of Maryland-Baltimore County upended top-ranked Virginia to become the first ever No16 seed to defeat a No1, springing the greatest of NCAA men’s basketball tournament surprises in the most shocking way imaginable. The little-known Retrievers didn’t merely defeat the Cavaliers, the top overall seed in the field who had lost only twice all season and won the Atlantic Coast Conference by four games before running the table in the conference tournament. They emerged from a half-time stalemate to break Virginia’s spirit during a second half that never felt close down the stretch, picking their teeth with a national-best defense that had surrendered an average of 53 points all season. Final score: No16 UMBC 74, No1 Virginia 54. You read that correctly. The same UMBC who lost to Albany by 44 points less than two months ago, that finished second to Vermont in the America East and needed a last-second three-pointer in the conference tournament final to punch their first NCAA ticket in more than a decade, won by 20 points over college basketball’s best team and made a mockery of the pundits both armchair and professional. No16 seeds had played 135 first-round games against No1s entering Friday night’s contest and lost all of them by an average margin of nearly 25 points. There had been a few close calls down the years. Princeton famously came within one point of beating top-seeded Georgetown in 1989. One year later Murray State took Michigan State to overtime before fading. Western Carolina had two shots in the final seconds to topple Purdue in 1996, twice missing their chance at history. But the blowouts far outnumbered the near misses. None had even come within single digits of the holy grail since Arizona’s nine-point win over Weber State in 2014. Until Friday. Surely there have been more consequential upsets in NCAA tournament lore: North Carolina State’s buzzer-beating stunner over Houston’s Phi Slama Jama in 1983 and Villanova’s epochal triumph over Georgetown in 1985 were both in national championship games and became archetypes of the modern-day March Madness mythos as it ballooned into the mainstream spectacle that today generates nearly $1bn in TV money. Louisiana State (1986), George Mason (2006) and VCU (2011) were each No11 seeds who scored Elite Eight upsets over No1s to complete improbable runs to the Final Four. Florida Gulf Coast, one of a few No15 seeds to knock off a No2, delivered a stirring encore against San Diego State to crash the Sweet 16. All UMBC won on Friday was a second-round date with Kansas State on Sunday. But there was something about No16 over No1, one of the last things in sports that had never, ever happened, that took on a mythology of its own and made natural fodder barroom debates: the sort of psychic blockade once associated with the four-minute mile and the sound barrier. One day it could happen, we told ourselves year after year, even as it felt less and less likely with each passing tournament. Now it finally has. And it couldn’t have come at a better time for college basketball, which has played out the season amid a spreading FBI probe into widespread bribery, fraud and cheating at the highest echelons of the sport that’s already ensnared dozens of top programs, prompting the NCAA to launch an independent investigation led by former US secretary of state Condoleezza Rice. Yet for one night the essential purity of the knockout format managed to overshadow the problems mounting at the gates, putting a fine point on why the NCAA tournament endures as one of America’s most valued sporting traditions: Throw together 68 teams in a one-and-done format and there’s no telling what will happen. Unlike football where the big guy will beat the little guy 10 times out of 10, basketball is a sport where one untimely injury, one whistle-happy referee or one hot hand can leave a heavily favored top seed scratching for its life. The better team doesn’t always win. On Friday night, the hot hand belonged to UMBC’s Jairus Lyles, who poured in a game-high 28 points on 9-for-11 shooting and etched his name alongside the long roll of previously anonymous heroes who vanish from American life as quickly as they appeared, but whose cameos endure in our sporting consciousness: Arceneaux and Lewullis, Pittsnogle and Farokhmanesh, McFadden and Blizzard. There’s no sensible reason a college basketball tournament should hold a nation of 320m souls in its thrall for three weeks every year, but it doesn’t take long to discover there’s very little that makes sense about March Madness. It’s right there in the name. It’s an event that showcases a unique cross-section of America, from urban centers to outlying areas that go unrepresented by professional sports teams, brought together under one tent like no other event in sports. The whole enterprise points directly into the mainline of why people watch sports: they’re unpredictable. And never more than on Friday night in Charlotte.