Bear with me while I tell you about the price of potatoes, for it is in such humble roots that some of the blights of capitalism are revealed. It is in the food system, too, that the Brexit fault lines over immigration are opening into alarming chasms. Martin and Sarah Mackey grow potatoes, along with fashionable greenery such as kale, in Kent. They are tenants on their holding, Ripple Farm, and so have no inherited, accumulated capital in the land to subsidise their business, although they receive about £5,000 a year in EU environmental farm payments. They sell some of their potatoes at local markets for a pound a kilo, about the same as you would pay for the equivalent grade in a high street supermarket. They also supply a trading and wholesaling operation called Growing Communities that mixes their potatoes with other produce in vegetable box schemes, starting at £7.75 for a week’s supply for one. Julie Brown, Growing Communities’ director, says her mission is to feed urban communities locally in a way that is fair and sustainable in the face of corporate dominance and climate change. She starts from the position that the price she gives the Mackeys for potatoes must cover their cost of production and enable both of them and their staff to earn a reasonable living. So she pays them 60p per kilo for delivered goods. Her supply chain is short and direct, keeping other costs to a minimum. She also believes her customers should know where the money goes, and explains that most of her markup goes into wages. Her packers are paid the London living wage, the amount the Resolution Foundation calculates is required to cover the real cost of living. One of her organisation’s governing principles is that the pay ratio between top and bottom should be no more than 2:1, so Brown takes a salary of £30,000 a year. All this sounds like a version of common sense, and yet such thinking is revolutionary in our food system, where value has been sucked up to the top. In conventional production, the average price for potatoes at the farm gate has been just 11p per kilo recently (less than a fifth of what Brown pays). A large-scale supplier to supermarkets or manufacturing will typically get only this small fraction of the retail price of around £1 per kilo that we pay in the shops, with opaque markups along the way for complex transport and logistics systems, processors’ costs, retail margins and executive pay. (Compare Brown’s 2:1 boss to worker pay ratio with that of FTSE bosses, which was 129:1 in 2016.) The Mackeys' staff are paid the London living wage – and in good years, a share of the profits in bonuses Across sectors, the past 50 years has seen a dramatic decline in the farmer’s share of the money as the buying power of supermarkets and processors has become more and more concentrated, their tendency to oligopoly largely untouched by competition authorities. These are dysfunctional markets. The Mackeys have the equivalent of nine full-time staff, made up of 13 to 14 people who work varying patterns that suit them. They are paid the London living wage like Brown’s packers. In good years, workers are also paid a share of the profits in bonuses. Unlike many agency workers supplied to industrial farms to harvest and pack, the workers on Ripple Farm receive holiday pay, sick pay and good protective clothing to keep them warm and dry. “That’s just the law, actually,” Martin Mackey explains, although it is a law all too often honoured in the breach. Unlike gang workers on many industrial farms, where advances in automation have not removed the need for labour but simply shifted it, no one works bent double in the fields for 12 hours a day behind a mechanised harvesting rig that dictates a worker’s pace, because that is back-breaking and soul-destroying. Large-scale producers say they have to bring in migrants because local people do not want these jobs, especially where they are seasonal, and small wonder. The Mackeys’ business, on the other hand, is arranged so that there is year-round employment five days a week, and a hard stint outdoors in the morning might be balanced by a less arduous indoor job in packing and admin in the afternoon. The work is tough and physically demanding, as agricultural work has always been, but it is not allowed to be crippling. Finding good staff is not always easy. We have become disconnected from the land and tend to look down on outdoor labour, but with good pay and conditions, the jobs have been filled by local recruits. The key for Martin Mackey is having routes to market that he can plan for and control, remaining, in other words, outside the system of supermarket and big manufacturing just-in-time delivery that now accounts for the vast majority of UK production. “I won’t go there. You have to have zero-hours work if you do,” he says. This is not how most food businesses work today. Large numbers of them have depended on EU migrants – around 98% of seasonal workers in primary agriculture are foreign-born and 33% of workers in food manufacturing are migrants. These businesses are now sounding the alarm. They can see European workers going home, while new foreign recruits are no longer attracted to wages paid in a devalued sterling. They want the government to commit to a new permit scheme for agricultural workers, and warn that they will not be able to function without one. But the Conservatives have put themselves in a bind. If they do not end free movement with a hard Brexit, they think voters will punish them for betraying them over immigration. So although industry is shouting about a crisis in labour supply, the government is dogmatically refusing to consider any new scheme until we are out of the EU. The environment secretary, Michael Gove, published his plan for food and farming – a vision of “health and harmony … in a green Brexit” – last week. It made welcome suggestions about capping any farming subsidies the UK government pays after Brexit so that the largest landowners would no longer collect the most. But it made no commitment to what agribusiness is saying is its top concern, which is who will do its work. It is the time of year when many big growers agree their deals with retailers and manufacturers for what will be planted for harvest next year. With no guarantee that they will be able to find enough people, they say they are scaling back. The government urgently needs to stop ducking the issue if it wants to maintain British production in coming years, but it will take a much more radical overhaul of economic structures to bring this labour market back to long-term health. • Felicity Lawrence is a special correspondent for the Guardian and author of the bestselling exposés of the food business, Not on the Label and Eat Your Heart Out