Rex Tillerson has said farewell to the state department with a parting shot at Washington, a plea for integrity – and no mention of the man that fired him. Tillerson did not name Donald Trump as he spoke to several hundred state department workers who gathered at headquarters in Foggy Bottom to watch him depart. Nor did he directly address the icy manner in which he was dismissed last week after one of the shortest stints by a secretary of state in recent history. “This can be a very mean-spirited town,” Tillerson said, eliciting laughter at first and then applause. “But you don’t have to choose to participate in that.” When he arrived in the nation’s capital last year, Tillerson made no secret of his disdain for Washington gamesmanship. He later said he had been reluctant to take the post, and had been looking forward to retirement, but had been persuaded by his wife. Weeks into his tenure, Tillerson said he did not have any “appetite or hunger” to speak with reporters about US diplomatic missions. Others he soon found himself on the receiving end of negative press reports, leaks from his rivals and mounting speculation about his future – until he was abruptly fired last week, four hours after returning from Africa. Often at odds with the White House, he also lost the confidence and support of many of the state department’s 75,000 workers over his moves to cut the budget, leave key leadership positions vacant and downplay human rights and democracy-promotion as diplomatic priorities. Still, there was sustained applause for several minutes as he departed the marbled lobby of the Harry S Truman Building, the same lobby where Tillerson, the former Exxon Mobil CEO, introduced himself as “the new guy” in his hallmark Texas drawl 14 months ago. A few former staffers whose tenures were even shorter than Tillerson’s also returned to see him off. Then Tillerson set off for his home in Texas – “a more familiar climate,” the deputy secretary, John Sullivan, joked, “which I know suits him well.” If the Senate agrees, he will soon be replaced by current CIA director Mike Pompeo, who frequently bumped heads with Tillerson over Iran and other issues. Since his firing, Tillerson has pointedly declined to thank Trump. He made no explicit mention of the president in his remarks. “Never lose sight of your most valuable asset, the most valuable asset you possess: your personal integrity,” Tillerson says. “Only you can relinquish it or allow it to be compromised. Once you’ve done so, it is very, very hard to regain it. So guard it as the most precious thing you possess.” This report includes material from the Associated Press and Reuters