My dearest angel, I promised to keep you safe and protect you for as long as I lived, but I feel I have failed in my duty. You left me in April and I feel so cheated by life. You were my entire life. You fought the battle against cancer twice, and I remember you saying that the only reason you put up with all the treatment was for me. I was terrified of losing you the first time round. When the doctors informed us that there was nothing they could do, I was shattered You had the most beautiful hair and it pained me to have to shave it when you were undergoing chemotherapy. When the treatment was completed, all I wanted to do was to hold you and not let you go. This time, when the doctors informed us that there was nothing they could do, I was shattered. You could see that I was lost and it affected you, my angel. I am so sorry that I was not strong enough to help you cope. We dreamed of growing old together, but little did I know that all the plans we made would come to nothing. I hate coming back to the house now. With you no longer here, it is no longer my home. It’s just a place I come to lie down before I go back to work the next day. I dread the weekends, when I have to be in the house with the memory of your illness. Nothing makes sense any more. I will always cherish the 20 years that we were together – the best years of my life. While going through some things on your laptop, I found a recording of your voice and I play it every time I feel alone. All I have now are the memories of us together. My greatest fear is that I will start to lose those. When you were here, I took it for granted that you would be at home when I came back. Here to give me a hug and ask me how my day was. Now that I have lost you I feel so empty and I wonder how long I can go on without you. I miss you so much. You were my best friend and my soul mate. Friends tell me that time will help me adjust, but I do not want that. I want to remember you until the day I meet you again, wherever that is. Nobody will ever take your place in my heart. I will live each day as it comes. Wherever you are, I know you are watching me and I will try to live by your principles. Until we meet again, my love. • We will pay £25 for every letter we publish. Email family@theguardian.com, including your address and phone number. We are able to reply only to those whose contributions we are going to use.