A New York firefighter was killed on Thursday night in a blaze at an unoccupied residential building in Harlem that was being used as a set for a new film directed by Edward Norton. The fire broke out on the set of Motherless Brooklyn at about 11pm. Flames poured out of windows as firefighters swarmed the scene. Michael R Davidson was separated from other firefighters inside the building as conditions deteriorated and had lost consciousness when he was found. He was pronounced dead at a hospital. “It’s an awful night,” Eric Philips, a spokesman for Mayor Bill de Blasio, said in a tweet. “You haven’t heard a scream until you’ve heard the scream of a mother who’s seen her son give his life to protect us.” You haven’t heard a scream until you’ve heard the scream of a mother who’s seen her son give his life to protect us Two other firefighters suffered burns and were in serious condition, and three others were injured, fire commissioner Daniel Nigro said, adding: “Our department and our entire city mourn this tragic loss of a very brave firefighter.” Davidson had been a firefighter for about 15 years. He leaves a wife, Eileen, and four children, daughters aged seven, three and one and a six-year-old son. He was the son of a retired firefighter, Robert Davidson. Producers sent condolences to the family of the firefighter, according to a statement given to TV station WABC. They said crews immediately called the fire department when they noticed smoke on the set. “We watched firsthand with astonishment as they charged into the smoke to make sure all were safely out and then fought to contain the blaze and prevent it from spreading, putting their lives on the line as they do every day,” the statement read. It was not clear what caused the blaze that ripped through the five-story building, which was home to St Nick’s Jazz Pub, a venerable bar, before it closed in 2011. The building was being used to film an adaptation of a Jonathan Lethem novel. Norton was directing and starring, with Bruce Willis, Willem Dafoe and Alec Baldwin. Resident Daquan Evans, 28, told the New York Post: “That actor Ed Norton walked right by. He looked pretty upset. This is crazy this fire. You think a movie comes up here and it is good for the neighborhood. Not a fire … damn.” Other neighbors said the movie crew set up a sign that read King Rooster Jazz Club about two weeks ago. Cars from the 1950s lined the street. “They started building the set two weeks ago and have been here every day,” Nathan Monroe-Yavneh told the Daily News.