Poor José Mourinho! Once he was king but now he cannot even claim to be the Premier’s League best Portuguese manager. Carlos Carvalhal certainly has a stronger case for that accolade at the moment. It is hard to imagine that any other manager could have turned Swansea around as impressively as he has done since taking over in late December, when the Welsh club seemed doomed. Now they are out of the relegation zone and within reach of survival. Even Mourinho must admire the solidity that Carvalhal has introduced to Swansea, who will not give up chances easily at Old Trafford. Paul Pogba performed well for France in Tuesday’s victory in Russia but will he be restored to the starting lineup for United? PD• Eric Devin: Pogba was colossal for France West Ham go into the mother of all six-pointers on the back of three consecutive defeats by three goals, the most recent of which was blighted by crowd trouble after they went a goal down to Burnley. Reinforcements have been summoned and the London Stadium’s famously lax security will be tightened for the visit of Southampton, who could unwittingly light the tinderbox if they take the lead in a match both sides desperately need to win. If they are to do so and go on to win, Charlie Austin could be the man to provide the spark. The luckless 28-year-old is back from injury after his latest lengthy spell on the sidelines but remains the club’s top scorer this season with only six goals in 16 Premier League appearances. While the quality may be questionable, Mark Hughes’s first Premier League match in charge of Southampton – a club he played for between 1998 and 2000 – promises to be a tense and very interesting affair. BG• West Ham increase security for visit of Southampton• Martin Laurence: Hughes needs Austin firing to save Southampton It has been 28 years since Spurs won at Stamford Bridge but they came mighty close in 2016 before Chelsea fought back from 2-0 down to sabotage their title hopes with pizzazz and giddy glee. What a satisfying spectacle that was! Except, of course, for Spurs. Now Mauricio Pochettino’s men could exact vengeance of sorts by practically ruining Chelsea’s chances of qualifying for next season’s Champions League while boosting their own. Given the full-blooded nature of these contests, Pochettino will probably think twice about thrusting Harry Kane back into the fray, while Antonio Conte will have similar concerns about Andrea Christensen and even Thibaut Courtois. Heung-min Son will likely fill in very well for Kane. But will Gary Cahill take his chance to regain a regular spot for Chelsea? PD• Jonathan Wilson: Tottenham’s quiet evolution slowly nears endgame• Pochettino believes Alli needs to be helped, not booed• Conte spells out why Chelsea have to beat Spurs in showdown The sight of Selhurst Park, scene of that ruinous 3-3 draw in 2015, can still induce shudders in Liverpool fans even if their team has won on their last three visits. The sight of Roy Hodgson can still induce shudders in Liverpool fans, too, even if he is no longer in charge of their club. So Liverpool would no doubt have chosen a different fixture in which to resume action after the international break and before a critical week featuring a pair of Champions League bouts against Manchester City either side of the Merseyside derby. With that schedule, Jürgen Klopp is unlikely to take risks on players’ fitness, which means he faces interesting decisions, especially regarding the full-backs, who are sure to be tested by Wilfried Zaha et al. Andrew Robertson limped off for Scotland in midweek and Joe Gomez is definitely out. Trent Alexander-Arnold is available but perhaps the fit-again Nathaniel Clyne will be given a first league appearance of the season? A successful return to action for Clyne would be timely, both for Liverpool’s run-in and his own World Cup ambitions. PD• Barney Ronay: why I was wrong about Mohamed Salah• Steven Reid: ‘Roy Hodgson is an inspiration’ Manchester City are going to win the Premier League; we have known this for many months. But their game at Everton is one of the most important of their season because if they win it, they know for sure that they can clinch the title in their following match against Manchester United. Football is great for many noble reasons, but the ignoble – such as revelling in the misery of others – is just as much part of its charm and after spending the best part of 70 years suffering at the hands of their local rivals, City now have the opportunity of a lifetime. It would be extremely surprising – especially given the absolute state of Sam Allardyce’s Everton – if they didn’t at least give themselves a shot at it. DH• Man City title stroll should not distract from strength of competition With no chance whatsoever of finishing in the top four, Arsenal’s pipe dream of being eliminated in the first knockout round of next season’s Champions League is pinned on outright victory in the Europa League. With a quarter-final first leg against CSKA Moscow to look forward to on Thursday, Arsène Wenger’s team selection against Stoke City on Sunday ought to give some indication of how much he plans to prioritise his team’s tilt at victory in Europe. Stoke City will be hoping they don’t field a full-strength team as they attempt to win – or at least avoid defeat – at the Emirates for the first time in 10 attempts. Alexandre Lacazette is likely to play some part for Arsenal after returning from minor knee surgery, while Jack Wilshere and Aaron Ramsey are also expected to be available. Filling in for Wenger at yesterday’s press briefing, Steve Bould said Arsenal have not quite yet reached a point where they can think about prioritising the Europa League. Given a rare moment in the spotlight, he is to be commended for doing so with a completely straight face. BG• Wenger is as hungry as ever for success at Arsenal, says Bould Relax, Baggies fans! Pards has got it covered! West Brom may be anchored to the bottom of the table on a run of seven Premier League defeats, but news broke yesterday that Alan Pardew travelled to Switzerland earlier this week to watch Egypt take on Greece and run the rule over Ali Gabr, the Egyptian defender he signed on loan from Zamalek in the last transfer window, but has since been restricted to just one appearance on the bench. With his team 10 points from safety with seven matches to go, the introduction of a utility defender with precisely no Premier League experience against Burnley may smack of being slightly too little, way, way too late. Nevertheless, a run-out for Gabr would at least help justify some of the money he’s been paid since arriving at the Hawthorns at the end of a week in which West Brom chief executive Mark Jenkins said an inspection of the club’s finances revealed they “have no more money for wages”. BG• West Brom’s chief executive ‘shocked’ at state of club’s finances There is still a chance that all three clubs who were promoted last season from the Championship will remain in the Premier League but it is more likely that one of them will go down. Saturday’s match at St James’ Park could go a long way towards determining which one. Newcastle go into the game with confidence high after their 3-0 defeat of Southampton in their last match, whereas Huddersfield, who beat Rafael Benítez’ side in August, have slipped up in recent games, losing at home to Crystal Palace after failing to beat 10-man Swansea. David Wagner’s team have had a habit of pulling out big wins just when it has looked like they are running out of steam, and they will need to do that again on Saturday before visiting Brighton next week. PD• Paul Wilson: Champions League riches overshadow old European Cup Brighton have lost their last two matches, both away, but have been strong at home all season, unbeaten by anyone outside the top five. Beating Leicester on Saturday, and Huddersfield the following week, would almost guarantee survival, which would make their run-in – featuring games against Spurs, Liverpool and Manchester United – look a lot less daunting. Claude Puel’s task is to ensure that Leicester do not simply go through the motions for the remainder of the campaign. They certainly have enough quality to spoil Brighton’s home record and even push for European qualification. PD• When extra time had no end: how one match lasted 3hrs and 23mins It’s the most wonderful time of the year: the Premier League’s first meaningless fixture. Much as Javi Gracia and Eddie Howe might plead otherwise, their teams are not going down nor are they getting into Europe, and their players will know it. So those going to Vicarage Road on Saturday can contemplate the prospect of either a glorious goalfest or a stultifying stalemate – and given the styles of both sides, there’s a fair chance of the former. Only Stoke and West Ham have conceded more times than Watford this season who are also excellent going forward. Bournemouth, meanwhile, have attacked well in recent weeks, and gave Spurs plenty of problems last time out. Stand by for a soul-crushing 0-0. DH• Cost to fill Panini World Cup sticker book is £773, says maths prof