The Israeli production company Gil Formats is set to launch a reality show inspired by the #MeToo movement According to the Hollywood Reporter, The Silence Breaker, an unscripted investigative series, will use hidden cameras to document workplace harassment. Each episode will focus on both the victim and the perpetrator, with an on-camera confrontation between the two at the end. Gil Formats, which advertises its programming as “factual entertainment”, is set to introduce The Silence Breaker to international network and production companies at the MIPTV Global TV and Digital Content Market next month in Cannes. The company boasts other reality programs, like Life on Duty, a docuseries following emergency responders, Pregnant & Platonic, which documents the experiences of co-parents not in romantic partnerships, and Forget Me Not, a series about former celebrities. The #MeToo movement arose after the dozens of sexual assault and rape allegations leveled against Hollywood producer Harvey Weinstein last fall. After more than 70 women accused Weinstein of misconduct, allegations were made against public figures such as Charlie Rose, Matt Lauer, Louis CK, Kevin Spacey, Ryan Seacrest, James Toback and Russell Simmons. Assaf Gil, the CEO of Gil Formats and creator of The Silence Breaker, wants to shine a light on everyday instances of sexual harassment. “The big difference in what we are doing to what has been around on the news is that, for one, most of these incidents happened a long time ago, while we are basically shooting in real time. And a lot of the [#MeToo] stories in the news have had to do with famous people,” said Gil. “[But] we feel sexual harassment is a much more widespread phenomenon,” he continued. “All the women we talked to in the research for this show had some sort of history of some sort of harassment.” The forthcoming program shares a name with the Time magazine Person of the Year issue, which honored The Silence Breakers across various industries that spoke out this past year about sexual abuse. Gil told the Hollywood Reporter the show’s host would “ideally be a woman with a strong background as a journalist” and that it will zero in “on the crimes, not the movement”.