On an overcast but humid afternoon in February 2017, on a stage set in Santa Clarita, California, about half an hour outside Los Angeles, Oprah Winfrey and Mindy Kaling are taking a break from making magic. Kaling, just about visible behind her exaggeratedly high collar, and Winfrey – as unrecognisable as Winfrey can be beneath glittery Cruella de Vil-like make-up and a towering hair piece – are playing two of the three witches in the upcoming Disney adaptation of the American children’s classic book, A Wrinkle in Time, written by Madeleine L’Engle, and now directed by Ava DuVernay. “Most roles I get cast for do not surprise me, and this did,” says Kaling. “I loved the book as a kid, but I always pictured the witches as little old white ladies, right? So this feels almost subversive.” Or as Winfrey later puts it to me, in her unimprovably Oprah-ish way: “I mean, you read the book and you’re expecting Mrs Doubtfire, right? You are not expecting this,” she hoots, waggling her finger towards her impressive cleavage. I am going to come clean here and say I am unprofessionally excited about this set visit. A Wrinkle in Time is little known in the UK, but in the US it is as much a part of the childhood canon as The Wind in the Willows is in Britain, and, like millions of American kids, I was raised on its sparklingly original mix of science, fantasy and spirited youthful feminism. Imagine the magic of Harry Potter mixed with the familial themes of Star Wars, the political undercurrrents of Nineteen Eighty-Four and the epic imaginative sweep of The Wizard of Oz, and you are getting there. At its simplest, it is the story of a little girl, Meg Murry, who, along with her younger brother, Charles Wallace, and friend, Calvin, are whisked away by a trio of witches, Mrs Who, Mrs Whatsit and Mrs Which, through space and time, to find her scientist father, who has been trapped by the Black Thing. “When Madeleine L’Engle wrote this [in 1963], she was so upset about the McCarthy hearings, where people were wanting someone to tell them what to think, with no tolerance of difference. Today, clearly, there’s a lot of darkness going on, so it’s a very timely story,” says Catherine Hand, the film’s producer and a friend of L’Engle’s. Like Winfrey and Kaling, I grew up picturing the witches as three little white women, and the Murry family as white, too. But for the film, the witches are played by Winfrey, Kaling and Reese Witherspoon, and, for the Murrys, Gugu Mbatha-Raw plays the mother, Chris Pine plays the father, and mixed-race child actor Storm Reid takes the lead role of Meg. But, let’s be honest, I am mainly excited about Oprah. Ahhh, Oprah, the woman who could be (but won’t be) America’s next president. God, I love Oprah. Yes, I know she endorsed the likes of vaccine denialist Jenny McCarthy with a Goop-like enthusiasm. And yes, her preference for fuzzy platitudes over actual opinions is frustrating to those of us who know how smart she is. You don’t, after all, become one of the world’s biggest celebrities when you’re an African American woman born in abject poverty without being pretty wised up. (That she was briefly touted as a possible presidential candidate earlier this year could also be seen as a testament to her smarts, but given who is currently president perhaps not.) I have spent, at a restrained estimate, a bajillion hours of my life watching Oprah’s various daytime TV shows and reading her indefatigably cheerful magazine O, so I know how fun and sharp she can be. Surely – surely – that is the side of her I would see in person, as opposed to the infuriatingly self-protective person she too often presented in public appearances. Surely I would get the Gandhi-like wise saint the world saw at the Golden Globes earlier this year, which prompted the world to beg her to run for office. When I arrive the set looks, at first glance, like a typical Hollywood set: actors are squirrelled away in large luxury trailers, like race horses in their paddocks, while hordes hover around buffet tables, each laden with more food than an entire branch of Waitrose. But a closer look reveals this is a set like none I have ever seen: the crew, like the cast, is noticeably diverse, and with a near-equal gender split. I ask DuVernay – who prefers the term “inclusive” to “diverse” – whether this required a conscious effort on her part or did it happen organically, and she hoots with laughter. “Oh no, no! Definitely not organic. If you’re not from here, it’s hard to explain how rare it is to see women walking around on a set, people of colour – usually it’s an all-white male crew. So to make sure it’s inclusive took a lot of effort on behalf of my producers and the studio, but they answered my call,” she says. Everyone I speak to is keen to emphasise the inclusivity and feminist slant of the movie, and fair enough. After all, I can count the number of upcoming blockbuster movies starring an unknown mixed race girl on one finger. Another frequently mentioned line is how much the book relates to today’s political situation in the US. “I kept seeing female characters in movies today not being sassy and dynamic the way they were in, say, the 1940s,” says the screenwriter Jennifer Lee, who also wrote the 2013 animated hit Frozen. “So I said: ‘Why don’t we make female characters like real women and girls?’A Wrinkle in Time, gives us permission to do things [with female characters] that we wouldn’t be able to do otherwise.” Lee had been a fan of the book since childhood and her young daughter happened to be reading it at the time Disney hired her. For her, the most important thing was to retain Meg’s centrality to the story. Disney executives talk about Lee’s “winning way with characters” and her “interest in mathematics and science, which are integral to the story” when I ask why they hired her. But it seems a safe bet that the fact Lee’s movies – Wreck-It Ralph (which she wrote), Frozen (which she also directed) and Zootopia (for which she wrote the story) – have made more than $3bn worldwide was at least as much of a draw. With Frozen, Lee became the first female director of a film which made more than a $1bn, and once Disney had signed her in 2014, they turned to another ceiling-smashing woman. DuVernay grew up in Compton, Los Angeles and is the first black female director to be nominated for a Golden Globe and the first one to be nominated for an Oscar, in both cases for Selma. And now, with A Wrinkle in Time, she is the first black woman to direct a feature film with a $100m budget. I ask if she gets tired of having to knock down barrier after barrier: “Of course I’d rather it were done and I could walk on in and enjoy the fruits of their labour. But I’d also rather it be me than no one,” she says, full of beans after seven hours of directing. “I feel like I’ve graduated from high school and I’m now in college and I know how to do the work and I just keep learning. I feel very happy.” It was DuVernay who told Disney that she wanted the cast to be inclusive. Did she get any pushback from them? “I said I wanted to make sure that Meg was a girl of colour and they embraced that. Then I said the witches should look like all kinds of women, different shapes, sizes, ages. And they right away said yes – I mean, I couldn’t believe it.” On one of the stages, Kaling and Reid are shooting a scene along with some puppeteers in charge of a long furry creature known as Aunt Beast. DuVernay patiently sorts out the origami-like folds of Kaling’s dress while Reid reclines on a bed. Watching these three women of colour up on stage, shooting this huge movie, not a white man in sight, it is impossible not to feel a little thrill. “Look like you’re having good dreams,” DuVernay shouts out to Reid from behind the camera. “Think of chicken, hot sauce, Funyuns!” Reid smiles contentedly. Kaling keeps garbling her line – “It’s amazing what can happen when you accept the love that’s given to you” – and apologises. “Just take your time, Mrs Who,” says DuVernay soothingly. On the fifth take, Kaling gets it. “Satisfied with that, Mrs Who! This is goooood!” cries DuVernay punching the air. “Ava is more than a director – she feels like a movement,” Kaling says, done for the day and eagerly peeling off her high collar. “She knows people see her as an activist and this is definitely the most diverse movie I’ve worked on.” Has it inspired Kaling to try to do the same on her own TV show, The Mindy Show? “Definitely. Also, I’d been asked to direct my show, where each episode costs $1m, and I felt a reticence I couldn’t explain. But this is $100m and Ava is fearless. She has really inspired me to do something similar.” Late in the afternoon, one actor is done for the day and ready for me: Winfrey emerges from her trailer in her downtime clothes of a long black cardigan, three-quarter length leggings, socks and slippers. But she is still wearing the hair and makeup of her character, Mrs Which: her hairpiece is platinum and tricorn in shape, and a giant jewel stares out from her forehead, like a mystical third eye. Glitter is skewed across her eyelids. The effect is of an off-duty witch, which feels like an appropriate look for a woman who has spent 30 years dispensing gnomic wisdom to middle America. (As DuVernay puts it, “Mrs Which is the wisest woman in the universe, the badassest badass of all – who else was going to play it? Oprah kinda didn’t have a choice.”) “Ooookay!!!!” she sing-songs loudly, just like she used to on her show. “We meet at last!” I half-expect her to tell me I’ve won a Range Rover. How is she feeling underneath all that hair and makeup, I ask, more than a little dazzled – and not just because of her forehead jewel which glints right at me. “Ai yi yi!” she says, sounding, strangely, like my Jewish grandmother. “I feel like this film is the culmination of my life’s work. I view it as not just a children’s film, but as wisdom teaching for all time. It feels like we’re making a new generation’s Wizard of Oz.” No one can accuse Winfrey of not knowing how to sell something. When she says wisdom for all time, does she mean politics today? “I mean all times. There is no time that you are not faced with the dark side and everyone has to face darkness in some sort, so no, I’m not specifically referring to politics,” she says firmly. OK. I try again: the movie feels very female-centered. Does that make it a different experience to other films she has made? “I can’t say that it makes it a different experience – I can just say that it makes it a full and enriching experience,” she says. I decide to go in one last time to get some kind of statement from Winfrey that is firmer than jelly, and I opt for what seems like the failsafe question. How important does she think it will be for children watching the movie to see the child actors in this and realise that white characters aren’t the default? Winfrey looks at me like I am utterly mad, and I assume that’s because the question is so obvious. I assume incorrectly. “I think if you go in there thinking, ‘Oh God, she isn’t white,’ you’re in the wrong movie,” she says with a distinct rebuke in her voice. At that point, I realise two things: one, I am not going to get anything interesting out of Winfrey. And two, she now thinks I’m racist. No, no, I mean, isn’t it great that the cast is inclusive, I ask, trying to claw this back. “Yes, it’s wonderful, it’s wonderful,” she says in a breezy moving-swiftly-on voice. Time for one last question. Ava DuVernay said she doesn’t get tired of knocking down boundaries, but Winfrey has knocked down more, and earlier. Does she get tired? “There’s nothing tiring about being first. It’s a deep joy for me to see Ava in her glory – directing this team of 900 people, and there she is in her sneakers and her dreads and she is doing it, doing it, doing it. It feels like the next generation of women evolving into what they can be. I had Maya Angelou as my mentor. Maya and I were 23 years apart in age, and Ava and I are 23 years apart, and Maya would say: ‘Babe, I’m so proud, I’m so proud.’ Now I feel what Maya felt for me when I watch Ava in her work,” she says, with a serious nod. Just like that, Winfrey brings me back around, and I understand better why DuVernay cast her as a witch. It’s time to leave, and as I go I catch sight of DuVernay, marching across the stage set in her sneakers, her dreads swinging, and something she said earlier about Meg comes to mind: “She’s the most super superhero because she doesn’t wear a cape – she’s a girl in jeans and T-shirt rocking the world. And in these times, in really dark times, especially in our country, where people aren’t sure about what’s next, I think it’s great to have some hope and a badass warrior.” In the twilight, striding across her giant stage set, calling out to the various stage hands by name, changing Hollywood one movie at a time, DuVernay looks like a badass warrior. A Wrinkle in Time is released in the UK on 23 March.