When arriving at your campsite determine the direction of east and pitch the tent’s main door facing that way. When the sun rises, it will warm the tent from the front all the way through as you wake up. It’s much nicer to poke your head out of the door first thing in the morning to be greeted by the sun on your face than to begin the day on the shaded side.  Simon McGrath, author of Camping with Kids Rather than using foil to cook fish over a fire, soak a few sheets of newspaper in water, wrap up the fish and tie at both ends, then lay the parcel on the fire. It takes a bit longer but the fish comes out steamed and you can burn the paper afterwards. Leave no trace.Andy Pietrasik, Guardian Travel You can’t always light a fire, but it’s nice to have natural flame. Take some tea lights and place them in white paper bags (the sort you get from bakeries) with some sand or stones in the bottom to weigh them down. Arrange a circle of them around the camp to shine their light and create a cosy atmosphere. Daniel Start, Wild Guides author This is fairly labour intensive (commandeer the kids) but digging a tandoor-style oven is a camping showstopper. Dig a pit around 40cm deep, line it with foil and push tent pegs into the pit wall 15 to 20cm from the top to support a grill. Marinate diced chicken or lamb (salmon also works and requires less cooking time) in spices, yoghurt and lime juice for several hours. Get a big fire going nearby and add some rocks, as they retain heat. When the embers are glowing, shovel them and the hot rocks into the pit, place the rack of meat on the pegs and cover the pit, ideally with a board or metal sheet, to seal the heat in – this is crucial. Check the meat after 15 minutes, and gauge how much longer it needs to cook for.Gavin McOwan, Guardian Travel I’m all about minimalist, lightweight camping, which is quite extreme but works for me. A firelighter in a used tuna tin is a great way to heat water for a cup of tea (in a tin cup, obviously). Put holes in the bottom of the tuna tin to give the lighter air to breathe. Sean Conway, endurance adventurer I take one of the smooth, rounded rocks that I’ve surrounded my campfire with and wrap it in my woolly hat. Great for tucking inside my jacket while sitting outside on a cold night, or warming up my sleeping bag. Kimberley Grant, author of Wild Guide Scotland If there’s one thing I’ve learned over the years, it’s that the lighter and more slimline I can make my rucksack or panniers, the more I’m going to enjoy a camping trip. To this end I’ve developed a fondness for carrying aluminium foil Ziplock pouches. I use them for storing food – they stand up by themselves once there’s something in them, so they’re easy to eat out of too – as dry bags for clothes, and as a pee bottle (marked very clearly). Not only are they featherweight, incredibly cheap (from about 30p) and as slim as paper when not in use, they mean I can dispense with bowl, plastic boxes, conventional dry bags and, err, a pee bottle.Dixe Wills, author of Tiny Campsites I take a one-litre Sigg aluminium water bottle, fill it with boiling water before I go to bed, wrap it in my fleece or a sock and use it as a hot water bottle to warm my sleeping bag – it’s perfect for drinking first thing too.Phoebe Smith, author of Extreme Sleeps: Adventures of a Wild Camper Shine your headtorch through a clear water bottle to make a much nicer, diffused tent light.Alastair Humphreys, adventurer & author Remove the lint from the filter of your tumble dryer and take it with you. A bundle of super-dried cotton and synthetics, it will ignite from sparks instantly and makes an ideal fire starter.  James Warner Smith, author and editor, Cool Camping