There’s no understanding the future of technology without understanding the future of its funders. And they have changed dramatically over the last three decades. First it was the military. Then the venture capitalists. Today, another chapter begins: massive funds, with billions to spend and often linked to governments, are technology’s new masters. The undisputed leader is Japan’s SoftBank, which counts Uber, WeWork, Alibaba and Nvidia among its investments. Its companies make awe-inspiring robot dogs (Boston Dynamics) and offer dog walking as a service (Wag) for real canines. SoftBank’s model is simple: build stable, cash-generating businesses, such as mobile network operators; use them as collateral to borrow more funds – an investor presentation from last year put SoftBank’s “interest-bearing debt” at $125bn – and buy promising tech companies. Given historically low interest rates (and borrowing costs), SoftBank has used the financial crisis to its advantage. It got Apple, the chip-maker Qualcomm and various sovereign wealth funds to contribute to its flagship Vision Fund, which now stands at $98bn. Saudi Arabia committed $45bn; Abu Dhabi another $15bn. Bahrain is considering joining. SoftBank’s founder and CEO Masayoshi Son told Nikkei in October that new Vision Funds will be launched every two to three years. SoftBank wants to invest in 1,000 AI and robotics companies in the next decade to the tune of ¥100 trillion ($880bn). Who would provide that money? Well, Saudi Arabia wants to use the initial public offering of the oil giant Aramco – potentially worth $2 trillion – to boost its sovereign wealth fund. Other sovereign wealth funds will eagerly join. There’s still, however, much misunderstanding about what it is that they do. The largest sovereign wealth fund – Norway’s – has decent governance mechanisms and is prudent in its investments. It often divests from problematic industries and sticks to listed companies over startups. It bets with Norway’s own money only. Not all sovereign wealth funds operate this way. Some are just highly leveraged state-run hedge funds. Like SoftBank, they borrow cheaply, often to refinance their existing debt, channelling remaining funds into areas like technology. For example, the funds of Malaysia, Bahrain and Abu Dhabi – recent investors into startups– all use debt as leverage. Saudi Arabia said it would borrow to expand its fund. SoftBank and its partners thus use debt to become the vanguard of the digital transformation of the global economy and control its key parameters: infrastructures, data, and artificial intelligence. This creates many oddities. Consider Airbnb, which counts CIC and Temasek among its investors (sovereign wealth funds of China and Singapore respectively). It’s often accused of shrinking the pool of long-term rental housing in popular tourist destinations, such as Amsterdam or Barcelona. This drives up rent but where does this money go? Yes, it funds the fancy yachts of executives at investment and tech firms. But, through sovereign wealth funds, it also fills the coffers of some governments, underwriting their social or military spending. Some countries have been tempted to follow this trend and set up a state-run hedge fund under a nicer, euphemistic label. Think of this as over-leveraged and over-exposed Norway. The long-term implications of this model are not clear, for it might also tempt governments to abandon any active tech and industrial policy and simply let SoftBank do all the thinking. Some companies on the receiving end of the fund’s investments might happen to be in the same country as the fund, but this would be a coincidence: what matters are potential returns, not geography. Consider Norway. It has benefited from the recent boom in technology stocks, for its fund owns a lot of Silicon Valley. This helped social spending in Norway, as proceeds from the fund plug budget gaps. However, as big tech firms swallow the globe – at times, with Norway’s funding – it, too, is becoming heavily dependent on their services; there’s very little domestic tech to satisfy its cloud computing or AI needs. The meaning of this dependence becomes clear once one understands that some countries will never abandon proactive national technology policy. Instead, they’ll keep nurturing their own global tech giants. China, having committed $150bn to AI development, wants to establish tight control over its chips, networks and data; it’s not spending this cash for its tech companies to be bought by Bahrain or Abu Dhabi. A similar process is gathering pace in the US. After floating a controversial (and, for now, scrapped) plan to nationalise the 5G network, the US might now block the largest tech deal in history on the grounds of national security– ie the merger of the San Diego-based Qualcomm with Singapore’s Broadcom, which some see as China’s proxy. Given Trump’s rhetoric, it’s hard to imagine Washington looking the other way as sovereign wealth funds acquire America’s tech companies. The aggressive global expansion of these funds is hardly an antidote to the much-maligned economic nationalism. If some governments have trillions to pour into other countries’ tech firms, they will, quite logically, be demanding the removal of barriers to investment. However, their singing of globalist hymns does not turn them into opponents of economic nationalism – they are, rather, its most cunning practitioners. Europeans are the real fools here. With China and America nurturing their own tech industries, Europe lost its crown jewels. Large robotics firms in Germany and Italy were sold to China. In the UK, SoftBank acquired the chip-maker ARM and poured money into Improbable, a prominent virtual reality startup; DeepMind, a pioneer in AI, was sold to Alphabet. Now, an entity linked to SoftBank might be bidding in UK’s upcoming 5G auction. Having neither the protectionist impulses of China or America, nor the financial craftiness of the Gulf states, Europe will pay for it dearly. It might excel at selling cars and glasses; selling smart cars and smart glasses will be a different game.