Hello there – I’m Warren Murray with the first news of the day. Intrigue continues to swirl as the “poisoned spy”, Sergei Skripal, and his daughter, Yulia, remain in intensive care. Counter-terrorism police have taken over the investigation. Boris Johnson has said the possibility of a Russian assassination attempt means UK officials might boycott the World Cup. This morning, Shaun Walker examines how the Skripal case looks like a warning about the fate awaiting those who collaborate with western intelligence agencies. And more details are emerging about the life of the former double agent, known in his Salisbury neighbourhood as a genial man with a penchant for Polish sausage and lottery scratch cards. Another Trump aide quits – Donald Trump’s top economic adviser, Gary Cohn, has resigned amid the fallout over the president’s decision to slap tariffs on steel and aluminium imports. Hope Hicks, Trump’s close aide and communications director, last week quit a White House that has haemorrhaged high-profile staff. But Trump is also having problems with people who refuse to go away: the pornography actor Stormy Daniels is suing the president, saying his personal lawyer acted improperly in trying to silence her over an “intimate relationship” with Trump in 2006 and 2007. Quick catch-up … in honour of it being Wednesday once again > The Brexit leakfest has continued, with Theresa May being accused in EU documents of “double cherry-picking” – an awkward metaphor for wanting a trade deal that includes “selective elements of EU membership and third-country trade agreements”. > North Korea has offered to freeze its nuclear weapons programme in return for direct talks with the US and pledged not to attack its southern neighbour, according to South Korea. At the same time, the US state department has announced its verdict that Kim Jong-un had his brother assassinated with VX, a chemical weapon. > As the universities strike continues, Oxford has been criticised for blocking an attempt by staff to debate pension scheme changes. Resolve among university leaders may be weakening, with several appealing for steps to resolve the dispute. > The parents of the profoundly brain-damaged baby Isaiah Haastrup have lost their European court appeal to have doctors keep him alive. It upholds the decision of UK judges, who agreed with King’s College Hospital that Isaiah should be taken off life support. Fresh prince arrives – Saudi Arabia’s reformist heir to the throne can expect a largely unchallenging official reception when he arrives in Britain today. Mohammed bin Salman – MbS for short – will have lunch with the Queen, dinner with the Prince of Wales and Duke of Cambridge, spend a day at Chequers and go to a meeting of the UK national security council. Human rights groups plan to outside Downing Street over rights abuses in the kingdom, British arms sales and Riyadh’s role in the Yemen war, in which thousands of civilians have died. Downing Street, though, will seek to focus on the expected signing of bilateral contracts worth more than £72m over 10 years, as well trying to iron out differences over the Iran nuclear deal. Niggles like the bribery scandal over a $43bn BAE arms deal and the kingdom’s record on human rights and democracy are likely, officially at least, to get short shrift. Cancer myths – Half of Britons wrongly believe that stress causes cancer, according to a YouGov survey. There is no proven direct link, says Cancer Research UK – but stressed people might eat too much, drink alcohol heavily or smoke, which are all risk factors. Half have not twigged that physical activity reduces the likelihood of cancer, while a similar proportion don’t know that ham, bacon, salami and other processed meats can increase the risk. Thirteen per cent blame coffee. More seriously, disparities in lung cancer treatment in England mean hundreds of people could be dying prematurely each year, according to a study whose authors call for more intensive radiotherapy and chemotherapy at the right stages. “The message is we treat our lung cancer patients too little and too passively, and existing therapies should be used more actively,” said Prof Henrik Møller from King’s College London. And finally – Internet denizens have suggested alternative messages in a bottle after a message afloat since 1886 turned out, boringly, to be about ocean currents. “Send nudes”, “please add me to your LinkedIn network” and “don’t vote for Trump” are among the ideas. A host of tech-savvy types of every faith and none at all are this week setting their keyboards against the world’s ills as the Vatican hosts its first ever hackathon, dubbed VHacks. About 120 students and 35 mentors will gather in Rome over three days to focus on social inclusion, migrants and refugees, and interfaith dialogue. Pope Francis has called for technology to be used to spread knowledge and understanding, but also to increase social equality and inclusion. The event will conclude with an award for the most innovative contribution combining technology and human values. In breaking news, Ross Taylor’s heroics have sent New Zealand and England to a one-day series decider. Taylor’s second hundred of the series, an unbeaten 181, gave New Zealand a five-wicket victory in the fourth ODI in Dunedin. Floyd Landis, the one-time doper turned informant, has called for Sir Bradley Wiggins to be stripped of his 2012 Tour de France title. Meanwhile the Tour de France’s race director has criticised the lack of a decision on Chris Froome’s failed drug test, calling the delay “grotesque”. Jürgen Klopp felt the thrill of Liverpool’s return among Europe’s giants after his side secured their place in the Champions League quarter-finals with a goalless draw against Porto; Cristiano Ronaldo ensured Real Madrid reached the last eight with a goal in a 2-1 win at Paris St Germain. England’s head coach, Eddie Jones, believes Maro Itoje is experiencing “second season” syndrome and is still feeling the after-effects of the British & Irish Lions tour to New Zealand last year. And a former England rugby league international who fought off police officers for nearly an hour despite being Tasered six times has been jailed for 23 months. Asian stock markets have fallen after the departure of President Donald Trump’s top economic adviser, Gary Cohn, the administration’s chief critic of planned tariffs on imported of steel and aluminium. Analysts see it as a sign that Trump is unlikely to back down. Sterling has been trading at $1.389 and €1.117 overnight. One show in town against today really: the deepening mystery surrounding the apparent poisoning of former Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter in Salisbury. The Telegraph says “Putin swore revenge on poisoned Russian spy” while the Guardian leads with “Terror police take over spy ‘poison’ case”. In the Times it’s “MI5 believes Russians tried to kill former spy”, reporting that the deaths of Skripal’s wife and son are now also under investigation. The Mail wonders: “Will royals now snub World Cup?” after a boycott was suggested by Boris Johnson. The Express, Metro and i also take that angle. The ever-shameless Sun asks “What’s your poison?” and suggests a Kremlin assassin might have spiked Skripal’s pint. Only two papers feature different splashes. The Mirror’s is about a bankrupt Coronation Street actor while the FT reports on how the Korean detente has prompted Kim Jong-un to reconsider his devotion to nuclear missiles. For more news: www.theguardian.com The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe.