Ten days ago, Yann Arnaud, a French acrobat based in Florida, posted a photo to Instagram in which his right hand grips the nylon strap he would later swing from during a show by the Canadian circus group Cirque du Soleil. For weeks, he had been perfecting an act alongside fellow artist Pawel Walczewski, and they were ready to reveal it to a live audience in Tampa. “After so much work and training and staging, our straps duo act is finally in the show tonight,” Arnaud wrote below the photo. “It’s time to go for it.” Hours later, Arnaud, 38, appeared to lose his grip. Video shot by a spectator showed him falling several metres on to the stage. Crew members rushed to his side while the audience gasped. “There were children there and they were freaking out,” another spectator told a Florida TV station. Arnaud, who had two young daughters, died in hospital later that night. In a statement, Cirque du Soleil said it was “in shock and devastated by this tragedy”, and that it would support the authorities while they began an investigation. Arnaud had been performing with the company for more than 15 years, its president and CEO Daniel Lamarre told the Canadian broadcaster CBC. Lamarre did not believe equipment had failed but said it was too early to be sure. “For me, one accident like this is too many,” he added. It was a sentiment being shared under the global big top as the circus community absorbed the news from Florida. In Britain, ringmasters are already in a reflective mood as they mark the 250th anniversary of Philip Astley’s first circus, a riot of equestrian tricks and music that first wowed audiences on the banks of the Thames in 1768 and created an artform. Its latest chapter, partly defined by Cirque du Soleil’s brand of avant garde artistry and dazzling stunts, has been a rising bar of derring-do. “Circus is a funny old beast, because people want to be excited and thrilled, but they definitely don’t want to see an accident,” says Martin Burton, who founded Zippos Circus in the early 1980s. “But people also want to feel that they might see an accident, so we have to walk a fairly fine line between, well, acting and perceived danger.” Zippos’ latest show includes a Brazilian aerialist who, its website says, “swings and walks upside down 30 feet above the audience with no safety nets or wires”. Arnaud was the second performer to die during a Cirque du Soleil performance in its 34-year history. After modest beginnings in Montreal, the company now employs more than 1,300 performers in multiple worldwide shows. In 2013, it was fined by the state of Nevada for safety failings after Sarah Guyard-Guillot, a 31-year-old French acrobat, died when she fell 28 metres after her safety cable ran too fast and came out of its pulley during a show in Las Vegas. A third performer – Oleksandr Zhurov, a 24-year-old from Ukraine – also died in a swing stunt in training in 2009. Investigators in Quebec ruled the death was the result of an accident. Circus accident statistics are lost in broader categories for entertainment industries, but, after Guyard-Guillot’s death, Cirque du Soleil’s own figures suggested a high rate of injury. In 2012, Kà, the show in which the acrobat died, had a rate of 56.2 injuries per 100 workers, the Wall Street Journal reported. That figure included minor muscle strains, but was four times the rate of professional sports teams, and five times that of risky professions such as construction and firefighting. Records showed that there had been five falls by Kà performers in the three years leading up to the death. At La Nouba, a resident Cirque show in Orlando, 42 acrobats sustained injuries between 1999 and 2014 that required more than a week off work. Even where compensation or union support is available to a performer, injuries can end careers. Meaghan Muller shattered her wrists and jaw in 2005 when she fell on to concrete in a training accident. “I had 13 surgeries, and I walked away with no show and bankrupt,” the acrobat told the WSJ. Cirque’s safety director Nicolas Panet-Raymond told the paper that injured workers are compensated, which is not always the case when circus companies employ freelancers. Boris Verkhovsky, director of acrobatics and coaching for Cirque, told the paper he was concerned by the accident rates but said the company was reassured by another study that showed they were comparable to some sports. Cirque said it reviewed all of its safety procedures straight after Guyard-Guillot’s death, and there had been no further accidents in Kà. Bruno Gagnon, a graduate of the Quebec circus school and Cirque du Soleil, for which he performed on a trampoline, among other acts, from 2006 to 2010, says danger is exactly what a circus sells. “Yes, you can die, and it’s a bad moment for the whole community when it happens, but it’s one in a billion,” he says. But does the audience’s expectation of bigger and higher not inevitably increase the risk, just as it must in gymnastics or the half-pipe? The comparison with such sports is frequently drawn, and many performers are former gymnasts. Volta, the Florida show in which Arnaud died, takes action sports as its theme. But Gagnon says the big difference in circus is the potential of illusion. “We can push the boundaries of artistry, scenery, costume and direction,” he says. “In the half-pipe it’s literally one time – you feel that pressure way more.” Gagnon, 29, knew Arnaud’s family. “We took a moment of silence here. It’s just the worst thing that can happen,” says the French Canadian by phone from Paris, where his company, Flip Fabrique, is performing Attrape-Moi (“Catch Me!”). The show, which comes to Manchester next month and the Edinburgh fringe in August, includes Trampowall, in which acrobats “climb” a six-metre wall while airborne above a trampoline. “That’s an act that could result in a fatal injury but we don’t think about it like that. We’re cats in the air and we’re going to figure it out.” But circus performers, including Gagnon, say the industry relies on more than feline intuition. “After 250 years, I would say it is generally safer than it has ever been,” says Paul Archer, a veteran juggler and the secretary of the Association of Circus Proprietors of Great Britain, which was established in 1932. “You go back to the 50s and there were two or three people dying every year. Acrobats falling, attacked by animals. It was reported less – we wouldn’t have heard about this if it had happened back then.” Burton says all his acts, who Zippos employs as freelancers, have their own rigorous safety procedures, and a circus industry assessor comes in periodically to perform checks. “If you tell a circus performer today that the shackle they need to use should carry one tonne, they’ll go out and buy a three-tonne shackle,” he says. Occasionally, he requires international acts, perhaps on lower budgets, to invest in better equipment, aware that, while his acts take responsibility for their own safety, Zippos would be in the headlines should the worst happen. Gagnon recalls a strong culture of safety at Cirque du Soleil. “It was everything,” he says. “They have people who are working full-time on this.” He insists he never felt pressured to push the boundaries: “We push them ourselves – it’s in our blood.” The rarity of serious incidents is in part why they are newsworthy, particularly in the atmosphere of peril performers cultivate to draw crowds, Burton says. “I wonder how many people get killed on building sites every year,” he adds. “I think the problem is that we flaunt it a bit so everybody notices when there is an accident.” In Britain, deaths are rare. In 1994, Neville Campbell fell from the Wheel of Death, a kind of human hamster wheel, and died during a performance at the Blackpool Tower Circus. In 2003, Eva Garcia, 38, an aerialist, lost her grip and died at the Hippodrome Circus in Great Yarmouth. Burton says the only serious accident at Zippos involved himself; in the 1980s he was badly burned when a fire-eating stunt went wrong. Gagnon once tore a tendon on the trampoline after being distracted by a wandering child, but has sustained nothing more serious. Burton says the level of training and risk assessment is also higher, and technology that enables more daring stunts also makes them safer. Thick ropes used to be required to suspend a performer. “Now you can get a piece of Kevlar not much thicker than cotton and it’s got a five-tonne breaking strain,” Burton adds. “Our carabiners are much safer than the ones they used to use to climb Everest, and we’re using video now to look at acts in training and pick up danger points.” Archer has already seen 15 circuses in four countries this year, and believes the real risks taken today are no greater than 20 or 40 years ago, “and the level of training is much higher now”. He has only witnessed one serious incident. Last September, he watched a North Korean acrobat attempt a sextuple somersault at a circus festival in Moscow. O Yoon Heck, 21, was not happy with his first, successful attempt, so tried again, and died five days after landing on his head. “It was very unfortunate,” Archer says, with some understatement. “But accidents like that are few and far between. And the old adage is that the show goes on, and the show does go on.”