Christine Shawcroft, the Labour official at the centre of an antisemitism row, has said she is stepping down from the party’s ruling body. Shawcroft, who has already resigned as chairman of the disputes panel, has been under pressure to quit her post on the national executive committee (NEC) after it emerged she opposed the suspension of a council candidate accused of Holocaust denial. She will be replaced by the comedian Eddie Izzard, who was previously defeated in a bid for a seat on the NEC in January. In a statement, Shawcroft said: “It has been a privilege to serve on the Labour party national executive committee for the last 19 years, and I was standing down in September in any event. I have, however, decided to resign with immediate effect. “It is clear that my continued membership of the NEC has become a distraction for the party and an excuse for endless intrusive media harassment of myself, my family and friends.” Shawcroft added: “I reaffirm my complete opposition to antisemitism and my abhorrence of Holocaust denial, and support all measures to tackle this within the party. “And I pledge my full energy to securing for our country the Labour government under Jeremy Corbyn that it so desperately needs.” Izzard takes his place on Labour’s NEC owing to Labour party rules after just missing out in January’s vote when he came fourth behind the three successful Momentum candidates. Izzard, a long-time Labour supporter whose candidacy was backed by the party’s centre-left, urged Corbyn at the time to “keep his eye on the prize, the election”.“If we spend all our time fighting against each other, I don’t think that’s the way to go forward,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “We should be further ahead of the Tory party in the polls, that’s what I want to see.” On Twitter, some prominent Labour supporters welcomed Izzard’s appointment. Musician Billy Bragg tweeted: “Christine Shawcroft is not an anti-semite. She made a serious error of judgement, but parties that hope to form governments must expect to be held to higher standards. I campaigned with Eddie Izzard against the BNP in Barking and I welcome him to the NEC.” Actor Tony Robinson also gave his backing, saying that Izzard was “a free spirit”. If it’s true that Christine’s resignation means my old mate Eddie Izzard joins the NEC, that’s good news for the party. He’s smart, a free spirit and won’t take shit from anybody #goeddie