When we were kids, my grandparents would take the three of us to a fish and chip shop in Whitby called the Magpie. I can’t remember sitting inside in the cafe, although I know we did. I remember sitting on a wall looking out to sea, the hot chips warming our laps through slightly damp paper, the sea air whipping our hair into our mouths. Grandma would divvy up a large cod between the three of us, making sure we all got our fair share of fish, batter and an equal rubble of the crispy bits. Little wooden forks were quickly discarded in favour of nimble fingers searching for the ideal chip, fat- and vinegar-soggy at one end and crisp at the other. The portions seemed enormous back then, a never-ending sea of chips, great white flakes and shards of golden-brown batter that shattered. Until it did end, which was always a bit sad, and we would screw the paper into a ball and lick our salty lips and fingers, then wipe them on our trousers and Grandpa would frown and say “give over”. The Italian historian Massimo Montinari is referring to fritters when he writes how “the golden colour of its crust is pleasing to the eye, the bubbling of the fat on its surface delights the ears and the sense of touch is gratified by a food at its best when brought to the mouth with one’s fingers”. But he could just as easily be talking about fish and chips. It wasn’t just that the Magpie’s fish and chips were superb, or that we were sitting on a seaside wall swinging our legs; it was that we were eating with our fingers. My six-year-old son reminded me of this the other day when faced with a plateful of today’s recipe, cauliflower in a parmesan batter. I stabbed a floret with a fork. “Silly mum,” he said. “You eat these with your fingers.” Then he wiped his fingers on his trousers. He also noted that vegetables are better when crisp, and I have to say I agree. It’s an old-fashioned batter, this one, which might be a bit stout were it not for the cheese, which dissolves into a molten state, making crisp and golden fritters. To make the batter, beat 100ml lukewarm water, six tablespoons of plain flour, the same of grated parmesan and an egg, until it looks like thick cream. I boil the cauliflower whole, then break it into florets. The stems are just the thing to hold on to and swipe through the batter before you fry. Frying is not for everyone, I know. Recently I tried to convince a friend that if you opened the window and wore a shower hat, it wasn’t really that bad. She replied – not unkindly – that I often smell of frying. My love for fried things, though – a love that has flourished in a city where fritti are a way of life – doesn’t give a damn about chip-shop hair. A last note from Montanari: “Whether you are frying in lard, olive or vegetable oil, depth matters. Only in this way can fried things be crunchy and tasty, and paradoxically less greasy … If immersed completely, in fact, the cooking time is reduced and with it the amount of fat absorbed.” With this in mind, I use a deep frying pan, heating at least four inches of olive oil until a piece of bread dances around, then (if you want a measure) fry, blot and eat with my fingers.