They are two of the most revered American pop artists of the 20th century, but Jasper Johns and Andy Warhol were a source of derision for Francis Bacon, according to previously unheard recordings released to the Guardian. The British master can be heard dismissing one of Johns’s paintings as “ridiculous” and calling Warhol’s works “very bad”. His criticisms have come to light in private conversations taped by his friend Barry Joule, who lived 20 metres from Bacon’s studio and home in South Kensington. The two men had struck up a friendship in 1978 when Bacon invited Joule for some champagne after he had repaired another neighbour’s TV aerial. The friendship lasted until the artist’s death in 1992. Bacon agreed to be recorded on condition that Joule did not release the tapes until at least 12 years after his death. On one of them, Bacon spoke of his astonishment that Johns’s 1959 abstract painting, a red, yellow and blue canvas titled False Start, had sold in 1988 for $17.05m (£12m). “It is such a ridiculous thing,” he said. “The whole thing, it is nothing. It is just a series of a number of diagonal scratches going in different directions in red and blue.” Johns, now 87, has been described as America’s foremost living artist, admired for his trademark images of flags and targets. A major retrospective, titled Jasper Johns: Something Resembling Truth, was staged at the Royal Academy of Arts in London last year, and is now in America, at the Broad Museum in Los Angeles. At the 1988 sale at Sotheby’s, False Start was reportedly purchased by New York art dealer Larry Gagosian, who ignored the pre-sale estimate of $4m to $5m. Subsequent reports suggest that, in 2006, the Johns painting was sold to a US collector, Kenneth Griffin, for $80m, while one of his signature 1950s flag paintings went to the US hedge fund billionaire Steven Cohen for $110m. It is what the Americans are interested in … they are not interested in art Bacon once told another friend: “When I die, my paintings won’t be worth anything, I’ll be forgotten.” Yet his prices soared dramatically after his death. His 1969 portrait titled Three Studies of Lucian Freud sold in 2013 in New York for a record $142.4m. The buyer was rumoured to be the US billionaire art collector Elaine Wynn. On the recording, Joule asked Bacon to explain why “some supposedly sane people will pay a huge sum of money for something like” the Johns painting. Bacon replied: “It is the fashion. It is what the Americans are interested in … they are not interested in art. They are only interested in being talked about – about being mixed up in the latest thing … now it has become absolutely ridiculous in America.” Bacon was no less scathing about Warhol. On the tapes, he can be heard dismissing the 1991 pop art exhibition at the Royal Academy. Having just returned from a visit, he said: “These pictures are bad. The Andy Warhols are very bad.” Joule has a photograph of Bacon looking at one of those Warhols, the car crash imagery from the Death and Disaster series, reflecting Warhol’s obsession with news reports of violent death. The whole exhibition had disappointed Bacon, who added: “It is dull really. I thought it might just have some superficial excitement, but it doesn’t even have that.” The artist’s paintings are featured in Tate Britain’s current exhibition, All Too Human: Bacon, Freud and a Century of Painting Life. In 2004, Joule donated a collection of 1,200 sketches from Bacon’s studio, then valued at an estimated £20m, to the Tate. It was described as one of the gallery’s most generous gifts. Joule has decided to release the recordings ahead of an exhibition of about 60 drawings which he kept and which he is lending to an exhibition in Italy, at the Villa Fiorentino museum in Sorrento between 19 May and 21 October.