It was a Monday. So no one wore pink. Mean Girls, based on the beloved 2004 Tina Fey comedy, arrived on Broadway for its first preview last night, and even before the show ended, fans who hadn’t managed to land a ticket crowded the fuschia stage door of the August Wilson Theatre, standing in the drizzle and hoping for autographs. The story of Cady (Lindsay Lohan in the movie, Erika Henningsen here), a teenager who transfers to a high school in Illinois after growing up on the African savannah, and falls in with the Plastics, a band of teen queens, the movie became a not-so-cult classic. It’s still big on the slumber party circuit. Theatergoers streaming on to the sidewalk, some of whom hadn’t even been born in 2004, were quoting favorite lines to each other: “So fetch!” “She doesn’t even go here!” “On Wednesdays we wear pink.” The Mean Girls musical, with a book by Fey, a pop and hip-hop score by her husband, Jeff Richmond, lyrics by Legally Blonde’s Nell Benjamin, and direction and choreography by Casey Nicholaw, had a fall tryout at the National Theater in Washington, DC, which the Washington Post called, “a jolt of super-energized adolescent hyper-viciousness, with a snazzy video screenscape”. Several audience members congratulated the musical on remaining true to the film. “It has all the Easter eggs you want as a fan,” said Jack Smith, 31. The musical, which will probably compete with Frozen for the adolescent girl demographic, has been updated from its 2004 origins. “They connected it to 2018,” said Will Lowery, 17, who had come with a friend from Memphis, Tennessee, to see it. There as some topical humor – a joke about tampering, another about President Trump and bullying – as well as some adjustments to suggest solidarity with the #MeToo movement. Violet Young, who had come to the show her 13th birthday, her first official day as a teenager, said that she thought “the overall message was just so powerful. They were all bullied, they all went through really hard experiences and they all came together at the end as women supporting each other”. (Also supportive, Fey herself, who had taken a picture with the birthday girl earlier in the night.) Her 14-year-old sister, Clara, agreed. “Some girls will always create drama,” she said. “But this is the kind of show that says if you inflict pain on other people it’s not going to make you feel any better.” A bearded man passing by griped that the show hadn’t gone far enough. “I thought it would be a leading-edge commentary on social media,” he said angrily. But Ella Madden, 13, was just grateful for a show that made her laugh. “It’s a nice break from teenage stuff,” she said with appropriate world-weariness. “Teenage stuff isn’t fun.” The girls were taking photos that they might or might not post online, a crucial aspect of teen life that has emerged in the years since the movie premiered. The musical has responded with songs and jokes about social media and handheld tech, one of which still had Mason Nichols, 18, laughing as he and his sister Gracie, exited the theater. It’s when one of Plastics compares herself to an iPhone without a case. She’s still useful, she has some great functions, but “I feel like I could shatter at any moment”. How did Nichols remember the line so well? “I wrote it down so that I could make it my Instagram bio,” he said.