At a newspaper I used to work for, the story was told of a foreign correspondent dictating his report down the line to the copytakers. He rolled on, through paragraph after paragraph of purplish prose about the horrors of war, until he was, eventually, interrupted by the woman at the other end of the phone. She asked in a matter-of-fact voice: “Is there much more of this stuff, dear?” Irvine Welsh is that kind of author. There is a lot of this stuff, and the quality-control lever is wobbly. He has never been a careful writer. At his best, he manages a sort of ragged glory, a life-affirming comic energy combined with a sense of horror or desperation and the ability to place his lowlife shenanigans in a wider thematic or social context. In a different gear, though, he is just a black-hearted farceur. Dead Men’s Trousers falls into the second category: a whooping last hurrah (possibly) for the Trainspotting gang after Porno, Skagboys and The Blade Artist. The central quartet of characters – Renton, Begbie, Sick Boy and Spud – are back, and there are cameos from the priapic cabbie Terry Lawson (Glue and A Decent Ride) and, off stage, from the Miami fitness trainer Lucy Brennan (The Sex Lives of Siamese Twins). The characters stitch one another up, take revenge, bond again in a burst of drunken sentimentality – rinse and repeat The story begins in 2015 when Mark Renton, now a successful DJ manager hopping between Amsterdam and LA, bumps into Franco Begbie on a transatlantic flight. In their last encounter Begbie disappeared under the wheels of a car while en route to take bloody revenge on Mark for ripping him off at the end of Trainspotting. But Begbie – now teetotal, and a successful artist living in California with a wife and two young children – comes over all Zen. Is he a changed character? Via a series of plausibility-stretching coincidences, the pair end up back in the orbits of Sick Boy (still in the pimping-and-mental-cruelty game) and poor old wild-eyed Spud, now self-employed as a full-time “jakey”, or street beggar. One of the gang is going to end up dead, the pre-publicity tells us, spoilerishly. Which one? At least to start with, it’s anybody’s guess. There’s a lot of travel, a lot of violence, a lot of cartoony sex. (“To paraphrase James McAvoy as Charles Xavier in ,X-Men: First Class, ‘Shagging hoors will not bring you peace, my friend,’” Sick Boy declares solemnly at one point.) There’s also a lot of stuff about the DJing and contemporary art businesses, kilos of coke and gallons of booze, a consciousness-altering experiment with DMT and an ongoing plot concerning the trafficking of stolen kidneys. Spud, as courier for one of said kidneys, takes his wee dog Toto along with him and things go wrong in exactly the way you’d expect. The characters stitch one another up, take revenge, bond again in a burst of drunken sentimentality – and rinse and repeat. It’s all wildly over the top and frequently very funny. Sensitive and inclusive, mind, it’s not. Sick Boy’s warm words of understanding when his son comes out to him as gay aren’t so much because of his open-mindedness as because the boy now won’t be competing with him for “fanny”. And women are, for the most part, either whining and needy or gagging for it, or both – though you could just about attribute the misogyny to the deplorable worldviews of the various narrators. Just about. The plot, though entertaining, is even more rickety than usual. It’s bookended by a detached and oddly cursory subplot in which Begbie is being stalked by a rogue policeman who is convinced he’s a serial killer. Another subplot, in which Renton gets a dose of the clap, relies on both a thinly motivated sexual encounter and two consecutive accidents with condoms. Coincidences and reversals pile up like falling dominoes. Read it as farce. Anyway, in a world where Welsh’s underdog club Hibs can win the 2016 Scottish Cup, why should any of his inventions seem implausible? If Dead Men’s Trousers has a philosophical centre, you might say it’s Franco Begbie. Here he is talking about Sick Boy and Mark and implicitly reflecting on most of Welsh’s canon: “Him and Sick Boy thegither: it eywis annoyed the fuck oot ay ays when they went on aboot drugs … Ah mean, take the cunts or dinnae; but dinnae fuckin talk aboot them twenty-four/seven!” At another point, he offers a mixture of the Kantian and utilitarian accounts of the moral order: “You cannae go around battering the fuck oot ay cunts. It isnae very nice, and ye can git yersel intae bother.” Mind you, battering the fuck oot ay a pair of cunts is exactly what he’s been doing over the course of the previous few pages. If you go for Welsh’s stuff, as I do, you’ll go for Dead Men’s Trousers with great enthusiasm. If you don’t … well, you were warned.