What were you hoping for?Someone unexpected, yummy food and a funny story to tell afterwards. First impressions?Very warm with a big, booming laugh and a signet ring. What did you talk about?Robert Winston, immersive theatre, and how, if Jonathan was a panda, he would singlehandedly repopulate the panda race. Any awkward moments?He tried to read my palm. Good table manners?He gave me the last dumpling, so yes. Best thing about Jonathan?Really fun and very silly, incredibly genuine, and he knows who he is. Would you introduce him to your friends?Sure. Everyone loves a dodgy accent or two, right? Describe him in three words?Expressive, perceptive, full-of-beans. What do you think he made of you?Like-minded, adventurous, cynical of the palm reading. Did you go on somewhere?To Dishoom around the corner for kulfis (posh mini milks) and whisky. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Those poor pandas... Marks out of 10?8.5. Would you meet again?I think two ENFPs might wear each other out. But he was really fun and I’m sure our paths will cross again. What were you hoping for?I’ve never been on a blind date, so I had no expectations. First impressions?Smiley, friendly and talkative. What did you talk about?Everything from panda reproduction to the meaning of life. Any awkward moments?I offered to pull her finger on a menu choice to help her decide, but I didn’t think about how oddly that must have come across. Good table manners?Better than mine, yes. Best thing about Anna?She put up with my bad jokes and energetic nature. Would you introduce her to your friends? Why not? Describe her in three words?Smiley, fun, adventurous. What do you think she made of you?She probably thought I was a bit out there. Did you go on somewhere?Yes, to Dishoom – she seemed pretty determined to have ice-cream. Or maybe she said, “I scream”? And... did you kiss?A peck on the cheek. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I’d maybe not offer to pull her finger next time. Marks out of 10?8.25. Would you meet again?If she can cope. • Anna and Jonathan ate at Ekachai, London N1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com