The butcher is telling me about pork knuckle – in particular about the cut’s value for money, the meat’s habit of falling sweetly from the bone after a long, slow cooking and the way it effortlessly produces a satisfying broth for a cold evening. He tells me of the succulence that ensues from a piece of meat endowed with so much collagen and skin, and the rich, sweet stock it produces. And then there is a reminder of how useful it is for sandwiches the day after roasting. To be honest, he had me at pork. Pork knuckle is one those bone-rich cuts that is perfect for a soul-warming soup, yet has plenty of meat to slice and fold in just before you bring it to the table. The cut lies at the very end of the leg, just below the meaty ham and before it becomes the ankle. Geographically, it is north Cornwall. I come back from the shops with two value-for-money knuckles, a bag of apples and a bottle of cider. There will be some winter roots involved, too, and caraway and coriander seeds. The oddly shaped lumps of meat will cook in a slow oven, while I attend to other business. I will balance the sweetness of the cider and apples with red cabbage cooked briefly with red wine vinegar. The lazy cook in me knows there is little to do once the dish goes in the oven, leaving plenty of time to tinker with the recipe’s sweet-sour notes, adding a little more vinegar or sugar at the end as you think fit. I wouldn’t attempt to hurry this one. If time is an issue, go for a pork chop. Cuts such as this are good-natured, but can be bad timekeepers, and no recipe can give an exact time for the meat to reach falling-off-the-bone tenderness. Ideally, you should be able to prize the meat from the bone with a spoon. If you intend to cook it that long, then you might need to keep an eye on the liquid level from time to time, topping it up with cider or stock. Serves 6 pork knuckles 2, about 1 kg each onions 3, medium groundnut or vegetable oil 4 tbsp carrots 250g small onions or shallots 8-10 apples 4, small garlic 4 cloves bay leaves 3 caraway seeds 1 tsp coriander seeds 2 tsp plain flour 1 tbsp dry cider 800ml red cabbage 150g red wine vinegar 4 tbsp Set the oven at 220C/gas mark 6. Take the pork from the fridge an hour before cooking and unwrap it. Peel and roughly chop the onions. Roughly chop the carrots. Put the meat in a large roasting tin, rub it with a little of the oil, then put it into the preheated oven for 25 minutes, turning once. Remove the lightly browned meat from the oven and set aside. Pour the remaining oil into the roasting tin and place over moderate heat then add the chopped onions and peeled garlic, letting them soften. Peel the small onions, leaving them whole, then put them into the roasting tin together with the carrots, bay leaves, caraway and coriander seeds. Scatter the flour lightly over the surface and stir in, then let it cook for 2 or 3 minutes before pouring in the cider. Season with salt and black pepper. Bring the liquid to the boil, then return the meat to the tin, cover with foil and bake for 1 hour. Cut the apples into quarters and push them down into the sauce. Continue cooking for a further hour or until the pork is tender. Shred the red cabbage finely and rinse in cold water. Pour the red wine vinegar into a deep saucepan, bring to the boil then add a generous seasoning of salt and pepper. Add the red cabbage to the vinegar and cover tightly with a lid. Cook over a moderate to high heat, tossing the cabbage occasionally with kitchen tongs, for about 5 minutes till wilted and bright. Check the pork for tenderness: it should be almost falling from the bone. Stir in the red cabbage, the seasoning and serve. Serves 2 as a side dish. lemon 1 salsify 500g butter 50g bread 125g, fresh, white olive oil  parsley 6 sprigs egg 1 blood orange 1, zest and fruit Fill a saucepan with cold water. Halve the lemon, squeeze the juice into the water, and reserve the empty shells. Peel the salsify with a potato peeler, cut each root into short lengths, dropping each into the acidulated water as you go. Bring the pan of water to the boil, add salt then let the salsify cook for about 25 minutes until tender to the point of a knife. Drain the salsify. Process the bread to fine breadcrumbs and put them in a shallow dish. Break the egg and beat lightly in a small bowl. Place the salsify, 1 or 2 pieces at a time, first in the beaten egg and then the breadcrumbs. Press it firmly into the crumbs, loosely coating each piece then place them in a single layer on a plate. Melt the butter in a shallow pan, add a splash of olive oil, then lower in the salsify and leave it to cook over a moderate heat until the crumbs are toasted and golden. Chop the parsley, finely grate the orange zest then toss them together. Remove the peel from the orange then cut the fruit into thin slices. Remove the salsify as it crisps, and drain briefly on paper. Once all the vegetables are cooked, toss the remaining crumbs into the pan, move them round as they turn gold. Add the parsley and grated zest. Divide the salsify between 2 plates, add the toasted crumbs and slices of orange. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater