The Week in Patriarchy is a weekly roundup of what’s happening in the world of feminism and sexism. If you’re not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. The kids are alright. Young people protesting gun violence participated in a national walkout this Wednesday, giving some of us old folks the hope we haven’t been feeling in some time. Their signs were amazing, their actions inspiring and they reminded us that no matter how much conservatives want to paint young activists as silly or underwhelming – they are anything but. All I can hope is that the adults who were touched watching kids as young as seven march out of school will take that admiration and put it to good use. There’s no reason that our children should have to protest to essentially beg for their lives and safety. We’re the adults, we’re the people who need to be creating change. So let’s take our cues from the young activists among us and stand up to do something. Despite scare tactics from the right, abortion in the United States is an extraordinarily safe procedure – and this new study says as much (again). Christina Hagan is running for Congress as a Trump-supporting conservative. Her opponent is a man. Men have always held the seat she's running for. Her campaign staff: all men. I asked if she is a feminist. A man cut her off and tried to answer for her.https://t.co/qPk6jEdQC6 pic.twitter.com/V3lwM661W1 Student sign says: As a black boy, I hope one I day I have as many rights as a gun. #nationalschoolwalkout pic.twitter.com/PuIXpy5yo1 rip stephen hawking, a brilliant mind and deliverer of sick burns pic.twitter.com/v7vQZXHiKJ Covering a walkout this morning at an elementary school in Virginia, and the 11-year-old organizers had a press packet ready for me. pic.twitter.com/eeElhGciid Melissa Harris-Perry urging those applauding Parkland students to think about why young activists of color have gone ignored for so long; Grace Bonney, one of my favorite design writers, in defense of trends; and the dos and don’ts from Columbia Journalism Review on conducting interviews with kids. The incredible Michael Twitty was just nominated for a James Beard award for his book, The Cooking Gene. Watch the conversation I had with him about his book and the politics of food, race and history. We’re at the point where conservatives are mocking teenage activists for their appearance, so I’m a solid eight out of ten. This girl’s sign is making my month, not just week. pic.twitter.com/yW6BookpF4      