The Front National leader, Marine Le Pen, will attempt to pull her divided far-right party together when it meets this weekend for its first conference since she lost to Emmanuel Macron in the final round of the French presidential election. Beset by political and personal rifts, and with her popularity in the post-election doldrums, Le Pen is facing opposition to her plan to rename the party in an attempt to improve its electoral chances. The move is seen by the traditional wing of the FN, founded by Le Pen’s father in the 1970s, as a betrayal of the party’s heritage. The new name will be voted on after it is unveiled on Sunday. Ten months ago, the party was on a high after Le Pen saw off the Socialist candidate to take the FN into the second round of the presidential election with unprecedented support, though not enough to defeat Macron. However, this weekend’s conference to transform and “refound” the party is threatening to fall short of its goals of unity and optimism. Bruno Cautrès of the Centre for Political Research at Sciences Po, said the party was undergoing a “crisis of Marine Le Pen’s leadership”. “Voters and even party members are questioning her ability, or not, to continue the feeling that the adventure continues and the party can still go forward,” Cautrès told 20 Minutes. A recent opinion poll by Kantar Sofres confirmed the diagnosis, with 55% of respondents saying they did not wish Le Pen to be the FN candidate at the next presidential election, and fewer than one in five believing she inspired confidence. At the conference in Lille, in the FN’s northern heartlands, Le Pen will urge the party to move away from the mindset of being a permanent opposition, ground it has occupied since it was founded, to broadening its appeal with a view to governing. Since taking over the party in 2011 with her father’s blessing, Le Pen has embarked on a process of “de-demonising” the FN, which has involved shrugging off its xenophobic, antisemitic, bully-boy image. In the presidential election, it appeared this strategy had paid off, as Le Pen gained more than 10 million votes (33.9%) in the final round, despite her bizarre and catastrophic performance in a debate with Macron, which cost her support. However, a questionnaire sent to party members found immigration remains the biggest preoccupation of FN supporters. The responses to the pre-conference survey, to be revealed on Saturday, are likely to echo warnings from Florian Philippot, Le Pen’s closest aide and strategist until he quit the FN last year, that it risked an “absolutely terrifying” return to its dark past, which he claimed was alienating voters. While Le Pen is facing no immediate threat of overthrow – she is expected to be re-elected unopposed as party president – her father, Jean-Marie, who was thrown out of the FN for racist remarks, continues to snipe from the sidelines. Last month, a court of appeal confirmed his exclusion as honorary president of the FN, a position the conference is expected to vote to drop. Le Pen’s young and ambitious niece Marion Marechal Le Pen, who claims to have withdrawn temporarily from politics, is also biding her time. The FN leader told Europe 1 radio that party members were asked 80 questions on major policy issues, including Europe, immigration, employment and the environment. “There may be surprises for some when they read the answers,” she said. Party members supported legalised euthanasia, which Le Pen opposes, and responded in favour of gay marriage and against the death penalty, she said. “The questionnaire shows we need to be more nuanced on certain subjects,” Le Pen said. “… It validates the party line of neither right nor left.”