Dr Mark’s Marching Academy marches in the Sydney Gay and Lesbian Mardi Gras parade to highlight issues facing its community. Over the past 19 years, 2,500 people have been part of the group’s float, while 6.1 million people have seen the float on the parade route. The group has been broadcast to more than 50 million viewers worldwide. This year was the float’s final appearance, with the group citing the parade’s growing commercialisation. This year dance coach Bradford Jefferies and a team of organisers planned to put on the best show yet, to farewell one of the most recognised floats in the parade. Jefferies said: “Had I not witnessed community floats like ours, that began to transform how I saw myself and my sexuality, I would not be the person I am today. There are so many people this parade has an effect on and there are so many people that read stories and watch broadcasts of us from all over the world that see this as a bastion of hope. That we can celebrate who we are. That we are proud.” This year, the group’s theme was Ignite my Fire, encouraging the participants to be true to their own individual stories, and six of those stories stood out. We all have a shared story and a shared narrative by being in this float and in that, we have a shared solidarity. We all belong. We all have a place. And you are loved. Don’t forget that – Bradford Jefferies The spirit and sense of community is slowly being eroded from the parade. We have gone from a group of 400 to a group of 80. And community groups are continually pushed to the side to make way for commercial floats that have money to spend – Bradford Jefferies  I am marching this year because this time last year I was fighting for my life undergoing chemo and radiation for lymphoma. I was pretty much at my worst and we had a small celebration at home. I told myself and my best friend, Claire, that we would march in 2018. That was my goal. It’s such a great feeling to not only be alive but to be able to be a part of this amazing experience to celebrate love, equality and acceptance. To be able to be who you are without judgment. That’s what it’s all about. This was my first time marching in the parade and I also performed at the after party as one of 20 dancers chosen to open the show. This time last year I was not sure I would be here to see another Mardi Gras but I fought and I am now in remission.   We are marching this year because, as with most people in Sydney, we tend to come from different backgrounds and countries and, like many a Sydney tribe, our group became more than simply a group of friends and leaned further toward a family. Our Sydney family would do almost everything together and an extremely close bond was formed. One of the closest bonds was with myself and Dean Cobbe, who we would joke was my “symbolic husband”. Dean and myself would spend hours on the phone, weekends together, evenings together. When our Sydney tribe got together, Dean was always key to the dynamic of the group. In 2016 our close group took part in Mardi Gras and this was a huge deal for us as the message Mardi Gras presents is core to the values we all believe in so much. Dean, unfortunately, took his own life not so long ago and, after the tears had subsided, Nathan, Briana and I could think of no better way to celebrate Dean’s energetic life than by taking part, once again, in Mardi Gras. Only this time without our Dean and instead dedicating it to his memory. I am marching this year because before Mardi Gras I avoided LGBTIQ events like the plague. As a queer trans guy with mental illness, living in the “not as rainbow as it preaches” city of Canberra, my dysphoria and anxiety were out of control. I was, and am, misgendered daily, so when I went to queer gatherings, continuing to be called “she” and mistaken for a butch woman, I felt betrayed and rejected by the community that I was meant be accepted by. The idea of participating was rather forced upon me by my cousin two years ago – I got a text in December saying “Merry Xmas, you’re doing Dr Mark’s with me!”. Usually I’d overthink and convince myself not to, but I impulsively agreed and I wouldn’t have it any other way. When I marched in the parade, it was the first time that I felt safe in a group of people and in my own community. I was euphoric. It is now over a year since I started my medical transition and a year since my first Mardi Gras. Needless to say, Mardi Gras will always hold a special place in my heart. We are marching this year to celebrate being newlyweds, having our wedding three weeks ago. We shared the day with our close family and friends and we wanted to celebrate with the larger community being recognised as equal under the law. Coming off the back of a rough public vote for our rights, it almost feels like a victory lap in a strange way. In what will be our first year of marriage and Mardi Gras’ 40th anniversary, what better time to march and celebrate? I am marching this year to show my support that it is never OK to take away an individual’s rights – everyone has a right to choose and the parade is a celebration about returning this right through the recent law change. It is also an opportunity to support our son who has organised this float and brought together this team to help celebrate a new era. It is really important for me to be marching with my son to demonstrate how proud we are of him, the open relationship we have, that he has our total support and to acknowledge that he has a right to choose. It is not about what I may or may not think, this is about individual rights so I am pleased to be celebrating this momentous occasion in our history with Bradford. I’m marching this year because, growing up in Mexico and attending Catholic school for 12 years, I never had any interaction with the gay and lesbian community – in fact, it was not accepted. When I worked at SBS, I had the fortune of working with several coworkers of the LGBTIQ ️‍ community who invited me to participate in my first Mardi Gras in 2008. It was an eye opener. I felt so connected and so happy to support their right to be considered equal and to fight for their rights. This year marks the 10th anniversary of participating in the parade and Dr Mark’s Marching Academy has been a wonderful group of people. I encourage all of us to “ignite” the fire within us, be proud of who we are and support equality. We are marching this year to celebrate four years since the event that changed both our lives – Mardi Gras 2014 – one of us married with two children, the other a single lesbian from Melbourne. We met under the giant mirror ball in the Royal Hall of Industries at the start of the Mardi Gras after party. Our eyes locked, a flame ignited in both of us and we kissed before even speaking. We both knew at an incredibly profound level that we had found each other and were destined to be together even despite our circumstances. It was the most exciting and fabulous public event we had ever been a part of. Four years on, we are happily living together and plan to get married.