Lewis Hamilton opened his campaign to win a fifth Formula One world championship with a strong start in practice for the Australian Grand Prix, offering early confirmation that his Mercedes is once again leading the field. Hamilton was quickest in both sessions on Friday at the Albert Park circuit. In the morning he was more than half a second clear of his team-mate Valtteri Bottas. The Red Bull of Max Verstappen was in third, seven-tenths down on the British driver, with Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel and Kimi Raikkonen in fourth and fifth respectively. In the afternoon, with the teams setting times on the fastest, ultrasoft rubber, the margins were much tighter but Hamilton remained on top. He was just over a tenth quicker than Verstappen whose form suggests that Red Bull’s pre-season testing promise is being borne out. The team’s day was spoiled, however, when a three-place grid penalty was handed to Daniel Ricciardo for driving too slowly under a red flag. Bottas was in third with Raikkonen and Vettel in fourth and fifth, the Finn’s Ferrari just under three-tenths back. “It’s been a good day,” said Hamilton. “Coming to the first race you have no idea what it’s going to be like but we started on the right foot here. It closed up in P2 but that is exciting.” He is likely to face a further test with rain predicted for both Saturday and Sunday. McLaren suffered some issues and lost time but ultimately put in some solid laps, closing with Fernando Alonso in eighth, but the best of the midfield was the impressive Haas.. The Mercedes executive director, Toto Wolff, also supported Hamilton’s call for greater diversity in F1, after the British driver posted a video on Instagram calling for F1 to encourage a greater range of ethnic backgrounds. “That is one thing that is very important not only for Lewis but for all of us,” said Wolff. “The more diversity we can get into Formula 1 the better. Whether it is different ethnic backgrounds or girls getting into motor racing, overall I think this is what needs to happen.”