Cervical cancer is cause by infection with papillomavirus. To our knowledge, every case of cervical cancer is initiated by infection with one of about a dozen closely related types of this virus. The same virus types also include one that seems to be responsible for some other genital cancers, and some throat cancer. The good news is that we have effective vaccines to prevent infection with these viruses: there are now three vaccines that have been shown effective – they all prevent the two strains of papillomavirus most commonly responsible for cancer, and one provides protection against another five types that more rarely cause cancer, as well as protection against genital warts. Australia has been fortunate to have had a government sponsored school based cervical cancer vaccine program since 2007, and studies in Australia have shown that this program has virtually eliminated new infections with the viruses responsible for cervical cancer for girls and boys who were immunised as young teenagers. Australia also has a world class screening program for cervical cancer prevention, which will become even more effective this year, with a switch to looking for the causative viruses in the samples collected. This will be complemented by screening for abnormal precancerous cells, as used in the previous screening program, if the relevant viruses are found. The screening program has been shown 100% effective at preventing cervical cancer for women who take full part in the program. There is thus a real prospect that, by combining the cervical cancer immunisation program, now with the new nine valent vaccine, and the improved screening program, the 200 cases of cervical cancer that occur in Australia each year will drop over the next few years to negligible numbers, and that sometime in my lifetime we will see the last cases of cervical cancer in women who have lived their teenage and adult life in Australia. The recent announcement by the International Papillomavirus Society that they can envisage a date when cervical cancer will be eradicated globally reflects the opportunity we now have to eliminate, through immunisation, a cancer that kills 250,000 women worldwide each year. The international research community has done its bit, by discovering the virus causing cervical cancer, by coming up with the technologies that have enable the pharmaceutical industry to develop effective vaccines, and by showing, in conjunction with the pharmaceutical companies, that these vaccines, when made available, can be delivered effectively across the globe. I would now hope to see a commitment from national governments and inter-governmental agencies to implementation of universal cervical cancer immunisation programs over the next few years, so that elimination of cervical cancer becomes a reality on a global basis. The challenges are many and should not be underestimated: the vaccines are most effectively delivered to young women by giving two immunisations in their last years in primary school, and this will require the development of complete new vaccine delivery programs. The cost of these programs then needs to be added to the cost of the vaccines themselves, and, before the vaccines can be deployed, education programs for the girls, their parents, and the immunisation teams must be put in place. However, It can be done. Bhutan, a small developing world country, with very limited resources, has implemented an effective HPV vaccine program over several years, with near universal coverage. Key to the success of the program, delivered entirely by the Bhutanese themselves, has been government willingness, royal sponsorship, and some financial assistance from the pharmaceutical industry and from international aid. Translating this sort of effort into practice on an international basis is a work in progress. Nearly 50% of girls and boys in the US are now receiving the cervical cancer vaccines, and universal immunisation programs are in place in many European countries, and in Canada. The immunisation programs to eradicate polio virus and measles virus which, like the cervical cancer causing papillomaviruses, only infect humans, have been struggling to achieve universal immunisation and successful disease eradication for some years, and there are risks of donor and program fatigue. While intergovernmental agencies have a role to play, the focus for international public health interventions is now shifting to making individual governments responsible for their programs, and answerable to their people for their choices as to where to spend the public dollar. As with most public health measures, implementation will require education, dedication, and patience. But, the reward will be a healthier, and therefore happier and more prosperous society. And that’s something worth striving for. • Ian Frazer is a Professor of Medicine at the University of Queensland. As co-inventor of the technology enabling the HPV vaccines he receives through the University of Queensland some income from the sale of these vaccines in the developed world