It snowed and sleeted on the day members of the women’s liberation movement took to the streets to march for equal pay and equal rights for the first time. “It was extremely cold,” Sheila Rowbotham recalls, as the 47th anniversary of the historic London march she helped to organise nears. “But there was an atmosphere of joy. It was exhilarating.” From all over the country, on 6 March 1971, an estimated 4,000 women, men and children braved the weather to march from Hyde Park to Trafalgar Square. They held banners demanding everything from equal education, wages and job opportunities to free contraception and 24-hour state-funded nurseries. Many had marched before, against the Vietnam war and against apartheid. But never for women’s liberation. “What was really vital for us was to recognise we actually had a presence – that we could mobilise on the streets,” said Rowbotham. “Before then, we’d had conferences, which several hundred people had attended – but this was on a bigger scale. We were visible to people, physically, as a movement.” It was deliberately an ostentatious spectacle – there was music, street theatre, singing and dancing – and also a friendly call to arms, with many women who were shopping on Regent Street successfully invited to join the march. “We were deliberately trying to pull people in,” says historian Sally Alexander, then a mature student at University College London. “By 1971 we had a sense of the tradition of feminist demonstrations from the suffrage era, as spectacle and street theatre.” With heavy irony, the song Keep Young and Beautiful– an outrageously sexist song from the 1930s that advises women “It’s your duty to be beautiful” and “exercise all the fat off … if you want to be loved” – was broadcast from a gramophone pushed in a pram. Many of the demonstrators, including Alexander, were young mothers. “It was particularly when women had children and tried to enter the labour market that they encountered sexism and male chauvinism, as we called it then.” She remains friends with some of her fellow marchers to this day. “Going on the demo was just one thing we did, and we didn’t have a choice but to go on it. I am sure that’s how young women feel today as well. When it’s an issue of social injustice you don’t even think about it. You just get out there and march.” I can’t remember how I heard about the march, but as soon as I did, I knew I wanted to go and be a part of the women’s liberation movement. I knew it was important. My female friends and I had been reading books like Sexual Politics and The Feminine Mystique, and we’d figured out we didn’t want our marriages and our careers to be like our mothers’– but we had no idea how much women’s liberation was going to change the way we saw ourselves and our relationships, as well as our personal and public lives. My whole life changed as a consequence of that day. I became totally involved with women’s lib and all my work has been about women and women’s rights. It felt heroic and exciting to be out there, marching in the snow. We felt that things would be different for us. We thought then, perhaps wrongly, women would be able to create the lives that they wanted. And we felt strongly we should be part of a broader movement, that this wasn’t just about us as individuals. Unfortunately, women still face a struggle to achieve the sort of liberation we had in mind that day. But I think it’s fantastic that with #MeToo there’s been another mass movement and a renewal of public solidarity among women. I decided to film the march because I felt it was important. That film, A Woman’s Place, was the first I ever made. We all pooled our skills and worked on it for nothing. The atmosphere was exciting, good humoured and fun. We had a satirical beauty pageant with women dressed up as, for example, Miss Behave or Miss Stress, wearing minimal clothing in the snow. There was an amazing mix of people there, including men. We wanted men involved. Many of our partners supported us and we wanted to show that in the film, so I interviewed a lot of them. My son was three months old at the time so I brought him with me in a pram and everyone helped look after him while I was filming. That march marked the start of feminism being something I engaged with publicly, and making A Woman’s Place made me realise why I wanted to make films. I wanted to see whether other people could be engaged by what I believed in. I’ve been on hundreds of women’s marches since 1971 and I’ve noticed the women’s marches post-Trump have been particularly powerful, and the women’s movement has gained momentum in the past year. I think the #MeToo movement is supporting a new wave of feminism. I was an 18-year-old working-class girl without any qualifications in 1971. I saw a leaflet about the march and thought: that’s for me. The demands for equal education opportunities struck a chord. I felt that working-class women were at the bottom of the pile, and things needed to change. I remember hearing May Hobbs, who led the night cleaners’ strike, give a speech at the march about the lives of ordinary working women and improving our pay and conditions. I was so impressed by the way she was standing up for what was right. It was the first time I had seen a woman do that in public. That day changed my outlook for ever. It crystallised my understanding of myself as a feminist, and showed me that women could organise and be strong and fight for a better world. I made friends with people on the march who recommended feminist literature to me and that widened my horizons. I decided to join in the fight. I got a job working for BT and joined the union on day one. I’m retired now, but I’ve spent the last 30 years of my life as a trade union activist, supporting female communications workers in particular. I remember fighting sexual harassment in the workplace 20 years ago. It’s so good to see another groundswell on the issue, and it’s inspiring to feel a women’s liberation movement is happening again.