The Cleveland Cavaliers’ already turbulent season has hit another bump with the team’s coach, Tyronn Lue, deciding to take time off to address health issues. The 40-year-old has had to leave three games this season due to ill health, the latest coming during Saturday’s win over the Chicago Bulls. “After many conversations with our doctors and [staff[ and much thought given to what is best for the team and my health, I need to step back from coaching for the time being and focus on trying to establish a stronger and healthier foundation from which to coach for the rest of the season,” Lue said in a statement. “I have had chest pains and other troubling symptoms, compounded by a loss of sleep, throughout the year. Despite a battery of tests, there have been no conclusions as to what the exact issue is.” Lue did not set a date on his return but suggested he may be back before the end of the season. “While I have tried to work through it, the last thing I want is for it to affect the team,” Lue continued. “I am going to use this time to focus on a prescribed routine and medication, which has previously been difficult to start in the midst of a season. My goal is to come out of it a stronger and healthier version of myself so I can continue to lead this team to the Championship we are all working towards.” The Cavaliers were expected to coast towards another NBA Finals meeting with the Golden State Warriors but the season has been a tough one in Cleveland. After poor form and talk of locker room discontent they overhauled their roster midseason with the likes of Dwayne Wade, Isaiah Thomas and Derrick Rose leaving the team after less than a season. All-Star Kevin Love has also missed significant time with a hand injury and said he suffered a panic attack during a game earlier this season. With LeBron James seemingly carrying the team at times, the Cavs are third in the Eastern Conference, 11.5 games behind the Toronto Raptors in first. James described Lue as “the captain of our ship” on Saturday and said his coach’s health was a concern. “We know he’s been doing everything he needs to do to stay healthy,” James said. “Take even more measures to get himself right. Everything that’s been going on with our year, it’s just another one.” Associate head coach Larry Drew will take over in Lue’s absence. After a 10-year career as a player, Lue became Cavaliers coach in 2016 and won the NBA title the same year, ending Cleveland’s 52-year title drought.