England had a much better second day here. This was mainly due to the fact that they did not have to bat and they had to bowl only 23.1 overs, during which time they dismissed New Zealand’s best batsman, Kane Williamson. However, there are still some scars that need urgent attention. Their batsmen have had plenty of time to contemplate how they might atone for their pitiful display on the first day. Nothing those batsmen witnessed on Friday when showers enveloped Eden Park all too frequently would have brought them much cheer. First, there was confirmation that the surface here possesses no demons. It is not a 58 all out pitch. It is not a 258 all out pitch. For almost all of the 23 overs bowled the ball stubbornly refused to deviate in the air or off the pitch. The ball plopped gently on to the middle of straight Kiwi bats. The tourists’ pace bowling quartet was persistent but not penetrating as Williamson gave the England batsmen in the field a first-hand, five-hour tutorial on how to compile a Test century. Williamson delivered his 18th, which meant that the New Zealand captain has reached three figures more frequently than any other Kiwi. He had begun the match alongside Ross Taylor and Martin Crowe on this list. Williamson displayed all the virtues that had eluded England in the first hour of the match. He was patient and watchful; his footwork was precise and positive; he played the ball late in defence and punched drives to the boundary with surprising power when the opportunity arose. It helped him that no bowler could move the ball in the air like Trent Boult. It was therefore a surprise when Williamson was dismissed. Even the new ball had refused to deviate much until Jimmy Anderson found some surprising inswing to have him lbw for 102. Williamson described this as “fairly good delivery”, which, given his dry, wry assessment of everything that happens around him, meant that it was an excellent ball and a fine piece of bowling by Anderson. Williamson was not going to lose any sleep over that dismissal or about New Zealand’s position in the match. The departure of New Zealand’s best batsmen did not trigger any panic in their dressing room. Henry Nichols had been resolute in defence throughout while playing the odd pull and cut shot on the rare occasions that the bowlers pitched short, while BJ Watling had skittishly acquired 17 on his return to Tests when more rain fell. There was an inspection at 8.30 pm after which the umpires decided to look again at 9pm, seldom a popular decision and one that was met with some derision from a dwindling crowd. The umpires finally abandoned play for the day at 9.10pm because they had decided that the outfield was still a bit damp and the game looked stupid once more. New Zealand were leading by 171 runs with six wickets remaining. Williamson does not seem to get too excited about anything. When asked about becoming New Zealand’s top-scorer of centuries at the tender age of 27 he gave the modern cricketer’s stock response, “I’ve never focused too much on stats. I just like to do what’s best for the team. It was a bit frustrating today [to be dismissed after adding 11].” Yet somehow he might mean all that. There is no doubting his admiration for Martin Crowe, who died two years ago. “He was a fantastic world-class cricketer for New Zealand, the best ever”, said Williamson. There is so much respect there for Martin.” Crowe predicted that Williamson could be his country’s greatest batsman and he may well have been right, even though the aesthete would probably opt to watch a Crowe century. Williamson explained his decision to insert England even though a glimpse of the scorecard makes that unnecessary. “We felt the wicket was at its greenest and it doesn’t deteriorate much here [one of the few pieces of good news for the England camp]. We didn’t expect that outcome. So it was a perfect storm for us and we did bowl a beautiful length. It will be a lot harder second time around.” He may even have to make a bowling change in the second innings. Like a good Kiwi, Williamson will take nothing for granted in this match. He has great respect for his opponents and he is prepared to voice his admiration in a manner that is seldom quite so prevalent on the other side of the Tasman Sea, especially in the middle of a Test. Of his opposite number, Joe Root, an occasional colleague at Yorkshire, he says: “He’s a great fella and a great player in all formats who conducts himself in a fantastic way.” So after two contrasting days – the first was surreal, the second all too ordinary – we appear to have an unusual contest on our hands: no one seems to be slagging one another off.