Anish Kapoor, the celebrated British artist, has blasted the National Rifle Association for its “nightmarish, intolerant, divisive vision” after the group used a clip of one of his works in a promotional video. Kapoor said the use of footage of his Cloud Gate sculpture in Chicago’s Millenium Park by the NRA “perverts everything that Cloud Gate – and America – stands for”. Known colloquially in Chicago as “the bean”, Cloud Gate is a three-storey high arcing, metallic-mirrored form that has been the visual centerpiece of the park, and a major tourist attraction, since its dedication in 2006. The NRA showed it for a brief, second-long cut in a provocative video released last August titled the Clinched Fist of Truth, which was widely criticised for directing violent language at media outlets like the New York Times, and generally, anyone perceived as a political opponent of the association. “The only way we save our country and our freedom is to fight this violence of [media] lies with the clenched fist of truth,” NRA spokeswoman Dana Loesch said in the minute-long spot. Kapoor said that the use of the image by the NRA “plays to the basest and most primal impulses of paranoia, conflict and violence, and uses them in an effort to create a schism to justify its most regressive attitudes”. The ad’s use of Cloud Gate, and other public sculptures, seems to be aimed at making public urban spaces – those situated in liberal cities especially – seem ominous and foreboding. Kapoor’s statement came as he announced that he was not going to pursue legal action against the NRA for the use of Cloud Gate after weighing his legal options, and the financial and emotional cost of a protracted fight against the “extremely aggressive, legalistic” association. “I decided it wasn’t worth the effort, much to my shame, because one does want to defend the ethical integrity of the work,” Kapoor said. Kapoor is no stranger to controversy regarding his work, nor to using his platform for politics. Last February he was one of more than 200 artists at the vanguard of a global art coalition promising to stage exhibitions and events confronting the rise of rightwing populism. The same month he donated his entire $1m award for the Genesis prize to assist refugees. As is typical after high-profile mass shootings, the NRA has been under increased scrutiny since a gunman killed 17 at a Florida high school earlier this month. The association has attempted to block all attempts by politicians, including conservative ones like Florida Governor Rick Scott, at introducing or enforcing new gun control legislation. Thousands of students across the US will protest for gun control reform on Wednesday by walking out of class.