Recently in the streets of Padua in northern Italy, I gave a euro or two to an insistent African man who, when I said I spoke only English, disappointed me by saying that he spoke English too: “I need money to eat.” A moment later an eccentric-looking Italian woman, who wore a fur coat and wheeled a bicycle, came up beside me to say I’d been foolish: the African man didn’t need food or shelter. “He wants money to buy drugs,” she said, “only drugs.” In a London pub a week or two later, a similar incident earned a similar reprimand. A plump young man slipped through the door and went quickly from table to table before the staff could notice. I gave him a pound. My companion, who had once worked in a charity for homeless people, refused. “They’re just lying about needing food and a bed for the night,” he said. “They’ll buy drugs.” Before the 1970s, Britain had neither drugs nor beggars – or at least had them only in quantities small enough to make them exotic. They belonged in other countries or in novels. Anyone who asked for money on the street usually offered something in return. The drunk in Glasgow wanted to carry your suitcase; the Irish girl and her little sister gave you a sprig of white heather; “Son, gie me ten shillins and I’ll gan wi’ ye,” said the ageing prostitute smiling up at you in a poor part of town. The closest to pure beggary came from the old soldier – regiment named, war service specified – who wanted sixpence for a cup of tea or the bus fare to see his sister somewhere plausible. All such encounters were rare enough to be memorable, and all involved a wordier solicitation than, “Spare change!” It was a shock when street beggars began to appear again in the 1980s to sit passively with a paper cup at their feet As it turned out, this period (which started in the 1920s, roughly) proved to be merely a respectable interlude in the unruly history of the British street. There had been beggars and drugs (or drink, at least) before and there would be beggars and drugs (and drink) again. The journalist Henry Mayhew, pursuing his researches into the London poor in 1850, interviewed beggars whose strategies would be familiar today. In a “lurk” or fraud called “the destitute mechanics”, for example, beggars would take up a position in a crowd and shout out: “Kind and benevolent Christians! It is with feelings of deep regret, and sorrow and shame, that us unfortunate tradesmen are compelled to appear before you this day, to ask charity from the hands of strangers.” Or there was “the shivering dodge”, when a man learned how to shiver by going out half-naked on a cold day, and with practice could shake “like a jelly – like a calf’s foot with the ague – on the hottest day in summer”. Mayhew’s subjects had often been brought low by alcohol, and often it was the unselfconsciousness produced by alcohol that sustained their begging habits. Almost 80 years later, if George Orwell is to be believed, all that had changed. Writing under his real name, EA Blair, for the French periodical Le Progrès Civique in 1929, he asked how it could be that the streets of London were crowded with people asking for money when begging was a crime punishable by imprisonment. The answer, he told his French readers, was that it was “perfectly legal to sell or pretend to sell any objects, or to annoy one’s fellow citizens by pretending to entertain them”. And so London had thousands – Blair estimated up to 10,000 “in the worst part of the year” – of the interwar unemployed earning a living as match sellers, pavement artists and street singers, as well as instrumentalists who made “discordant sounds with any old musical instrument”. As for food and drink, bread and margarine was their only meal, and tea their only stimulant – drunk at all hours of the day and night. At sixpence a pint, beer was far too expensive. Some of these occupations persisted after the second world war: the Glasgow tradition known as “back-court” singing, when the residents of tenements would open their windows to throw coins at the performer below, went on into the 1960s. But the welfare state, together with unprecedented working-class prosperity and low unemployment, relegated beggary to a memory in most of Britain – and it was a shock when street beggars began to appear again in the 1980s to sit passively with a tin, a cap or a paper cup at their feet. These were unexpected sights that the passerby felt belonged to a city such as Kolkata rather than London. We were surprised to find people who had apparently lost their sense of shame, who put out their hands brazenly, offering neither a product (an overpriced dishcloth) nor an urgent reason (the need to see a sister in Sidcup). The latest government estimate suggests England had 4,751 rough sleepers last autumn, a rise of nearly 270% since 2010, with about a quarter of them in London. Not all rough sleepers are beggars; more important, in terms of public attitudes, not all beggars are rough sleepers. Figures from police forces in England and Wales show that of more than 1,000 people arrested for begging in 2014, less than a fifth were legally defined as homeless. A year earlier the Daily Mail discovered a 37-year-old man in west London who allegedly earned £50,000 a year from begging, and lived rent-free in a £300,000 flat. But the world of begging has always been riddled with impostors, proven as well as rumoured. Beggar chiefs in India really do seem to exist, taking their cut from children they send on to the streets. But do they, as is sometimes said, maim the children first, a little boy minus his legs being harder to refuse? That seems too inhuman to be true, but one never can tell. Likewise, the bearded man who shudders and trembles outside the South Kensington museums: does he really suffer from a permanent shaking fit, or is he a modern practitioner of Mayhew’s shivering dodge? And the men and women who prostrate themselves beside their begging bowls so that their foreheads forever touch the pavement: are they in fact so desperate and abject, or are they acting out despair and abjectness? And would one be more deserving than the other? The advice of almost every charity is never to give to beggars; in the words of the Big Issue’s founder, John Bird, “It locks the beggar in a downward spiral of abject dependency and victimhood, where all self-respect, honesty and hope are lost.” Most beggars – as many as 80% – are doing so to fund a drug habit. Better instead to give money to charities, say the charities, so that they can fund drop-in centres and other projects that have a chance of changing the beggar’s life. There’s something unreal about this position, however: when you have so much more than the person asking for it, refusing money can be hard. What I notice is that the beggar and the begged-from are far less separate than before. Often, a young woman will kneel down to talk to a ragged man or walk out of her way to fetch him a coffee. Friendships of a kind have been formed. Perhaps a feeling is dawning: we’re in the same boat.