Robert Plant has, rightly, won lots of plaudits for reinventing himself in the past couple of decades, morphing from rock dinosaur to a thoughtful artist happy to embrace world music, country and electronica. So it’s a bit of surprise – though a wonderful one – when he and his band stroll on to the stage at the Opera House and ease into the Led Zeppelin classic, What Is and Should Never Be. As the song builds to its thunderous climax, some of the audience can’t contain their excitement at the unleashing of this music of primordial power; the bloke beside me punches the air and plays air guitar; others are whooing and yelping their frenzied appreciation. We’re all hooked. As for the man himself, he still has all the magnetic charisma and presence that made him the frontman of the band that more or less created rock music as we know it. He might be gnarled and a bit hunched these days but he’s still full of regal swagger, flipping his microphone stand nonchalantly, smirking and teasing the audience with the old moves. As his musicians rip into their work, he pulls faces of mock amazement as the solos screech around him. At moments he appears very actorly, so much so that at times he resembles a Shakespearean king surrounded by his courtiers. They crowd around him in choreographed fashion, bowing and fawning before him, pleasing him with their instrumental virtuosity. With his wild mane he could be Lear, but there is nothing mad about what he’s doing here. Plant has worked hard not to be a prisoner of the past and, as he says early in the show, he’s trying to create music for the future. Although the naming of one of those new tracks, May Queen, evokes a character from one of his most celebrated former glories, Stairway to Heaven, they succeed in sustaining the interest and keep the pace rattling along. Carry Fire, the title track of his new album, is a standout, and there’s also a thrilling version of Please Read the Letter, a Plant-Page song recorded in his collaboration with the bluegrass singer Alison Krauss. On that album, Raising Sand, the song is a gentle workout but here it is a rock monster and receives a twist when the British folk artist Seth Lakeman – the night’s support act – appears on stage to reel off what can only be described as a rock violin solo. Plant’s voice is not quite what it was in his princely pomp, of course, and there’s a little bit too much soloing for my liking, but it is still a treat to see one of music’s genuine legends giving it all he’s got on the Led Zep tracks Going to California and Babe I’m Gonna Leave You. Finally, the powerdriver riff of Whole Lotta Love speaks for itself and brings back the air guitar to all parts of the house.