A fierce nor’easter that flooded streets, snapped trees and knocked out power to more than 1.8m homes and businesses continued to lash the US Atlantic coast as the weekend began. At least five people were killed by falling trees or branches, with one forecaster saying Massachusetts could experience “a significant coastal flood event”. On Saturday winds were expected to slowly let up as the storm moved offshore. Forecasters said rain and snow would slowly come to an end early, hanging on the longest across southern New England. Winds were expected to remain breezy from Washington to Boston, a day after they toppled tractor trailers and exceeded 50mph, with gusts of 80mph to 90mph on Cape Cod. Ohio and upstate New York got a foot or more of snow. Boston and Rhode Island expected to get 2in to 5in. Jim Hayes, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service (NWS) weather prediction center in Maryland, said coastal flooding was expected to continue to cause problems in eastern Massachusetts and Boston, which could experience “a significant coastal flood event”. The five killed on Friday included two children. A man and a six-year-old boy were killed in different parts of Virginia, while an 11-year-old boy in New York and a man in Newport, Rhode Island, were also killed. A 77-year-old woman died after being struck by a branch outside her home near Baltimore. Floodwaters in Quincy, Massachusetts, submerged cars and police rescued people trapped in their vehicles. High waves battered nearby Scituate, making roads impassable and turning parking lots into ponds. More than 1,800 people alerted Scituate officials they had evacuated, the Boston Globe reported. Charlie Baker, the governor of Massachusetts, activated 200 national guard members to help victims. In Pennsylvania, Governor Tom Wolf was sending 90 guard members primarily to assist communities in the Poconos mountains where the deepest snow totals were recorded. Airlines cancelled more than 2,800 flights. LaGuardia and Kennedy airports in New York City were brought to a near standstill. Passengers had a rough ride aboard a flight that landed at Dulles airport outside Washington. “Pretty much everyone on the plane threw up,” a pilot wrote in a report to the NWS. Donald Trump, who traveled to North Carolina for the funeral of the Rev Billy Graham, was forced to fly out of Dulles instead of Joint Base Andrews in Maryland, where Air Force One is housed, because of high winds. Police in New York reported that several barges broke loose in the Hudson river. The barges were part of the construction project for the new Mario Cuomo Bridge, formerly known as the Tappan Zee Bridge. Tractor-trailer trucks toppled in high winds. The wind prompted officials to close several bridges in Rhode Island to commercial vehicles. Amtrak suspended service along the north-east corridor, from Washington to Boston, until at least Saturday. In New Jersey a tree hit overhead wires, forcing the suspension of some New Jersey Transit commuter service.