No one had ever seen anything like Andy Warhol’s soup cans. Precisely but flatly painted, and copied from the packaging of mass-produced commodities, these revolutionary works of art were unveiled in 1962 and changed the way we look at the world. Or so the fairytale goes. But when you see Stuart Davis’s painting Odol, the story of pop art is turned upside down and inside out. Odol was – and is – a mouthwash. Davis painted a bottle of it in clear precise lines and dry inexpressive colouring, just as Warhol was to depict his cans of Campbell’s. Yet Davis paid his homage to mouthwash in 1924, when Louis Armstrong was the latest sound and F Scott Fitzgerald was writing The Great Gatsby. Davis’s masterpiece of jazz age pop art is cynical and disillusioned. The blue and white colours he gives his bottle of Odol have long been associated with holiness in western art. He juxaposes the blue of the Virgin Mary’s robe with the whiteness of the dove of the holy spirit, and isolates his product behind a slanted glass case, like a museum vitrine. Yet Odol’s promise to “purify” is base and materialistic. Instead of true redemption, it offers a cosmetic clean-up before you go to Jay Gatsby’s latest party. Fitzgerald himself, in The Great Gatsby, describes an advertising hoarding that seems to mock religion in the same way as Davis’s Odol. As they drive across an empty landscape, the characters see a billboard with giant bespectacled eyes. It’s an ad for an optometrist called Dr TJ Eckleburg. This sign in the middle of nowhere becomes, in the novel, an image of the absence of God: instead of a divinity watching from heaven, the modern emptiness of capitalist America is observed by the dead eyes of Dr Eckleburg. The Ashmolean’s fascinating survey of American art in the era of Gatsby is full of images of emptiness and nothingness shot through with sudden moments of revelation. The artists are all trying to make sense of the modern world. Are human hopes vanishing in a bleak new landscape of factories and skyscrapers? Or is there hope of redemption on the mean streets? The loudest “Yes” – like a clanging bell rushing through the city night – comes from Charles Demuth. In 1928, he painted a symbolic portrait of his friend, the modernist poet William Carlos Williams inspired by his poem The Great Figure: Among the rainand lightsI saw the figure 5in goldon a redfiretruck … Demuth paints the shining gold figure 5 echoing in space, enlarging before our eyes as the red abstract of a fire truck hurtles towards us through a New York street that is a vortex of rain. This is a vision of mysterious optimism: the firetruck’s number is a friendly promise of help, a moment of meaning and generosity in the big, barren city. But for many artists here that city is a nightmare world of nothingness. George Ault’s paintings are relentlessly bleak. His 1921 New York Night No 2 sees Manhattan as a ghostly dehumanised wasteland of smooth grey facades, dead windows and lonely yellow lights in the cold fog. The skyline looks more romantic in A View from Brooklyn, painted by Ault in 1927, yet it is seen over a funereal structure whose deep black arches are portals of despair. This is where I disagree with the exhibition’s title, America’s Cool Modernism. Cool suggests a chilled emotional temperature, a deliberately disengaged art. I don’t see that at all among these soulful artists. All are responding to the new reality of the modern world in anxious, poetic ways. Modernity was much more of a fact for American artists in the 1920s than it was for Europeans. Modernism in Europe at this time was utopian: it dreamed of the future. Mondrian and Malevich were painting geometrical visions of new human harmonies, Le Corbusier was inventing ideal cities. In America, the future had arrived. In New York or Chicago, you only had to look up to see it. Berenice Abbott does just that in her 1936 photograph Canyon, Broadway and Exchange, her lens drinking in the sublime soaring light and darkness of the skyscrapers directly above her. Howard Norton Cook takes this into Miltonic realms of hellish imagination in his expressionist 1928 engraving Skyscraper, transfiguring a Manhattan block into a Satanic tower. Georgia O’Keeffe looks down instead of up in her 1928 painting East River from the Shelton Hotel. The view from her hotel room takes in snow-covered apartment block roofs, smoke-puffing chimney stacks and the dead cold surface of the river. It is a precise, epic view that slips into abstraction, the human scene becoming inhuman. For O’Keeffe, redemption lies in visionary experience. Narrowing her eyes, she dives into an embracing, sensual dark in her 1927 Black Abstraction. It is an escape inward. There’s no such getaway for Edward Hopper. He looks at the modern city without consolation or illusion. A solitary figure sits at a high window in his 1928 picture From Willamsburg Bridge. There’s no other glimpse of human life in the orange and grey facades perforated by glistening empty windows. Those windows are like the eyes that gaze over America in The Great Gatsby: unseeing, godless – and truly modern.