Hours before a pedestrian bridge at Florida International University collapsed on Thursday, killing at least six people, engineers met the construction manager, state transportation officials and university representatives to discuss a crack on the structure. The Miami-based university detailed the two-hour meeting in a statement released early on Saturday. It said the session included a technical presentation by Figg Bridge Engineers that “concluded there were no safety concerns and the crack did not compromise the structural integrity of the bridge”. The meeting ended at 11am. Three hours later, the bridge fell. The Florida department of transportation (FDOT) announcement late on Friday that an engineer hired by the university left a voicemail message with the state agency two days before the collapse, seeking to draw attention to the crack. In the call, which was not picked up until after collapse and has been released to the public, engineer W Denney Pate mentioned “some cracking that’s been observed on the north end” of the bridge but said he did not think it was a safety issue. The state transportation department also said one of its consultants attended a meeting with the FIU bridge team hours before the collapse. It did not say the crack in the bridge had been discussed. The National Transportation Safety Board chief investigator, Robert Accetta, said on Friday it was too soon to tell if cracks played a role in the bridge collapse. “I would have to say that a crack in the bridge does not necessarily mean it’s unsafe,” he said. University officials have said engineers had performed stress tests to determine the “resiliency of the concrete” in the bridge. On Saturday, crews worked to extract the first two crushed vehicles from underneath the collapsed span. According to the Miami Herald, the first vehicle to be removed appeared to be a silver Jeep, the second a Chevrolet pickup. “We’ve discovered three bodies within those two vehicles,” Juan J Perez, the director of the Miami-Dade police department, told reporters. “Currently we are working on the removal of two more vehicles.”