The prime minister has “full confidence” in her political adviser Stephen Parkinson after he was accused of outing a whistleblower to distract attention from allegations he made about Vote Leave’s spending during the referendum campaign. The whistleblower, Shahmir Sanni, says he has endured one of the “most awful weekends” of his life after telling the Observer how Vote Leave channelled money through BeLeave, a group linked to Cambridge Analytica, to get around electoral law. On Friday Sanni was outed by Stephen Parkinson, now one of Theresa May’s closest advisers and a former Vote Leave official, with whom Sanni had an affair during the campaign. On Monday Sanni heaped further pressure on the government over the allegations by accusing Parkinson of trying to smear him. A Downing Street spokesman said May had full confidence in Parkinson. Speaking to ITV’s Good Morning Britain, Sanni said: “This weekend has been one of the most awful weekends for me. I didn’t want to talk about this at all because it is not relevant. The only reason that this was brought to light was just to make it seem that this was a vendetta, when it is not about me.” In a statement delivered without Sanni’s consent, Parkinson said they had dated each other for a year and a half, including the period when Parkinson was at Vote Leave and Sanni worked as a volunteer and treasurer at BeLeave. Dominic Cummings Campaign director of Vote Leave and former special adviser to Michael Gove, the 46-year-old from Durham has been described as an “optimistic Eurosceptic” by the Economist. Cummings is regarded as the leading strategist of the campaign. He is credited with creating the memorable official slogan of Vote Leave: “take back control”. Matthew Elliott (pictured) Chief executive of Vote Leave, the 40-year-old political strategist from Leeds has been described by the BBC as “one of the most effective lobbyists at Westminster”. Elliott has served as chief executive of Big Brother Watch, Business for Britain and, formerly, the TaxPayers’ Alliance. Stephen Parkinson The national organiser of the ground operation for Vote Leave, Parkinson is from North Shields  and was a special adviser to Theresa May when she was home secretary. Following the EU referendum victory he rejoined her as a special adviser based in Downing Street. His current official title is political secretary to the prime minister. Victoria Woodcock Vote Leave’s operations director. Credited by Cummings with winning the referendum: he described her as “the most indispensable person in the campaign – if she’d gone under a bus, Remain would have won.” Vote Leave’s powerful ‘Voter Intention Collection System’ (Vics) software was named after her. Henry de Zoete Old Etonian digital director of Vote Leave and another senior figure from the Michael Gove camp: Zoete, 36, worked for four years as right-hand man to Gove when he was education secretary. Cleo Watson Prominent member of Vote Leave and now a political adviser at 10 Downing Street. Prompted uproar during the referendum when a leaked email revealed her telling clinicians that her group needed doctors and nurses to warn that Britain’s health service was being damaged by the EU. Darren Grimes Former fashion design student, 25, who ran BeLeave – the campaign group given £625,000 by Vote Leave during the final stages of the referendum. The cash was paid directly to data company AggregateIQ. The donation is currently being investigated  by the Electoral Commission. Grimes is now the deputy editor of the BrexitCentral website. Boris Johnson A figurehead of Vote Leave and member of the campaign committee that met weekly during the referendum to set its campaign strategy. The 53-year-old Old Etonian is currently foreign secretary. Michael Gove Co-convener of Vote Leave’s campaign committee, the 50-year-old  is currently environment secretary.  Previously he has served as education secretary and justice secretary. Parkinson said he had only given Sanni advice and guidance in the context of that relationship. Sanni claimed Parkinson’s statement had forced him to discuss his sexuality with his family. He also claimed that his family in Pakistan, where homosexuality is criminalised, were in danger as a result of Parkinson’s statement. He told ITV: “I had to come out to my mother the day before yesterday as well as my entire family, as well as take security precautions in Pakistan for my family.” Parkinson said he was saddened by “factually and incorrect misleading statements by Sanni and his lawyers”. He said he could not see how his relationship with Sanni could have remained private once Sanni had decided to publicise his “false claims”. Sanni said Parkinson’s statement was an attempt to divert attention to “petty relationships when it was just a campaign fling”. He added: “It is not relevant. What is relevant is the evidence.” Boris Johnson, a leading member of the Vote Leave campaign, dismissed Sanni’s claims as “ludicrous”. The claims have also been strongly criticised by Dominic Cummings, who ran the Vote Leave campaign. Sanni said: “It is not Boris Johnson’s place to determine whether something is true or false; it is the place of the authorities and the Electoral Commission, who I provided all the evidence and more [to].”