In the Hobart Test series of 2016-17, Faf du Plessis received three demerit points and lost 100% of his match fee for ball tampering. His crime? He applied saliva to the ball (as all cricketers do) while he was chewing on a mint, arguably artificially manipulating its condition. At the time, Du Plessis appealed, arguing that all cricketers would do the same – a point on which most would agree. Still, by the letter of ICC law, he had committed a level two offence, while there was little sympathy for his plight given he had previously been caught rubbing the ball on the zipper of his trousers against Pakistan in 2013. At the time, Australian vice-captain David Warner was Du Plessis’ harshest critic, making a point of trumpeting the integrous nature of Australian cricket by comparison. “I won’t comment on the way [South Africa] have been behaving but I just know from an Australian cricket perspective: we hold our heads high and I’ll be very disappointed if one of our team-mates [illegally change the condition of the ball],” Warner said at a 2016 press conference. “The rules are in place for a reason, if you’re not going to use them, then why bother having them?” Why bother, indeed. On Monday, Vic Marks argued that modern sportsmen are regularly “head-butting the line” to seek an advantage in their chosen endeavour, and as such, there is a degree of “21st century hysteria” about the public outcry to this saga. On the contrary, however, the reaction is one commensurate with Australia’s history of asserting its moral ascendancy when it comes to its integrity in sport, a position now untenably hypocritical. As Shane Warne said wisely on Sunday, there is a difference between using saliva to shine a ball (mint or no mint), and pre-meditating the use of sticky tape (with granules attached from the pitch) to damage the condition of the ball so as to force the umpires to replace it. The former is a tactic employed by all teams, the latter one reserved for blatant cheating. That Warner was up in arms over Du Plessis’ more minor charge is telling; Australia has never shied away from questioning the honour of its rivals, using each opportunity to shore up its own unquestionably commendable character by comparison. When a member of the bowling team interferes with the condition of the ball with the primary aim of altering its aerodynamics. To gain an advantage over the batsman by making the ball swing more in the air, to achieve reverse swing or to degrade the ball to a point that a new one is required. New balls are favoured by fast bowlers as they move quicker and bounce more. The ball can either be shined on one side – with the application of lip balm, saliva sweetened by a lolly, polish, sun cream or hair gel – or made more abrasive on the other – by scuffing the ball with a finger nail, rough paper, dirt or even teeth. The seam of the ball can also be picked. Ball tampering is outlawed by the Laws of Cricket. Under law 41, it is an offence for any player to take any action which changes the condition of the ball, however polishing it on clothing, removing mud and drying the ball with a pre-approved piece of cloth are acceptable. If an offence is found to have taken place during a match, five penalty runs are awarded to the batting side and the doctored ball must be replaced. If discovered retrospectively, other sanctions can be applied. As another pertinent example, in 2014, Warner was fined 15% of his match fee for accusing South Africa of ball tampering, even when there was no explicit evidence as such. Nonetheless, he appeared on Sky Sports Radio to question the character of his opponents: “We [the team] were actually questioning whether or not AB de Villiers would get the ball in his hand and with his glove wipe the rough side every ball,” he mused. The Australian men’s cricket team’s self-righteousness, however, extends beyond just these most obviously hypocritical responses to their opponents’ perceived cheating. On this most recent, and particularly ugly tour of South Africa, the Australians have repeatedly cried foul at their opponents’ intimidation tactics, with CA chief executive James Sutherland calling them “offensive and inappropriate”. But the Australians were arguably reaping what they had sowed, having previously asked for microphones to be turned down between balls because of their own intention to ruthlessly sledge. With Warner outraged over Quinton de Kock’s alleged slight on his wife, Candice, he responded with physical aggression, as if he, the truly aggrieved party, was entitled to machismo under the circumstances. All the while, they maintained the line of respectability in the face of the purportedly “crossed lines” of their opposition, while English fans reminded them that Darren Lehmann had once said [of Stuart Broad]: “I just hope the Australian public give it to him right from the word go... and I hope he cries and goes home”. The image of the Australians as champions against misogyny admittedly didn’t wash too well. Before Sunday, this kind of routine, while certainly not endearing the team to outsiders (or even insiders), had been allowed to continue relatively unchecked because Australia had never been seen to cross the line of illegality. Most certainly, Australia’s national sides of years gone by have cultivated a reputation for winning “ugly”, but not in its recent past, nor history, has it sunk this low. Even some of its darkest moments, such as the underarm delivery from Trevor Chappell, may have flown in the face of the spirit, but not the laws, of the game. This incident has changed all that, which explains what outsiders might perceive as hysteria from down under. Ironically, given its moral failings in so many areas of international politics, Australia has always considered itself an upstanding sporting nation. No longer, however, can its citizens stomach the piousness of a group of hypocrites. There were only a few minutes left of the 2009 Heineken Cup quarter-final between Harlequins and Leinster and the English side were a point down. Luckily for them, they had one of the greatest players in their history in their squad. Unluckily for them, Nick Evans was sitting on the bench, having gone off injured earlier in the match. What followed was one of rugby union’s darker episodes. The Quins wing Tom Williams sought treatment for a cut lip, allowing for a change to be made. Except there was no cut. He had bitten into a fake blood capsule. The fallout claimed the job of the Harlequins director of rugby, Dean Richards, and led to a series of bans being imposed on other figures involved in the scandal. And Quins still lost the match. The scandal that seemed to drag on and on. The New England Patriots were found to have been inflating balls to less than the minimum pressure required by the rules, the idea being that a slightly deflated ball is easier to handle. The scandal erupted after an Indianapolis Colts player intercepted a ball from the Patriots quarterback Tom Brady and handed it to a member of his team’s staff. A curious rule in American football allows teams to provide their own balls to use in their own plays, meaning opposing players rarely touch a ball provided by the opposition. Brady ended up being fined and banned for four matches in a bitter row with the NFL that lasted about 18 months and ended up in a US courtroom. In the 2008 Singapore Grand Prix, the then Renault driver Nelson Piquet alleged that senior team staff asked him to crash in order to force the deployment of a safety car and help his teammate Fernando Alonso to gain track position. Alonso had started the race 15th on the grid and the inevitable slowing of the competition – and the likelihood that other drivers would use the time to make a pit-stop – meant he could move up. Piquet said he was under significant pressure at the time and was unsure whether or not he was going to be kept on by Renault beyond the end of the season. The team’s managing director, Flavio Briatore, who had asked Piquet to crash, left his job and was later effectively banned from the sport for life, though Renault were allowed to continue in Formula One.