Today, our staff at the Eagle Eye, the student newspaper at Marjory Stoneman Douglas high school in Parkland, Florida, is taking over the Guardian’s website to run coverage of the March for Our Lives. We hope to use the Guardian’s platform to heighten awareness of the issue of gun control and school safety to such an extent that the federal government can no longer ignore us. As part of this project with the Guardian, we requested interviews with a number of politicians and celebrities, including Bernie Sanders (he said yes!), Marco Rubio (another yes) and George and Amal Clooney, who gave $500,000 to support the march. They turned us down on the interview, but we loved the letter George sent us back. – Emma Dowd, Lauren Newman and Rebecca Schneid, co-editors-in-chief of the Eagle Eye Dear Emma, Lauren and Rebecca, Thank you for your note and congratulations on the incredible work you and all of your fellow students are doing to make the country a safer place. It’s terrific that you’re editing the Guardian. It’s a stellar newspaper and they must feel honored to be working with you. Amal and I are 100% behind you and will be marching in DC on the 24th, but we both feel very strongly that this is your march. Your moment. Young people are taking it to the adults and that has been your most effective tool. The fact that no adults will speak on the stage in DC is a powerful message to the world that if we can’t do something about gun violence then you will. The issue is going to be this, anyone you ask would feel proud to be interviewed by you but it’s so much more effective if it’s young people. You could talk to a dozen kids like the young kids from Chicago and LA that Emma met with. You could take over the Guardian and make it tell the stories of children by children. It’s a once in a lifetime opportunity to point to this moment and say it belongs to you. You certainly should do what you want but that would be my hope for you. Amal and I stand behind you, in support of you, in gratitude to you. You make me proud of my country again. Thank you. All the best, George