It is just under two months since Eddie Jones signed a two-year contract extension as the England head coach until 2021. His team had won 23 from 24 Tests and everything in the Twickenham garden was spectacularly rosy. “I’m enjoying it,” he said, reflecting on his first two years at the helm. “But as we know in sport things can change very quickly.” Just how swiftly has been underlined at England’s team hotel this week. Successive defeats by Scotland and France and Jones’s unfunny attempted “jokes” about Ireland and Wales have transformed the mood. From perhaps privately wishing they had him as their coach, England’s neighbours are suddenly relieved he is the Rugby Football Union’s employee. In terms of antipodean cultural sensitivity he is starting to make even Sir Les Patterson look a model of diplomacy. How much does this matter? Not to the players, apparently: it is now pretty much a contractual requirement to insist the team are blocking out all the “white noise” and are purely focused on the game against the grand slam-chasing Ireland on Saturday. But, as John Donne astutely observed 400-odd years ago, no man – or coach – is an island. When the unveiling of a much‑changed England XV for a big Six Nations game becomes a virtual sideshow, something is awry off the pitch as well as on it. It boils down, ultimately, to good judgment – or, rather, a strange lack of it. What serving England coach, in any sport, imagines it is a jolly jape to describe the Irish as “scummy” and Wales as a “little shit place”? Some are crying stitch-up, that “banter” in a cosy corporate setting last July should not be taken overly seriously. Maybe. But imagine if it were Joe Schmidt or Steve Hansen who had said something similar? What if Gareth Southgate had referred to Germans or Scots in similar derogatory terms? Let’s just say the story would not be blowing over inside 48 hours. At least Jones was swift to apologise. Then again, what else could he possibly do? Only a fortnight ago he was sitting in the Randolph Hotel in Oxford, criticising the anti-English rhetoric coming out of Scotland and suggesting it might have been responsible for the hassle he endured on a train journey the following day. Those in glass-fronted coaching boxes need to take care when throwing stones if they wish to retain public credibility. Nor is this latest episode going to do much for the 58-year-old’s chances of coaching the British & Irish Lions in 2021. A few crass words might not matter greatly to Irish players who already require no extra motivation to beat England on Saturday. They will, though, stick rather longer in the minds of administrators and fans who love the all-for-one Lions ethic and the fellowship it engenders. Now they have every reason to suspect Jones instinctively feels otherwise. What, say, if he were to be given the job and opted to omit a couple of Irish or Welsh totems from his tour party? Justifiably or not, there would be uproar. And whose fault would that be? As someone who endured more than his fair share of casual racism as a kid, Jones should hardly need reminding that some people have thicker skins than others. Then again, as everyone said at the time of his appointment, the Jones era was never going to be dull. English rugby needed a jolt and he has comprehensively delivered one. His selections, until recently, have worked for him and the squad are measurably fitter. It makes it all the stranger that the team have hit quicksand so abruptly. Every opposing side watching the Scotland or France games will have wondered the same thing: where was the physicality, energy, purpose and directness that earned them the past two Six Nations titles? It is not all about breakdown and penalty-count woes. Maybe Jones’s rejigged XV, now conspicuously shorn of key regulars such as George Ford, Dan Cole and Joe Launchbury, will rediscover its mojo against Ireland. If not, Ireland could make some serious inroads. And should England lose this weekend, finish second‑bottom of the Six Nations pile, go down 3-0 to a revived Springbok side in South Africa and then get pasted by New Zealand at Twickenham in November, what then? It will certainly require a leap of faith to imagine the Webb Ellis Cup being held aloft by Dylan Hartley in 2019. A glance at next year’s Six Nations fixture list further underlines the need for Jones to unearth a rapid antidote. First up for England next February? A trip to Dublin, with a visit to Cardiff in round three. The “scummy Irish” will be keenly looking forward to their arrival; not all of Wales’ supporters will be looking to slap good old uncle Eddie warmly on the back. In isolation Jones’s videoed remarks are embarrassing more than anything else, one of those things that occasionally happen to public figures when they forget the microphone is turned on. But longer term? If the national team’s results fail to perk up and the RFU has to issue any more apologies, that happy-clappy contract renewal in January will have to be rebranded as the day Jones’s England jumped the shark.