Tracey Emin has spent the morning affixing little bronze sculptures of birds under park benches, awnings and lampposts for her latest art installation. It’s a reflective project; a quiet, unobtrusive use of public space wending its way through a small section of Sydney’s CBD. “I’m being gentle,” Emin says. “I’m not being domineering, I’m not being macho. I’m not using ego. I’m literally integrating within what’s already here. I really do think that there are a lot of public art projects that are just so ego-based, that take over everything.” The British artist was commissioned to make the work, titled The Distance of Your Heart, by the City of Sydney in 2014, as part of the public art program that accompanied the state government’s light rail project. Four years and $912,000 later, and the project is finally being unveiled on Wednesday, and Emin says she’s already seen a positive response to the work. “People’s reaction when they see the birds, they just smile. And that’s what it’s about. I want people to stop for a moment and feel better about everything.” The work is “a nice thing”, she says. “It’s not heavy. It’s not oppressive. It’s not macho. It’s not domineering. It’s not demanding. I’m not taking up anybody’s space by what I’m doing. It’s giving something.” Emin’s work is often very emotionally driven, raw, cathartic. Her most famous pieces exemplify this – consider her 1998 installation My Bed. Shortlisted for the Turner prize, the work comprised of Emin’s own bed and the detritus that had accumulated around and within it after the artist inhabited it for several days in a depressive state. Or her 1995 work, Everyone I Have Ever Slept With 1963–1995 – a tent appliquéd with the names not simply of the artist’s lovers, but of her grandmother, her parents, two unborn babies. A couple of years ago, she married a stone, saying the piece of rock in her garden was like “an anchor, something I can identify with”. Despite its often confronting veneer, her work offers thoughtful reflections on feelings that run deep. Birds have been part of Emin’s practice since she studied ornithology at school, and for a long time, drawing them was her way of expressing herself in the context of an art scene that she felt wasn’t particularly accepting of the emotive work that she wanted to create. “In the early 90s, or late 80s, that was like a no-no,” she says. “If you drew self portraits you were considered to be a bit of a moron. So I started drawing birds … and I used the birds as a vehicle to express what I was feeling, like another language.” Sydney is not unfamiliar to Emin, who has travelled back and forth to the city over the past 15 years. The homesickness was very strong when she first arrived, and she describes standing in Kings Cross near a signpost marking the distance to places like Hong Kong, New York and Paris, feeling conflicted. “I noticed lots of backpackers would stand there and have their photos taken by it, and I was thinking … [that’s] not actually saying anything to the person you’re taking the photo for. It’s just saying how far away you are.” Wouldn’t it be lovely, she thought, that instead of a marker to highlight how far away you were, it helped you tell people that you’re missing them, that you love them? The idea of migration got her thinking about all the different circumstances since colonisation in which people – not just the British – have arrived in Australia. This, coupled with the loneliness of distance, fuelled the bird motif. “Little birds don’t migrate here because it’s too far away,” Emin says. The birds first appear in Grosvenor and Bridge Streets in Sydney’s CBD, and the trail culminates in Macquarie Place Park, around a stone birdbath engraved with the title of the piece. “Birds are so spiritual. Everybody loves birds, especially tiny birds. My mum died about a year and a half ago, and I think a lot of people who have bereavement, when they see birds flying they wonder if a spirit is involved there – if the bird has touched a spirit of someone you love.” She spent the last four years sculpting the 68 bronze figures with which to build the trail. It’s important that none of them are modelled on real birds; they are creatures of the imagination, not found in any guidebook. “If you’re sitting somewhere and a little bird comes and lands and is sitting next to you and kind of looking up at you, you actually feel like it’s something magical. You feel like you’ve been touched by something.”