In June 1977,  Bob Marley took a day off from the European leg of his Exodus tour to visit the photographer Allan Ballard at his studio in Primrose Hill, north London. Marley was said to dislike studio-based shoots and only did a couple in his lifetime, but on that day Ballard found him in playful mood, willing to strike a pose. Today most of the images we see of Marley come from the same few photographs, with the singer looking composed, eyes closed, deific. Those three or four shots are the basis for almost every mural, album cover and student poster of him – but do little to reveal the person. Yet the contact sheet from Ballard’s shoot shows a sequence of off-guard Marleys: running his fingers through his hair, sitting cross-legged, larking about. Perhaps if just one of those shots were blown up to the size of a billboard, Marley would once again seem messiah-like. But in the movement from shot-to-shot, his humanity is revealed. The Marley contact sheet is part of a new exhibition, called Contacts, that provides an insight into how memorable rock photographs are created by collecting contact sheets from the past 60 years of music photography. A collaboration between gallery owner Lucy Bell and photograph library Rock Archive, it features the work of nine of the most famous rock photographers, including Brian Duffy, Jill Furmanovsky, Andrew Catlin and Carinthia West. “I wanted to show things like how much a face can change, just within a matter of 24 frames,” says Bell, whose eponymous gallery in St Leonards-on-Sea, East Sussex, is hosting the exhibition. She says contact sheets reveal more of the relationship between sitter, photographer and viewer – creating a narrative where otherwise there might have been only a glimpse. All film photographers are likely to use contact sheets, but what makes this exhibition unique is how renowned some of the final images are. Take the cover of Aladdin Sane, taken by Duffy: it has been reprinted millions of times on T-shirts, iPhone cases, in emojis and tattoos. It is so well-known that it is easy to forget it was once just a photograph. “When you see the contact sheet, it reveals something different from what you think the picture was about, because you see David and Duffy going through the process to find that one moment,” says Chris, Duffy’s son and archivist. “When someone takes your photo you naturally feel self-conscious. But Duffy had a technique of engaging the sitter in conversation to a point where he made them forget they were being photographed. He would push people, be argumentative, say outrageous things. If he knew you supported Chelsea he’d say Arsenal were better.” Looking across all the sheets, it is perhaps surprising that the shot that ends up being selected, often marked in highlighter pen or with a red sticker, rarely comes at the end of a shoot. “Duffy always described it a bit like a boxing match. It might not be the last punch that knocked the guy out; it might be the one in the third round that weakened him,” says Chris. The photographer featured most is Jill Furmanovsky, famous for her portraits of Dylan, Oasis and Björk. The contact sheet of the Icelandic singer shows how the smallest shifts in expression can change the feeling of a shoot, from something glossy and distant to something that feels candid. “It’s because of her very strong personality, her quirkiness,” says Furmanovsky. “Instead of looking like a fashion shoot, which it easily could have done, it becomes a kind of collaboration between the camera and the artist. I suppose it helps that she’s a maestro with the camera herself.” Furmanovsky says she is most excited about a sheet of Joy Division mucking around in a dressing room. “There’s so little material of them in the world. It’s quite revealing – people wandering in and out. Someone takes a shower and there’s a towel in one shot. Technically it’s not a great shoot – there was only shot that really worked – but it’s quite fascinating to see the whole of it, to see Ian Curtis having a laugh.” The gallery website makes a lot of how digital photography has done away with contact sheets but, looking at them, I’m struck by how often we all engage in a similar process: taking 20 photos on our phone then looking through the thumbnails to select the one we want. “It’s true,” says Furmanovsky. “People are shooting large amounts of material and they do often come in sequences. People’s feeds are kind of like living contact sheets – and these are the earlier versions.” So the exhibition should demonstrate even to amateurs how to select the perfect selfie. Contacts runs from 7 April to 17 May at the Lucy Bell Gallery, 46 Norman Road, St Leonards-on-Sea, East Sussex TN38 0EJ. More information from lucy-bell.com