Name: Macaulay Culkin. Appearance: Blond, formerly cute. Age: 37. Sorry, what? 37. How dare that little kid from Home Alone be 37! You can’t really blame him for it. The passing of 27 years does that to the majority of 10-year-olds. I blame him utterly. I trust he’s spending the rest of his life hiding from public view like the phantom of the opera? Not quite. He has just launched a parody of a celebrity lifestyle website. A … what exactly? It’s a spoof magazine, in the style of the likes of Goop, Gwyneth Paltrow’s nonsense emporium. It’s called bunnyears.com. As in Bunn Years, in homage to the Aston Villa goalkeeper Mark Bunn? No, as in Bunny Ears, in homage to the things rabbits listen with. I expect it’s a reference to holding up two mocking fingers behind someone’s head. Ah. “The foundations of the Bunny Ears brand are Proclivities, Diet, Exploration and Upscale Culture,” the site explains. Ha ha! Yes, very good. Someone ought to puncture all that self-regarding celebrity twaddle. Indeed. And few people know more about the absurdity of fame than “world-famous celebrity turned world-famous recluse Macaulay Culkin”, as he describes himself. Splendid. So, show me one of these funny articles. I can’t do that I’m afraid. Oh. Is there a paywall? No, it’s just that I’ve read a few and none of them are funny. Sad. Yes. And sadly in keeping with Culkin’s later career choices. Come now. Life can’t be easy as a former child star and muse of Michael Jackson. No. I’m sure it’s very hard. And he had problems with his dad, remember. Yes, but Culkin seems so painfully aware of it all that he has wound up trapped in his own irony. Sometimes it seems that his life has become a parody of the fact that he doesn’t know what to do with it. What do you mean? He wrote an experimental novel. He acted in avant-garde films. He moved to Paris. He fronted a satirical rock band. He was arrested for drugs, but denies he had a serious problem. He did knowing cameos on Will and Grace, British TV commercials, American wrestling … That sounds, erm, unfocused. He says he has retired. But yeah, it’s a lot of energy being spent on not very much. Perhaps the website’s meant to be ironically unfunny? Perhaps. It’s kind of hard to tell. Do say: “Someone get that man a hobby.” Don’t say: “Why can’t you be more like Haley Joel Osment?”