Late-night hosts on Thursday discussed Stormy Daniels’ lawsuit against Donald Trump, the president’s focus on video games to curb gun violence, and the possibility of diplomatic talks with North Korea. “Stormy’s suing the president, claiming that their non-disclosure agreement can’t be enforced because the president didn’t sign it,” Stephen Colbert explained. “If she wins, she’ll then be free to discuss her affair with Donald Trump and share texts and pictures he sent her.” “That’s a terrifying prospect for Trump lawyer and man-who’s-never-getting-that-130-grand-back, Michael Cohen,” the host continued, noting that Cohen obtained a restraining order against the porn actor in order to silence her. Colbert went on: “Now, the White House has shown surprisingly disciplined silence about the Trump-paid-a-porn-star-thing. And they might be able to get the story to go away completely as long as they never admit that the president is involved in legal proceedings or any arbitration in any way with Stormy Daniels. Sarah?” Colbert then cut to footage of the press secretary, Sarah Sanders, who on Thursday said “this case has already been won in arbitration”. President Trump was apparently angry at Sanders for her response to the question. “He’s blaming Sarah Huckabee Sanders for the fallout from his affair with a porn star?” Colbert asked. “Happy International Women’s Day!” Trevor Noah discussed the administration’s blaming video games for gun violence. “Trump is not a big fan of video games, partly because the controllers are too big and also because he believes they inspire real-world violence,” Noah began. “Trump is hardly the first person to blame gun violence in part on video games,” the host continued. “You see, it turns out politicians have been warning about the dangers of violent games way back when.” Noah went on to show footage of various lawmakers, including former senator Joe Lieberman, denouncing video games for supposedly inciting violence. Noah replied: “Here’s the thing: there have been hundreds of studies on this issue, and they have shown that there isn’t any connection between violent video games and violent activities. That doesn’t mean video games have no influence, because, let’s be honest, everything we consume as human beings affects us somehow.” “You can’t take violence out of the world,” Noah added. “What you can do is limit the tools violent people have. Which is exactly what they’ve done in Japan.” The host then cut to news coverage explaining the prevalence of video games in Japan, where gun laws are extremely strict and there are less than 10 gun-related deaths per year. “The truth is, many countries around the world have figured this out,” Noah said. “The most effective and realistic way to limit gun violence is to regulate who has access to guns. While the president is talking about video games, lawmakers in Florida have decided to take action.” Noah explained that Florida has proposed legislation, set to land on Governor Rick Scott’s desk, that raises the minimum age of purchase to 21, enforces a three-day waiting period, bans bump stocks, and adds mental health programs to schools. “I’m going to say a sentence that I’m assuming has never before been uttered on this show,” Noah concluded. “Well done, Florida.” Finally, Jimmy Kimmel discussed North Korea’s invitation to conduct talks with Trump.  “South Korean officials delivered a letter today from Kim Jong-un, the leader of North Korea, to Donald Trump inviting him to meet and promising to halt his missile tests,” Kimmel explained. The messaged was relayed from the South Korean national security adviser, a stunning development given Trump and Kim’s back-and-forth saber-rattling. “The president was very excited about this, so excited that he went into the White House press room where he’s never gone before to tell reporters off the record,” Kimmel said. “And they’re like, ‘We can’t do it off the record, we’re in the press room.’” Kimmel continued: “Then he announced that there would be a major announcement without even telling his staff there was going to be an announcement. It’s like the uncle you know will blow a surprise party if you tell him about it.” Imagining the North Korean and American leaders meeting for the first time, Kimmel said, “The two worst haircuts in the world, together; you know those two are going to hit it off.”