I love this kind of cake: the type that’s firm, bready and packed with chunks of fruit and nut. Not because it’s particularly virtuous, but because its damp, dense texture means you can carve off great slabs, spread them with butter and it won’t crumble or collapse under the weight of the knife. It’s even good for breakfast. This is a great template recipe that you can adapt pretty much infinitely: cinnamon and cherry, ginger and cox apple, hazelnuts and peach all work a treat. Prep 15 minCook 1 hrServes 8 75ml vegetable oil100g soft light brown sugar3 eggs1 tsp vanilla extract250g grated pear (from roughly 2 ripe, peeled dessert pears)125g dark rye flour125g plain flour3 tsp baking powderSeeds from 8 cardamom pods, finely ground½ tsp ground coriander½ tsp ground cinnamon½ tsp coarsely ground black pepper¼ tsp salt50g walnuts, roughly chopped½ ripe dessert pear, peeled and cut into thin slices2 tbsp demerara sugar, optional For the spiced butter125g unsalted butter, softened1 tbsp soft light brown sugarSeeds from 2 cardamom pods, finely ground½ tsp ground cinnamon¼ tsp ground ginger1 good pinch of salt Heat the oven to 170C/335F/gas mark 3. Line a 900g loaf tin with baking paper. Combine the oil, sugar, eggs, vanilla extract and grated pear in a large bowl. In a separate bowl, combine both flours, baking powder, cardamom, coriander, cinnamon, black pepper and salt, then add this dry mixture to the wet ingredients. Stir in the walnuts. Once the batter is smooth and thick, spoon into the prepared loaf tin. Arrange the pear slices along the top of the batter, sprinkle demerara sugar over the top if you want a crackly, sugar-freckled crust. Bake for an hour or so, until the cake is well-risen and fragrant. The kitchen should be thick with the scent of cardamom by the time it’s ready, and a knife inserted into the thickest part of the cake should come out with no more than a crumb or two stuck to it. Leave to cool for at least half an hour before slicing and serving. While it cools and your hunger begins to stir, prepare the spiced butter: beat the softened butter with the sugar, spices and salt. Spread slices of the cake thickly with the spiced butter. You can toast it, too, if you fancy it.