Is Vladimir Putin engaged in a long-running, murderous and ongoing campaign to silence Russian defectors, emigres and dissidents living in the UK? That is perhaps the most pressing of many questions facing the government after Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia were poisoned with a nerve agent in Salisbury. Russia’s retaliatory expulsion of 23 diplomats, announced on Saturday, was as unjustified as it was expected. Its vindictive and unwarranted decision to go further and shut down the British Council highlighted the Putin regime’s fear of open societies and disregard for its citizens’ best interests. It has been suggested that the attempt to murder the Skripals was timed to whip up nationalistic fervour and boost Putin’s presidential re-election bid. Another theory is that the use of an illegal, highly toxic nerve agent, whose detection was certain, was intended to humiliate Britain and send a message about the risks of confronting a Russia supposedly restored to great power status. It is also argued that Russia has been prematurely blamed and that the intelligence services may be surreptitiously pushing Britain into a new cold war, just as they ostensibly pushed us into Iraq. All these hypotheses fall wide of the mark. Putin’s re-election is not in doubt; he effectively fixed the result in advance. The west is well aware of Moscow’s revived ambitions; it needs no reminding. And in terms of might, reach and influence, Putin’s Russia is a sickly shadow of the former Soviet Union. He is the capo of a corrupt rogue regime, not the leader of a once proud superpower. And Putin has form. What now seems most likely is that the Salisbury atrocity was part of a wider campaign against Russian nationals in Britain who Putin personally regards as traitors or enemies. One aim is to silence them, by whatever means. Another aim is to send an intimidatory message to Russians in Russia that challenging the regime is a potentially life-threatening activity. The suspected murder in London last week of Nikolai Glushkov, a long-time Putin critic, must now be added to a list of 14 suspicious deaths of Russians in Britain, first compiled in a BuzzFeed investigation last year. Belatedly, the government has acceded to calls from Labour’s Yvette Cooper, among others, to investigate possible involvement of the Russian state or state-sponsored assassins. The exceptional significance of the Skripal attack cannot be overstated. It involved the use of a chemical weapon on European soil for the first time since 1945. It potentially endangered thousands of British citizens. It showed blatant disregard for international law and the UN charter. And because the only really plausible, credible explanation is that it was ordered or approved by Putin and his cronies, it represents a direct challenge by the Russian state not only to Britain but to all law-abiding countries. Yet the growing suspicion that the Skripal affair is but one incident in a continuing succession of lethal outrages dating back to the 2006 murder by Russian agents of Alexander Litvinenko raises the problem to an even higher level of seriousness. An obvious, urgent question is: who’s next? It is right that counter-terrorism officers are now reportedly talking to Russian exiles about their safety. Theresa May’s government bears an enormous responsibility. The expulsion of Russian diplomats was the easy bit. May and her ministers must ensure that no further killings take place on British soil; that everything is done to demonstrate, incontrovertibly, whether Russia attacked the Skripals, and that the correct technical procedures are followed through the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and the UN; that effective measures are finally taken to stop the flow of dirty Russian money through London; and that key allies, notably France and the US, which initially questioned Britain’s case, do not go wobbly again. Britain cannot manage this crisis alone. It needs the help of its friends and allies if it is to force Putin to back off.