About 180 military personnel have been called upon by the police investigating the attempted murder of Sergei Skripal and his daughter, Yulia, to remove evidence in Salisbury potentially contaminated by a deadly nerve agent. Skripal, a Russian former spy, and his 33-year-old daughter are comatose in hospital after being found on Sunday unconscious on a bench in the Maltings shopping centre. The investigation widened on Thursday as police sealed off the graves of Skripal’s wife, Liudmila, and son, Alexander, and said 21 people had been treated as a result of the incident. Among the injured were a detective sergeant, Nick Bailey, who remained in a serious but stable condition. Bailey was described by Wiltshire’s temporary chief constable, Kier Pritchard, as “a massively dedicated officer”. Pritchard said Bailey was “very anxious, very concerned” but sitting up in bed and talking. The home secretary, Amber Rudd, met Bailey during her visit to Salisbury district hospital on Friday. It is understood that personnel from the Royal Marines, the RAF and chemical teams were helping to remove vehicles from the scene. “The Counter Terrorism Policing Network has requested assistance from the military to remove a number of vehicles and objects from the scene in Salisbury town centre as they have the necessary capability and expertise,” Scotland Yard said. “The public should not be alarmed and the public health advice remains the same. The military has the expertise and capability to respond to a range of contingencies. The Ministry of Defence regularly assists the emergency services and local authorities in the UK. Military assistance will continue as necessary during this investigation.” The defence secretary, Gavin Williamson, said: “Our armed forces have stepped up to support the police in their investigation in Salisbury, building on the vital expertise and information already provided by our world-renowned scientists from the Defence Science and Technology Laboratory at Porton Down. We have the right people with the right skills to assist with this crucial inquiry. This is a dreadful incident and my thoughts remain with the victims and their families.” Visiting Salisbury on Friday morning, Rudd said: “It is still very serious for the two people subject to this outrageous attack. For the police officer, it is still serious but we understand he is conversing and engaging.” The NHS confirmed that Skripal and his daughter were in a critical but stable condition, while Bailey was conscious in a serious but stable condition. Rudd continued: “I understand people’s curiosity about all those questions, wanting to have answers, and there will be a time to have those answers. But the best way to get to them is to make sure we give the police the space they need to really go through the area carefully, to do their investigation and to make sure that they have all the support that they need in order to get that.” Rudd added: “At the moment our priority is going to be the incident, which is why I’m here in Salisbury today, making sure that everybody’s protected around the incident, making sure the emergency services have had the support that they need and will continue to get it. “In terms of further options, that will have to wait until we’re absolutely clear what the consequences could be and what the actual source of this nerve agent has been.” Rudd did not reveal any further details about the substance, how it was deployed or who used it. Ian Blair, who was Metropolitan police commissioner when the former spy Alexander Litvinenko was murdered in London by radiation poisoning, has suggested one line of inquiry is that Skripal may have been exposed to the nerve agent in his own home. “Clearly what they’re trying to find out at the moment is how was this delivered personally. There obviously are some indications. The officer – I’m very sorry he’s been injured – has actually been to the house, whereas there’s a doctor who looked after the patients in the open who hasn’t been affected at all. There may be some clues floating around in here,” Lord Blair said on BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. Nerve agents are not hard to make in principle, but in practice it takes specialised facilities and training to mix the substances safely. The raw materials themselves are inexpensive and generally not hard to obtain, but the lethality of the agents means they tend to be manufactured in dedicated labs. The main five nerve agents are tabun, which is the easiest to make, sarin, soman, GF and VX. The latter was used to kill Kim Jong-nam, the half-brother of the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, at Kuala Lumpur airport last year. VX is particularly stable and can remain on clothing, furniture and the ground for a long time without proper decontamination. All pure nerve agents are colourless organophosphorus liquids which, after they were discovered to be highly poisonous in the 1930s, became the dominant chemical weapons of the second world war. Once made, the substances are easy to disperse, highly toxic, and have rapid effects. Most are absorbed swiftly through the skin or inhaled, but they can also be added to food and drink. The agents take their toll on the body by disrupting electrical signals throughout the nervous system and the effects are fast and dramatic. Victims find it increasingly hard to breathe. Their lungs produce more mucus which can make them cough and foam at the mouth. They sweat, their pupils constrict, and their eyes run. The effects on the digestive system trigger vomiting. Meanwhile the muscles convulse. Many of those affected will wet themselves and lose control of their bowels. At high doses, failure of the nerves and muscles of the respiratory system can kill before other symptoms have time to develop. There are antidotes for nerve agents, such as oxime and atropine, which are particularly effective against VX and sarin, but they should be given soon after exposure to be effective. Blair said that if the nerve agent was rare, as Rudd has said, then it should be possible to identify where it came from. “If this is rarer than sarin and VX it’s basically possible to identify the laboratory in which it was made. They would be able to establish where it came from – the level of authority is another matter,” he said. The use of a nerve toxin is seen as a key indicator of possible Kremlin involvement, with such substances usually held only in state military stockpiles. On Thursday, the Russian embassy in London sent a sarcastic tweet, saying of Skripal: “He was actually a British spy, working for MI6.” Moscow has repeatedly denied it had anything to do with the attack, the same line used when Litvinenko was poisoned in 2006 with a radioactive cup of tea. A public inquiry a decade later concluded that the Kremlin had ordered the hit.