The Australian cricket team have been roasted on newspaper front pages – particularly in the UK – after the ball-tampering scandal. The UK tabloids pulled no punches, with the Mirror opting for the headline “Clown Under” next to a picture of a glum-looking Steve Smith. MIRROR SPORT: Clown Under #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/VLD2kvVd18 The Sun labelled the Australian team “Hypocrites” and was one of several UK papers to question whether the previous Ashes series (which Australia won) was a fair series. The UK Sunday Times led with the blunt headline “Cheats: Aussies admit ball tampering after being caught red-handed”. Sunday TIMES Sport: "CHEATS" #bbcpapers #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/bcZ5SAwqIQ The decision by cricketer Cameron Bancroft to hide the yellow tape that was used to tamper with the ball in his underwear gave free licence to headline writers. Enter the NT News front page, “Why I’ve got some sticky near my dicky”. OH DEAR ... TOMORROW’S FRONT PAGE pic.twitter.com/gnudHxk8zs Rupert Murdoch’s Australian tabloid accompanied the headline with a photograph of Bancroft opening the top of his pants and looking down. Very strong front pages in News Corp Australia newspapers today - sadly for a sporting moment we all wish never happened @newscorpaus #media #marketing pic.twitter.com/8K4oD1QaBC In the UK, the Guardian’s front page was simply “Not Cricket” while its sport front declared “It’s Time for Smith to go”. The Express went for just one word, “Shameful”. The Independent called it a “Cheating Scandal that ‘Beggars Belief’” and the Times said “There’s the Rub”. MAIL SPORT: Did they cheat in Ashes too? #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/rr9edk7LWG While every Australian newspaper splashed with the cricket ball-tampering scandal, reaction in South Africa, where the Test is being played, appeared muted. The sports broadcaster SuperSport, which provides the feed, can claim the scoop because it was its footage that revealed the scandal. Oscar doesn’t dress like this for nothing. He means business.Great work catching the Aussies cheating!#SandpaperGate #SAvsAUS pic.twitter.com/ILtvqQlupy But apart from the Johannesburg Sunday Times, which headlined its sports section with “Cheating Aussies hit a sticky patch”, and Business Day Sport (“Aussies Sent Packing”), there was a low-key reaction in the Sunday newspapers in South Africa. The South African Sunday Independent did give half a page to the incident with the headline “All-time low for these Aussies”. The Australian press was far more scathing on Monday. The Herald Sun ran the headline “Sack them all”, the Advertiser had “Smith falls on the sword” and the Canberra Times had “Cricket in Crisis”.