Mitchell Starc ignited an Australian fightback by uprooting Hashim Amla’s off stump, but a sublime knock from AB de Villiers left South Africa 20 runs ahead at stumps on day two of the second Test. The Proteas will resume at 263 for seven on Sunday morning in Port Elizabeth, with de Villiers unbeaten on 74. Australia had five-and-a-half overs with the second new ball late on Saturday but were unable to conjure a wicket. De Villiers was a class above his team-mates and the tourists’ disciplined bowling, counter-attacking when the game was in the balance to drag his side towards first-innings ascendancy. South Africa lost Hashim Amla, Dean Elgar, Faf du Plessis and Theunis de Bruyn in a post-tea collapse of 4-28 but de Villiers steadied in unique style, cracking 10 boundaries to bring up his half-century in 62 deliveries. “As a bowler you block out who you’re bowling to but he’s obviously an amazing player,” Mitchell Marsh said of De Villiers, having trapped Du Plessis and De Bruyn lbw. “He’s done it for so long and we need to find a way to nullify him as quickly as possible. That’s going to be a great challenge for us. Hopefully we can keep the lead under 50, that’d be great.” Amla, who scored a patient 56, suggested a lead of anything over 50 would be a big boost to his side’s search for a series-levelling win. “If we get to 50 or 70, those are leads that you can maybe hope to nab one or two wickets before they (draw level) ... AB is batting really well.” Nightwatchman Kagiso Rabada was the only wicket to fall in the opening 55 overs of the day, with Elgar and Amla digging in as the tourists started to reverse-swing the old ball. Elgar and Amla played and missed regularly, desperately dug out yorkers and scampered through for risky singles, adding just 43 runs in Saturday’s second session. Amla successfully reviewed twice before the 88-run stand was broken in emphatic fashion by Starc, whose pinpoint yorker beat the veteran’s defence and blew off stump out of the ground. It silenced the crowd, although umpires played a part in that earlier when they asked the St George’s Park brass band to stop playing. Quinton de Kock fell victim to a sensational delivery from Nathan Lyon that turned sharply and reared off the deck, beating the outside edge and kissing the top of off stump. Vernon Philander successfully held up an end, surviving 39 balls to finish 14 not out. Pat Cummins went close to dismissing De Villiers with a brute of a bouncer in the 75th over, at which point the gifted batsman was on 15 and the Proteas were 175 for four. The rearing delivery struck De Villiers on the arm and helmet then flew to Steve Smith at second slip. The Australia skipper opted to review because he thought the ball flicked the gloves. Replays confirmed that wasn’t the case, but they also revealed De Villiers went close to losing his balance and dislodging the bails. The second day passed off without major incident in what has been a heated series. Following David Warner and De Kock’s confrontation in Durban, Kigiso Rabada could miss the rest of the series after a charge of “inappropriate and deliberate physical contact. Rabada bumped into Smith during Friday’s play and will attend a hearing after today’s play.