Are you single? Do you struggle to find a partner? Is this specifically because nobody enjoys the life and work of Kanye West quite as much as you do? Well, fear no more, because the internet is about to fix your love life once and for all. In the next few weeks, a service called Yeezy Dating will launch. Yeezy Dating aims to not only match users by location, but by their favorite Kanye West tracks and albums. Yeezy Dating is genius, and other celebrity dating sites are bound to spring up in its wake. Here are five with the most promise. The tyranny of choice affects us all. From a simple interaction in a supermarket to the endless array of swipeable faces on Tinder, we often find ourselves paralysed by the infinite options that confront us. If you can identify with this, you need Ed Sheeran Dating. It’s a dating site exclusively for people who want to simplify their lives. Meet someone who has also only decided to like the work of Ed Sheeran because he’s popular. Get married because it seems like the right thing to do. Dance to the Ed Sheeran song that sounds like Let’s Get It On at your wedding. Live together without excitement or disappointment for several years, then die and play the Ed Sheeran song about flowers at your funeral. Easy peasy. On the surface, a dating site specifically for Taylor Swift fans seems redundant, because everyone quite likes Taylor Swift. But this is not a Taylor Swift dating site. Instead, Swift Dating is aimed right at the hearts of those who enjoy the work of Taylor Swift and Jonathan Swift in equal measure. Like lilting country-lite pop songs about the yearnings of adolescence and ironic deadpan 18th-century literature? Fantastic, you may enter. Only like one of those things? Then get out, you barbarian. Do you like to express an array of complicated furious emotions purely in impenetrable hieroglyphics, just like Cher does on Twitter all the time? You do? Then sign up for Cher Dating; a site that sends prospective matches a random selection of emojis and waits while they forlornly attempt to decode them. If they manage to somehow wrestle a scrap of meaning out of them? Congratulations, it’s true love. A dating site created for fans of experimental electronic minimalist composer Qasim Naqvi. Do you define yourself by your love of music that Pitchfork once called a study of ‘tone color and stillness’? Did the line ‘Naqvi’s detailed approach to the intricacies and indeterminacies of analog sound synthesis are exposed within the reiteration of similar highly rhythmic melodic motives and sonic gestures’ in a recent I Care If You Listen review make you really horny? It did? Then this is the site for you. Get in there and start shagging, you maniac. Note: this is not for anyone who primarily enjoys Qasim Naqvi’s participation in the acoustic jazz trio Dawn of Midi. This is for his solo work only. Do you enjoy being literally the only person in the entire world who’d ever think of finding a potential romantic partner on a dating site designed for Mel Gibson fans? Great, because this is for you. Less a functioning website and more a coldly infinite void where you can reflect on the poor decision-making skills that have come to define your miserable gravel-drag of a life, Mel Gibson Dating is an empty howl of despair that’s been deliberately deprived of any form of warmth or love whatsoever. Sign up now!