When someone asks what you do for a living, you probably don’t answer: “Sit in meetings all day.” And yet a look at the average business person’s schedule makes it easy to forget that meetings are a means of doing a job, rather than the substance of the job itself. One recent survey found that the average UK employee spends over 10 hours every week preparing for and attending meetings – around half of which they deem unnecessary. But, because other people occasionally know things and don’t serendipitously show up at our desks to impart that knowledge when we want them to, meetings are here to stay. Fortunately, there are ways to make them more productive, or at least not soul-sucking and awful. The biggest problem with meetings is that there are too many of themPacked schedules create a vicious cycle. People call meetings to force deadlines because they know you’re too busy with other meetings to get things done. They call meetings to share information, because you’re too busy with meetings to read your emails. Push back on this nonsense. The only reason to have a meeting is that something will change in the world as a result. What is your goal? Don’t have a meeting on Tuesday morning because you’ve always had a meeting on Tuesday morning. Make every meeting earn its place on the calendar. If you find yourself able to check your email in a meeting, that’s a good sign you don’t need to be there If you decide you need a meeting, create an agendaThis needs to spell out what everyone in the room should be doing with every minute they are there. If you’re not sure what someone would contribute for a portion of the meeting, that’s a good sign they don’t need to come. Likewise, if you find yourself able to check your email in a meeting, that’s a good sign you don’t need to be there either. Change your mindset. Maybe being invited to a meeting doesn’t mean you’re important. It might mean people think you have nothing better to do. Build in time to socialiseThis sounds counterintuitive for efficiency, but if the only reason to have a meeting is to do something as a group that you couldn’t do alone, then everyone needs to trust each other. Trust is built through relaxed interaction. A Harvard University project, intended to help schools make the most of test result data but which led to a book by the researchers on how to run meetings, found that the most effective meetings included a specific time at the beginning for everyone to have an informal chat. This served two purposes: team members got to know each other, and they got their socialising out of the way before the meeting started, so it didn’t bleed into everything else. Analyse how it wentThat same Harvard study also found that effective meetings featured a few minutes at the end when the team asked what could have gone better. This reflection can, by itself, improve meetings over time. People agree that the meeting meandered. They decide to appoint a time keeper. Magically, the next meeting stays on track. Put some down time in your diary Even if you say “yes” to fewer meetings, you can still wind up with days that are packed. The trouble with this scenario is that if one meeting runs over, the rest fall like dominoes. Everything starts late, wasting everyone’s time. A better approach is to build white space into your schedule. Not only can you get caught up, but you can also manage your energy. Cal Henderson, CTO of Slack, describes his schedule like this: “At 2:30, I take a break. I like a few breathers throughout the day – I find having a couple of half-hour breaks is much less stressful than having constant, back-to-back meetings.” Did those breaks lengthen the day? Hardly. In Henderson’s non-meeting space he got enough done that he was able to leave the office at 5pm. With a smarter approach to meetings, maybe you can too. Laura Vanderkam is the author of What the Most Successful People Do Before Breakfast.