Donald Trump’s proposed tariffs on steel and aluminium imports are a “black day” for the world, according to the chief executive of BHP. Andrew Mackenzie’s comments on Tuesday came as reports suggested Trump would meet American steel and aluminium users at the White House later this week to hear their concerns about proposed tariffs of 25% on imported steel and 10% on aluminium. The meeting organised by White House economics adviser Gary Cohn is part of a Republican rearguard action against the president’s plan, which House speaker Paul Ryan has called “extremely worrying”. The Republican pushback, which was also supported by business groups who called the tariffs a tax on the middle class, helped shares in the Asia Pacific recover on Tuesday after slumping in the wake of Trump’s surprise announcement. Analysts said investor anxiety about a trade war had eased, sending MSCI’s broadest index of Asia-Pacific shares outside Japan up by 1.3%. The Nikkei jumped 2.3%, a day after it hit a five-month low. Mackenzie, who heads world’s largest mining company, said it was too early to tell how the tariffs would affect BHP, but he told a conference in Sydney he was concerned the restrictions could damage the current optimism towards free trade. “Outside of the US the sense that I have at the moment is that people are re-embracing free trade after a bit of a wobble – partly driven by the result of several elections,” he said. “I don’t see that changing anytime soon but I am worried about this sort of sentiment shift, that people all around the world might suddenly say free trade is not good for the world, and that would be particularly bad for a trading company like BHP and a trading nation like Australia.” Despite the uncertainty created by the tariffs, the BHP boss still believes the global economy is in its best shape in eight years. “In spite of recent moves made by the United States to impose tariffs on steel and aluminium products - a black day for the world and business - elsewhere we do observe buoyant economic conditions underpinned by the growth of free trade outside the US,” Mackenzie said. “We see the world economy in probably the strongest shape it has been since 2010.” Mackenzie said free trade was the “lifeblood and promoter of health” of the global economy, and he expects it to flourish despite the recent developments in the US. “We [BHP] will live and die by what happens with free trade,” he said. “We will never hide or seek to hide behind trade barriers to shield ourselves from our lack of competitiveness.”