Of the 27-man squad selected for the friendlies against the Netherlands and Italy, who should make the final 23 for the World Cup finals in Russia? Jordan Pickford Excellent in Amsterdam, and his distribution may establish him as first-choice at the finals. Yes Jack Butland Pickford’s closest challenger and still a player of such promise but may end up as a back-up. Yes Joe Hart England’s most capped player will surely revert to his role at the 2010 finals as third-choice. Yes Nick Pope His push came late at Burnley but the 25-year-old was always an outsider. No Joe Gomez Gareth Southgate spies real promise in the versatile defender, despite an ankle injury limiting him to 10 minutes across both games. Yes Alfie Mawson Will have benefited from involvement with the seniors over the past week but only an outside chance of travelling. No Kyle Walker An asset at right wing-back but now also in central defence. A key player in Russia. Yes Danny Rose Patchy form at club level and not quite the certainty he once was. But a natural wing-back with tournament experience. Yes John Stones Southgate’s preference in the middle of the back three, even if he is guilty of over-confidence at times. Yes Ryan Bertrand A back problem denied him involvement but he has been a regular under this regime. Yes James Tarkowski Shaky on debut and likely to be edged out in the final reckoning by more experienced campaigners. No Harry Maguire Impressed against the Dutch and fits the system. Solid defensively and comfortable in possession. Yes Kieran Trippier His delivery is his primary asset and his combinations with Walker could be a feature of England’s tournament. Yes Ashley Young Experienced, adept on both flanks and could lean on that versatility to get the nod. Yes Jake Livermore England are short of central options but the West Bromwich Albion midfielder was unused and is slipping further down the pecking order. No Lewis Cook Now capped and a player with a huge future in the game who might gain long-term benefit for experiencing the finals in Russia. In the balance Eric Dier His versatility makes him a certainty, and he will surely begin against Tunisia in Volgograd. The only question is where. Yes Adam Lallana One Premier League start to his name this season but a source of creativity on whom England will lean. Yes Jack Wilshere Tendinopathy has ruled him out in the past. Given that knee condition flares up regularly, can Southgate risk him at a tournament? No Dele Alli Southgate opted against starting him in these fixtures but his link up with Kane remains an asset. Yes Jesse Lingard Thriving at this level having made a fine impression in both games. Now challenging Alli for a starting berth. Yes Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain Offered a chance centrally having impressed at Liverpool and suits the style Southgate is promoting. Yes Jordan Henderson Thrived as a midfield pivot in Amsterdam and his leadership qualities have earned praise from the management. Yes Raheem Sterling Mightily impressive in both games and that 20-game scoring drought will surely not be prolonged for much longer. Yes Danny Welbeck A fringe player at Arsenal with 15 international goals to his name but may be the odd one out. In the balance Marcus Rashford So sprightly last week, and can operate wide or centrally. His pace and opportunism make him an asset. Yes Jamie Vardy Failed to touch the ball in Amsterdam but finished emphatically at Wembley. A powerful option from start or bench. Yes Harry Kane, recovering from an ankle problem, will lead England’s line while Phil Jones is a relatively experienced option at centre-half. Gary Cahill and Michael Keane would need strong finishes to the season while Ruben Loftus-Cheek and Harry Winks must prove their fitness.