Just before 7am on a slightly chilly morning, Anthony Stephan House walked on to the front porch of his home in north-east Austin and picked up a package. It exploded, killing the 39-year-old, who was getting ready to take his eight-year-old daughter to school. Police quickly developed theories. Perhaps the intended target was a nearby drug dealer and the attacker got the wrong address. Maybe House was blown up by a device he made himself. “Based on what we know right now, we have no reason to believe this is anything beyond an isolated incident that took place at this residence and in no way this is linked to a terroristic attack,” Brian Manley, the interim police chief in the Texan capital city, told reporters on 2 March, the day of House’s death. This proved horribly wrong. Over 19 days, five more bombs would detonate and another device was made safe. Austin would soon discover it was in the grip of a serial bomber whose actions were as frightening as they were mystifying. The apparently random terror campaign drew comparisons with one of the most notorious American criminals of the last century, the Unabomber. Ted Kaczynski killed three people and injured 23 over a period of 17 years, though. Mark Conditt, an unemployed 23-year-old from a Christian family in the quiet, conservative suburb of Pflugerville, worked on a more accelerated timeline. The second package bomb blew up in the kitchen of an east Austin home on 12 March, killing Draylen Mason, 17, a popular student and gifted musician. His mother was seriously hurt. Later that morning, in another residential neighbourhood a couple of miles away, a 75-year-old visiting her mother’s home, Esperanza Herrera, was critically injured when she picked up a package that exploded. Whatever his motive is, he’s certainly put fear into the city of Austin An everyday activity in the internet shopping era, especially – collecting a cardboard box left on a doorstep – was now cause for anxiety. The timing was striking: residents in mundane suburbs targeted as, in the shadow of downtown’s glassy, sky-scraping new apartment blocks and offices, thousands of visitors descended on the city for the annual South by Southwest festival, a symbol of Austin’s swift evolution from a quiet university town into an internationally renowned destination for young, tech-minded liberals. The danger amplified long-standing inequities. Amid community anger, police apologized for implying that House might have killed himself. Austin has a reputation as America’s most politically progressive big city away from the east and west coasts, a quirky cultural oasis deep in the heart of Republican Texas. But, perhaps less obvious to outsiders, it has never escaped the familiar scourges of entrenched racism and police brutality scandals. Two days after the first bomb, Traffic Stop, an HBO documentary about the violent 2015 arrest of a black Austin school teacher, was in contention for an Oscar at the Academy Awards. The locations and identities of the bomb victims raised the possibility of a racial motive. The two who died were African American, while Herrera is Hispanic. “We lost two very prominent and talented people in our community,” Nelson Linder, the president of the local branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), told the Guardian. All three explosions were east of Interstate 35, the north-south freeway that slices through downtown and has long acted as a de facto segregation line between wealthy, mainly white west Austin and the less prosperous, though now gentrifying, largely black and Hispanic east side; a legacy of structural racism designed by city leaders in the 1920s. The authorities declined to define the attacks as terrorism, attracting criticism from those who detected a double standard based on the likely skin color of the perpetrator. Donald Trump, in the past quick to seize on potentially Islamic State-inspired attacks to advance his immigration agenda, merely said the suspect was “very sick”. The next bomb deepened the mystery. On the evening of 18 March, two twentysomething white men, walking through an affluent, mainly white part of south-west Austin, were badly injured. Not by a package, but from a bomb set off in the dark by a tripwire in the street. Different area, different races, different type of device. “Whatever his motive is, he’s certainly put fear into the city of Austin,” local resident Lynn Hanson said the next day, out for a walk along a leafy route in Travis Country on a splendidly sunny afternoon. Steps from where she stood the road was blocked by a police barricade and federal agents in head-to-toe white forensics suits gathered evidence. “It’s certainly a sad state of affairs that you don’t even feel like you can walk down your own street without worrying,” Hanson said. “It’s much more devastating than using a gun, to me, it just seems like the next level up. You kind of get used to weapons.” The authorities appeared baffled, but then another tactical shift prompted mistakes that gave vital clues. At about 12:30am on 20 March a package bomb went off on a conveyor belt at a FedEx warehouse. Then an unexploded package was found at another FedEx facility. CCTV footage showed they had been dropped off at a store in Austin by a man wearing pink gloves, a baseball cap and a blond wig. The suspect had parked within view of a surveillance camera, a Texas politician told CNN, allowing police to read his license plate and then to pinpoint the location of his cellphone. The general public knew no details of his being tracked, although Conditt may have suspected the authorities were closing in. Then, in the early hours of 21 March, a Swat team hunted Conditt down in his car outside a hotel in the Austin suburb of Round Rock. As an officer fired a shot, the suspect deployed his last bomb inside the vehicle, and claimed the final casualty in his short but horrific reign of terror: himself.   