Raised in Wales, Joanna Scanlan, 56, became an actor in her mid-30s. Her TV work includes the comedy series The Thick Of It, Rev and No Offence, and she was nominated for a Bafta for Getting On, an NHS comedy that she co-wrote and starred in. Her film roles include Notes On A Scandal, In The Loop and Testament Of Youth. Most recently, she starred in the BBC drama Requiem, which is out now on DVD. She is married and lives in London. When were you happiest?Swimming down the Thames on a full moon night 10 years ago. It was dangerous, but extremely joyful. What is your greatest fear?Being buried alive – I never got over seeing The Vanishing. What is the trait you most deplore in others?The ability to say no. I think I am envious. What was your most embarrassing moment?Leaking while having a period on to a beautiful white dining chair. The hostess whipped it away and scrubbed it in the kitchen. It was just awful. What is your most treasured possession?My prescription goggles. I would be lost without them. What is your wallpaper?The river at the bottom of our garden in Wales. What do you most dislike about your appearance?Everything. What is your most unappealing habit?Changing my mind. Which living person do you most despise, and why?All the people, including myself, who lack simple courtesies and kindnesses. It makes life intolerable. Who would play you in the film of your life?A Nick Park claymation. What did you want to be when you were growing up?An actor or a nun. What is your guiltiest pleasure?Staying in bed all day and reading. To whom would you most like to say sorry, and why?To my Latin teacher – I was very naughty. What was the best kiss of your life? Certainly not my first, which I discovered had been the result of a bet. I was 13. What is the worst job you’ve done? At the BBC, in the old days, a piece of paper was sent to various households for them to report on what they’d watched that week. In my early 20s, I collated the data. It was deeply boring. What has been your biggest disappointment?Never getting back to a size 12. If you could go back in time, where would you go?Bankside around 1492, to free the bears from bear-baiting. When did you last cry, and why?The plastics episode of Blue Planet. How often do you have sex?Surprisingly often. I didn’t have much sex when I was young. I seem to be having a lot more now I am older. What do you consider your greatest achievement?Having someone to love. What has been your closest brush with the law?Driving Tilda Swinton’s car without insurance when I was about 25. We both had to go to court. What song would you like played at your funeral?Move On Up.