A gendarme hailed as a national hero after he volunteered to take the place of a female hostage being held by a terrorist gunman has been named as Lt Col Arnaud Beltrame. The 44-year-old officer is fighting for his life in hospital after he was shot several times by the suspected Islamist extremist who killed three people and injured 16 others before being killed by French special forces. Beltrame, described by French president Emmanuel Macron as a “credit to our country” and a hero who had “saved lives”, played a vital role in the four-hour hostage drama. After gunman Redouane Lakdim walked into the Super U supermarket in Trèbes near Carcassonne on Friday morning and killed a member of staff and a customer, Beltrame, a local gendarme, offered to swap places with one of the hostages. He did so knowing that France’s forces of law and order have been specifically targeted by suspected terrorists at least 10 times since the attacks on Charlie Hebdo newspaper in January 2015. Beltrame entered the supermarket leaving his mobile telephone line open enabling French police, military and special forces that had surrounded the store to hear what was going on inside. When shots were heard, the special forces stormed the supermarket, killing Lakdim. François Molins, the French public prosecutor, said Beltrame had “put his life in peril when he chose to take the place of a hostage”. He added that the gunman had shot the gendarme “several times” leaving him critically injured. Beltrame was evacuated from the scene by helicopter. Beltrame, originally from Morbihan in Brittany, a senior member of the local Aude gendarmerie, was the commanding officer of the first detachment to arrive at the supermarket soon after 11am, when the attacker entered the store. According to the local newspaper, La Dépêche du Midi, in December 2017, Beltrame had organised a joint exercise with the local fire brigade simulating a terror attack on a supermarket in Carcassonne. Gérard Collomb, France’s interior minister, saluted “the courage of this lieutenant-colonel, who has been seriously injured, and who substituted himself for a hostage that the terrorist was holding”. Le preneur d’otages a été abattu par nos forces.Un lieutenant-colonel de @Gendarmerie s’est substitué à l’un des otages. Il est grièvement blessé. Son héroïsme et son courage forcent notre respect. pic.twitter.com/plbUmhYxfw Collomb told a press conference near the scene: “It was an act of heroism of a sort that is customary for our gendarmes and police, who commit themselves to the service of the nation in order to protect the safety and security of our fellow citizens.” Politicians and members of the public took to social media to praise the gendarme’s “exceptional courage” and “remarkable devotion to duty”. France’s forces of law and order have repeatedly been singled out by Islamic extremists in the past three years since a state of emergency was introduced in January 2015 after the attack on Charlie Hebdo newspaper and a Jewish supermarket in Paris. January 2015: The Kouachi brothers, who gunned down 11 people at Charlie Hebdo magazine in Paris, shot a police officer in the head as they fled the scene. A day later, 25-year-old trainee police officer Clarissa Jean-Philippe was gunned down by Amédy Coulibaly who killed four people and took hostages at the Hyper Cacher Jewish supermarket in Paris before being killed in a shootout with police. February 2015: a man with a knife attacked a group of soldiers guarding a Jewish community centre in Nice. January 2016: A man rammed his car twice into four soldiers protecting a mosque in Valence. Jihad propaganda images were found on his computer. A few days later, a man wearing a fake explosive belt attacked police officers in the Goutte d’Or district of Paris with a meat cleaver while shouting Allahu Akbar. He was shot dead by police. June 2016: a police officer and his partner, a police secretary, were stabbed to death at their home on the outskirts of Paris in front of their three-year-old son. Their attacker, Larossi Abballa, had been convicted of terrorist links in 2013. He was killed in a shootout with police. Islamic State claimed responsibility. 3 February 2017: a man wielding a machete in each hand attacked patrolling soldiers in the Carrousel du Louvre, shouting Allahu Akbar. The suspect, a 29-year-old Egyptian was shot and wounded. 18 March 2017: a man claiming he was “ready to die for Allah” tried to grab a gun from a soldier patrolling Orly airport before being shot dead. He had earlier shot and injured a police officer in a northern Paris suburb. 20 April 2017: Police officer Xavier Jugelé was killed while out on patrol on the Champs-Elysées. He was eating a sandwich in his police van, when Karim Cheurfi shot him in the head. 6 June 2017: An Algerian Islamist attacked a police officer with a hammer in the street in front of Notre-Dame cathedral. The man who claimed to be a “soldier of the caliphate” of IS was shot by a second police officer. 19 June 2017: A man rammed his car into a police vehicle. After he was shot dead, explosives, an assault rifle and handguns were reportedly found in his car. 9 August 2017: A man rammed his car into soldiers near their barracks at Levallois-Perret, a Paris suburb. He was tracked to a nearby motorway and arrested after a shootout. 