Schalke needed an 86th-minute own goal from Robin Knoche to win 1-0 at VfL Wolfsburg on Saturday, tightening their grip on second place and delaying title celebrations for Bayern Munich by at least one matchday. At the other end of the table the first Bundesliga relegation for the league ever-presents Hamburg SV edged closer, after they lost 2-1 at home against Hertha Berlin to stay anchored in 17th place. The Schalke substitute Breel Embolo cut back into the box and Knoche deflected the ball into his own net for the game’s only goal as the visitors moved up to 49 points with seven games left. Ten minutes earlier Schalke’s keeper Ralf Fährmann had saved a penalty to keep them in the game. Bayern, top on 66 points, face RB Leipzig on Sunday but will have to put the champagne on ice for at least two weeks because of the league’s break for international matches as, theoretically, they can still be caught. Third-placed Borussia Dortmund, on 45, host Hanover 96 on Sunday. Hamburg, the only club to have played in the Bundesliga every season since the league’s creation in 1963, are seven points away from the relegation play-off spot occupied by Mainz 05, with just seven games left. They have won only four Bundesliga games all season. Everything looked to be going well for the former European champions and their new coach, Christian Titz, when Douglas Santos put them ahead in the 25th minute. But Hertha struck twice in seven minutes in the second half, with goals from Valentino Lazaro and Salomon Kalou, to snatch the three points. Eintracht Frankfurt boosted their chances of a top-four finish – and Champions League action next season – with a 3-0 victory over Mainz to climb to fourth on 45 points. In La Liga Valencia continued their impressive form by beating Alavés 3-1 at home on Saturday to climb above Real Madrid into third in the standings and take another step towards returning to the Champions League. The Spain international Rodrigo Moreno put Marcelino’s side ahead in the 19th minute by playing a smart one-two off his strike partner, Simone Zaza, and sliding the ball home from close range. The Italian Zaza turned in a free-kick from Daniel Parejo to consolidate his side’s lead in the 34th minute, although Rubén Sobrino gave Alavés a foothold in the game by getting a goal back four minutes into the second half. Hopes of a comeback from the Basque side were short-lived, however, as the defender Víctor Laguardia diverted a cross into his own net five minutes later. Valencia are third in the standings after 29 games, with 59 points, two above Real who host Girona on Sunday, and 14 clear of fifth-placed Sevilla, who go to Leganés. Also on Saturday relegation-fighting Deportivo La Coruña drew 1-1 at home to their fellow strugglers Las Palmas, leaving the two sides seven and six points adrift of safety respectively. Getafe came from behind to win 2-1 at Real Sociedad, prompting an angry reaction from supporters at a soaking wet Anoeta Stadium and piling more pressure on the beleaguered coach, Eusebio Sacristán, whose side are 14th in the standings and have lost four of their last six games in all competitions.