It is hard to believe, given the wellspring of queer-centric entertainment we’ve been graced with over the last few years, that Alan Cumming’s character in the new police procedural Instinct is the first openly gay lead of an American broadcast drama, ever. Even with Oscar plaudits for Moonlight and Call Me by Your Name, with shows like Transparent, Looking and reboots of Will & Grace and Queer Eye, progress has remained slow in the mainstream. In truth, the vacancy has gone pretty much unnoticed. One can find quality television in so many places that the cautious incrementalism with which the major US networks approach inclusion and diversity has become more or less a moot point. But still, since broadcast television is in many ways a reflection of what Instinct showrunner Michael Rauch refers to as “corporate apprehension”, Cumming’s character is certainly a step forward. In it he plays Dylan Reinhardt, a brilliant and quick-witted CIA operative-turned-college professor who studies abnormal behavior and published a Gladwellian best-seller called Freaks, about psychopaths, murderers and others on the fringes of society. One imagines Reinhardt’s own experience as a gay man allowed him to empathize with his subject’s sense of isolation, but no such reckoning is revealed. In what’s either a refreshing surprise or a kind of equivocation, his sexuality is mostly irrelevant, surfacing only in brief, domestic scenes with his husband Andy or offhand remarks to Lizzie, the intrepid cop with whom Dylan partners up to solve various heinous crimes in New York City. On one hand, it’s nice to see a queer character on TV whose sexual preference doesn’t define them. After all, Instinct (adapted from James Patterson’s book Murder Games) is a standard law enforcement procedural and thus most of the storylines involve the mechanisms of crime-solving and psychology-probing. On the other, the fact that Reinhardt’s sexuality bears so imperceptibly on the show will inevitably fan the flames of those who accuse CBS of fashioning the character in a way that’s conservative and palatable to its audience. With that, Instinct is in a bit of a catch-22, in that the show seems to want to pat itself on the back for featuring the first gay network lead while also making the character’s sexuality subordinate, and justifiably so, to his other qualities and responsibilities. “While I hope that some viewers do talk about Dylan’s sexuality, I’d like him to be judged by his virtues, flaws and quirks, not by who he loves,” wrote Rauch in a guest column for the Hollywood Reporter. “The success of every good TV show is built on the strength of the characters, and how dimensional and relatable they are.” Thanks to Alan Cumming, who brings to the character boundless personality and panache, Reinhardt is a new kind of TV sleuth: he invokes Lady Gaga in a college lecture, wears a colorful rotation of sweater vests, and approaches the job with cheerful, professorial determination. Outright mentions of his sexuality, though, are sparse, at least in the show’s first three episodes. “Most times when we see gay characters on American TV, their gayness is the prime thing,” Cumming, a gay man himself, told THR. “And [being gay] is also the fourth or fifth most interesting thing about this character.” As a result, Reinhardt’s sexuality seems to matter more in network television’s greater, institutional firmament than it does in the actual show. Depending on how you look at it, this is either progress or passivity. But with visibility, of course, comes the question of its varying gradients. Gay people have been straining to be seen and, now that we’re finally in front of the camera, rightfully want to be seen in totality. Therefore, films like Call Me by Your Name and Love, Simon have fielded criticisms of sanitization, as members of the LGBT community regard their portrayals of gay men and gay romance to be too conservative, drawn with an eye toward what straight audiences will stomach. And naturally, more flamboyant depictions of homosexuality run the risk of being caricature-like and borderline farcical, evincing a rather thin and stereotypical notion of queerness. Somewhere in the middle of these poles is Cumming’s Reinhardt, who seems perfectly at ease with himself, even if questions of identity don’t really surface. But the fact remains that, for so long, Cumming’s character would have been a set piece in a crime show just like this one, consigned to the mostly ancillary, thankless task of delivering slick punchlines once or twice an episode. Without question, Cumming belongs here, at center stage, using cartomancy to solve crimes and chafing at feckless coroners. In that, there’s something worth celebrating.