A report this week found that young adults who return to the family home can have a negative impact on their parents’ quality of life. The London School of Economics study found that about a quarter of young adults in the UK now live with their parents – the highest number since records began in 1996 – as a consequence of spiralling housing costs and poor job security. We talked to three families affected by the “boomerang” generation about life in household with young adults. When the Cutlers’ children finally left home for university, Jim first, then his sister Jessica, they had two child-free years. Then their children returned, one by one, and they look likely to remain at home for the foreseeable future. “I felt very bereft when they went,” says Heather, an artist. “It felt very strange. It felt like there was a big hole. You have to think of a whole new role for yourself and I didn’t have one. “At the same time it was good for me and Philip. Our relationship went back to how it had been pre-children. They take so much of your thinking time and energy, and you often don’t have time to talk to each other about anything other than them. “So that was nice. You make an effort. You think, well, let’s go and do this, and let’s go and do that, because you’ve not got to think about anyone else. It definitely has its advantages.” Her husband, a university technician, agrees, saying: “I remember this feeling – a kind of freedom. Bloody hell – we can do anything; we can go anywhere; we don’t have to think about anybody but ourselves.” Then Jim, 24, returned home after living on his own for a year at the end of his studies at Norwich University of the Arts. Last year he was followed by Jessica, 22, who has set up her own textiles business after studying weaving at Manchester School of Art. “I would prefer it for them not to have had to come back,” says Heather. “I would have loved them to get great jobs where they could live enjoyable lives and not struggle. That would be my ideal for them. The reality isn’t like that, is it?” She enjoys their company, but admits it is easy to regress. “You just slip right back into being a mum and a dad. As independent as they’ve been, when they come home they very easily slip back into being looked after. “I’ve gone backwards, to spending most of my time cleaning and tidying up. There’s less time for myself. I can find myself getting pissed off sometimes at my situation. But I don’t think it’s easy for them either. “In lots of ways it’s quite nice. It’s like when they were teenagers, except it’s not as stressful because they’re a lot more independent. It’s a bit like having lodgers, but nice ones that you really like. “The thought of them living with me for another five or six years – I don’t think I could face it. It would be too much, but I’m quite happy to be a stopgap.” “My wife was more emotional than I was about them going [to university],” says Derek, of his daughters Georgia, 23, and Abbie, 21. Georgia has been back almost two years after completing a philosophy and literature degree at University of Warwick. Abbie, who is about to complete a digital media course at the University of Hertfordshire, is expected to move home in a matter of weeks. “Because of the climate, in my own mind I knew they would have to come back,” says their father. “Georgia really wanted to branch out on her own, but she realised it wasn’t going to be easy. So we started to prepare for her return. “We did a loft conversion. We tried to reorganise the house and move things about so she has her own space and her independence.” Georgia lives rent-free and is saving from her job as a paralegal until she has enough for a deposit. She admits she found it hard to lose her independence once university finished and was sometimes irritable with her family. “Coming from having that freedom, thinking you are really grown up, to be in the family unit again was a bit frustrating,” she says. “My wife loves to have them back,” says Derek. “For her it’s easy. She wants them home. She would not mind if they were here when they were 50 or 60. She’d like them never to leave. “I want them to be here, but I don’t want them to be in a position where they feel they have to be here as they don’t have any alternative.” Derek and Colette, who also have a 12-year-old son, Nathan, are careful to respect Georgia’s space and independence. “I don’t want to be one of those families that says: ‘This is not a hotel.’ You have to be mindful of the way she’s feeling. “I can be very annoying. All daughters find their dads annoying. I’ve learned to check myself. There are times when you may have a word or two and you have to accept that. “But you’ve got to stop yourself from thinking: ‘Oh, you’re going out wearing that?’ They are adults, they’re working, and it’s not really appropriate to think like that. They are their own person.” Pam and Keith’s daughter, Imogen, moved back two years ago after a geography degree at University of Leeds. The 24-year-old is back in her childhood bedroom – and with her own sitting room for additional privacy. She’s happy with her parents, but sometimes worries when she invites friends back that she’s encroaching on their space. “It was quite hard to see her go [to university],” says her mother, “ but I was very hopeful. I knew university was a great step for her. It was quite sad to see her come back because she was not finding the promise of those jobs.” Pam and Keith, now both retired, enjoyed a new freedom when their daughter left home. “We seemed to go out more. It was like an independence from her – an independence from the obligation of parenthood. It felt pretty good,” says Pam. We’ve negotiated it pretty well. I have to remind myself to stop being a mother, to stop nagging her Now Imogen is back, they all get on well, but to some extent have returned to the old family dynamic – she tells them if she’s going out, her mum likes her to get a taxi home after a night out. “There’s that obligation on both sides,” says Pam. Pam did not recognise her own experience in the LSE study. “I don’t think we resent her being back. I don’t think we’ve changed things particularly. When she’s here she has to be respectful, and we have to be respectful of her. I feel sorry for younger people who have to stay at home. “My generation were lucky. By the time I was her age I had got a flat and lived with friends. I feel she’s not getting the lifestyle we had when we were younger. “We’ve negotiated it pretty well. I have to remind myself to stop being a mother, to stop nagging her. I would love her to be in a position to move out and get a flat and move on with her life in a year or two. If she was still with us at 30, we would be rather sad.” The clinical psychologist Linda Blair recommends that parents draw up a contract with their adult children and agree terms as one might do with a lodger. In reality, the contract may be flexible, but it is important to treat your offspring as an independent adult, discussing how long they think they will stay and how much they might be able to afford to contribute to household costs. Blair says it is about showing you respect and trust them to be independent, and resisting the instinct to try to fix everything for them. You do not want the returning child to get too comfortable back in the family home because it is in everyone’s interests that they grow up and move on. While they are at home they have to respect the house rules – just because they are paying rent does not mean they can play loud music at 3am. But their room is private – parents should not go in to tidy up or interfere. Let them cook their own meals and clean their own clothes. “Treat them as lodgers with love.” Parents in turn should make sure they continue to invest in their own relationship. (“Reinstate the date,” says Blair.) They may also need to protect younger siblings who are still living at home who may feel jealous of the returning child and the attention they command. When the so-called “boomerang” trend began, Blair says she was concerned that an entire generation would be infantilised, but now she thinks they are just growing up a bit more slowly and besides, there are bonuses. “It’s a chance to get to know your kid better than you would have done. It’s also a chance for them to enrich their relationships with their siblings,” she says. Linda Blair’s latest book is called Siblings: a parenting guide to managing sibling rivalry and raising happy children