The world’s first David Bowie statue is to be unveiled on Sunday in the unlikely location of Aylesbury, Buckinghamshire, where the singer debuted Hunky Dory. Only time will tell whether sculptor Andrew Sinclair’s Earthly Messenger statue will prove a Ziggy smash or Tin Machine dud, although historically, such well-meaning effigies have been rather hit and miss with fans. With this in mind, we look at some of the best – and worst – rock star memorials of all time. You wouldn’t think a bronze statue could cause hysteria, but Andrea Lugar’s first sculpture of the King had to be moved indoors to stop fans tearing off its tassels and guitar strings. Since the artist replaced it in 1997 with a likeness of the 50s Elvis, the public have been kept at a safe distance by a fence. This 2011 plaster and resin monstrosity – honouring the late King of Pop’s 1999 visit to Fulham’s Craven Cottage ground – was universally unloved. One critic hailed “a spectacularly bad piece of kitsch”. Fans said it made the club a “laughing stock”. Unrepentant chairman (and Jacko fan/friend) Mohamed Al Fayed told them to “go to hell” – or worse, to support Chelsea – but the club’s subsequent owners dispatched the thing to a museum. John Swindells’ otherwise respectful 2006 bronze artwork of the rock-guitar god – who performed at the Isle of Wight festival in 1970 shortly before his death – managed to outrage the sleepy Victorian island. “I had to look him up,” resident Jean Boulton raged. “By all accounts he was a drug user and not the sort of person we should be celebrating here.” Although adored by many fans, Ralph Helmick’s depiction of the late blues guitarist (looking more like Kung Fu TV star David Carradine) has been beset by problems. Because the broad-brimmed hat blocked sunlight from its face, it was moved to a riverside location, where it proves an obstacle to joggers, and has been vandalised twice this year. Thirty years after Paul Weller reflected on his hometown in the Jam’s A Town Called Malice, artist Richard Heys returned the, er, honour with three pieces of giant wooden abstract art inspired by the trio. Not all fans were enamoured. “It’s just three logs,” said one, although drummer Rick Buckler declared: “It looks great. Much better than a statue of us.” A lifesize John Lennon has greeted visitors to the replica Cavern Club on Mathew Street for years, but since 2015, Andy Edwards’s 1.2-tonne sculpture of the entire Fab Four has proved more popular with fans who can now have a photo taken “with the Beatles”. Hull’s initial memorial to the city’s municipal gardener-turned-Bowie’s-Spiders-From-Mars-guitarist – the Mick Ronson Café and Stage in Queen’s Gardens – was so reviled that fans campaigned for a replacement. Since 2017, Hull College student Janis Skodins’ stunning design in steel has provided a more fitting tribute than a dilapidated greasy spoon. Scott Eaton’s statue of the singer, who died in 2011, is among a select few that seems to meet with universal approval. Fans travelled from as far away as Hawaii to witness the 2014 unveiling of the lifesize sculpture on what would have been the vocalist’s 31st birthday. Her father, Mitch Winehouse, described the effigy as “beautiful”. The late, legendary gravel-voiced bluesy rocker once sang that her hometown – where she was cruelly mocked in her youth – was “the worst place that I’ve ever found”. It’s hard to decide whether Doug Clark’s depiction of her as a five-headed bronze is a respectful posthumous olive branch, or somehow compounds the ignominy.