Steve Smith has been has been handed a one-match ban, fined 100% of his match fee by the ICC and has stood down as Australia captain for the remainder of the third Test against South Africa after admitting his team deliberately tampered with the ball. The vice captain David Warner has also stood down while Cameron Bancroft has been fined 75% of his match fee and handed three demerit points. Smith accepted the ICC charge of serious conduct that is contrary to the spirit of the game and the ban. Bancroft pleaded guilty to the breaching level two of the ICC code of conduct. The ICC’s chief executive, David Richardson, said: “The decision made by the leadership group of the Australian team to act in this way is clearly contrary to the spirit of the game, risks causing significant damage to the integrity of the match, the players and the sport itself and is therefore ‘serious’ in nature. As captain, Steve Smith must take full responsibility for the actions of his players and it is appropriate that he be suspended. “The game needs to have a hard look at itself. In recent weeks we have seen incidents of ugly sledging, send-offs, dissent against umpires’ decisions, a walk-off, ball tampering and some ordinary off-field behaviour.” Both Smith, Warner and Bancroft will continue to play in the rest of the third Test, but wicketkeeper Tim Paine will act as captain for the remaining two days of play. “This Test match needs to proceed, and in the interim we will continue to investigate this matter with the urgency that it demands,” Cricket Australia’s CEO James Sutherland said on Sunday. “As I said earlier today, Cricket Australia and Australian cricket fans expect certain standards of conduct from cricketers representing our country, and on this occasion these standards have not been met. All Australians, like us, want answers and we will keep you updated on our findings, as a matter of priority.” Cricket Australia’s head of integrity, Iain Roy, was rushed onto a plane to South Africa to gather more information on the incident before any more permanent sanctions are imposed. For some though, with two days of play remaining, it was a weak gesture and Smith should have already paid a heftier price. Politicians, including the prime minister Malcolm Turnbull, former cricketers and other sportspeople all weighed in on Australia’s day of shame. News bulletins led with the revelation, commentators were hastily assembled in front of cameras and social media went into meltdown. Many demanded Smith’s head be served up on a platter. Turnbull stopped short of endorsing those calls, but said he was “shocked and disappointed” at the captain’s behaviour. The Australian Sports Commission – the government body that oversees and funds the nation’s sporting organisations –backed the immediate removal of Smith and any other members of the leadership group or coaching staff who had prior awareness of the plan. The former Australia skipper, Michael Clarke, said his successor’s actions were “disgraceful” and “premeditated … blatant” cheating. The veteran broadcaster Jim Maxwell was close to tears on air as he labelled the incident “so blatant and so stupid, immature, naive ... it was hugely disappointing”. Former Test player Simon Katich said Smith and coach Darren Lehmann had no option but to resign or be sacked, and Adam Gilchrist was “sad, shocked, stunned” at the news. Condemnation was not restricted to disappointed Australians either; the former England captain, Michael Vaughan, said Smith’s position was now untenable while Kevin Pietersen called for the leadership group, along with Lehmann, to go. Bill Peever, CA’s chairman, said the board fully supported the impending investigation into events in Cape Town. “We regard this as a matter of the utmost seriousness and urgency. We will ensure we have all information available to make the right decisions for Australian Cricket,” Peever said. The former Australia wicketkeeper Adam Gilchrist called the side the “laughing stock” of world cricket and has called Smith’s long term future into question. “I’m really sad, shocked, stunned – I’m not trying to over-dramatise it but [I’m] really emotional about this,” Gilchrist said on Network Ten. “Australian cricket now and the integrity of Australian cricket is the laughing stock of world sport. “This clearly is against the laws of the game and we’ve just had our national captain and our national team admit that they sat down, premeditated and pre-planned a way to cheat. I’m not sure he [Smith] can remain captain. “I think it’s a pretty tough position to hold after you’ve admitted to what you’ve admitted to, [to be able to] carry on with any faith from anyone watching.”