Here we go again. A better than decent Test Match concluded on Monday in Durban but will never stand a chance of capturing the attention it deserves. Events of the previous afternoon made sure of that. Press conferences came and went where the participants argued their corner in the usual way. Match officials will try to unpick it all from narrators unlikely to give an inch. Will anything change? Almost certainly not. That David Warner was front and centre was all the spice the tale required. Of course he has form, most of it some years ago, but he’ll forever be known as a crosser of the line. Oh, that bloody line. The one the Australians routinely talk about headbutting (their chosen word) but not stepping over. This time, there is no disputing that it has been breached. But the twist. When Warner went after Quinton de Kock at the tea interval on Sunday – revealed in leaked CCTV footage that both sides woke up to on the final morning of the Test – Steve Smith said it was due to an attack levelled at his deputy. “Quinton got quite personal and provoked an emotional response from Davey,” he said. “Those things aren’t on and you can’t be getting into somebody’s personal life like that.” Specifically, De Kock is alleged to have made derogatory comments about Warner’s wife. This wasn’t refuted by Faf du Plessis, who like his opposite number expressed regret at the episode, but did raise that “both parties” had been rolling around in the personal mud. “Who started it?” he continued, “I don’t know.” Smith returned serve: “Faf can say what he likes.” As far as he was aware, his charges had not (sigh) crossed that line. The hosts didn’t much care for this. Within minutes of Smith leaving, the long-term South African team manager Mohammed Moosaje popped his head up to say that De Kock had “most definitely” been provoked. The South Africans have also briefed that Warner called De Kock a “bush pig”, would you believe. Sick of this yet? The skippers acknowledge that they are. Both forwarded the argument that there is an inevitability of situations like this in elite, intense sport. For Du Plessis’ part, he said he relishes it, while Smith believes his side are at their best when “hunting as a pack.” But that doesn’t mean they enjoy the associated nonsense. By logical extension, this is where the umpires – the pair paid to control the game in a dispassionate fashion – can do more to help protect players from themselves. As Du Plessis said, this whole sorry saga would never have made it into the stairwell had it been dealt with in the middle. “The fact that it spilled over off the field shouldn’t have happened.” It was a view shared by the former Australia opener Simon Katich. “If it is allowed to keep going on, then things are going to get out of control,” he told Cricinfo. “This is where the umpires need to step in as soon as they start. We have all heard about the stump mics being turned up and everything being heard, but initially, the umpires have got to be the ones to put it to rest straight away; give the warnings to the skippers and get the skippers to control it. That obviously hasn’t happened.” If that doesn’t work, Katich continued, then some heavy-handed intervention might result in welcome self-regulation: “If they start rubbing blokes out for this sort of behaviour and miss a Test then it is going to cost a team at some point and if that happens the team-mates are going to clamp down on that behaviour and probably police it themselves.” When Smith finally received a question about the Test match his side had just won so impressively, the room erupted in laughter. On the back of a clinical display like this, he should have been reflecting on the start of a new era led by the best bowling attack in the world. Maybe he’ll get the chance after the second Test. It has to be better than this.