Not content with all the other nuptial traditions that they are happily smashing down to plight their troths, Prince Harry and Meghan Markle have gone for the big one: they are not having a fruitcake. Every royal wedding since that of Harry’s great-great grandmother Queen Victoria has been celebrated with a slice of something solid enough to prop up the entire dynasty. The maverick couple, though, have announced they will be cutting into an organic lemon and elderflower cake decorated with buttercream and fresh flowers: “the bright flavours of spring”. Claire Ptak of Hackney’s Violet Bakery (and this very newspaper) has been tasked with the baking part – like the bride, she hails from California, and even manages to bring a bit of her native sunshine to the classic British fruitcake. She has said that she is “delighted” that she and the couple share the same values of food provenance, sustainability and seasonality, and this is indeed a perfect cake for mid-May, a time when the weather might suggest summer is on its way, but the shops suggest otherwise. Asparagus may be at its peak, but soft fruit still needs a few more weeks of warmth, and stone fruits, such as plums and apricots, are months away. Citrus, however, which brightens the coldest months of the year, is still going strong: the Amalfi lemon, which Ptak has described as “Italy’s finest” only improves as the weather warms up, while the brief frothy British elderflower season is at its peak: time to head out with a bucket and some scissors, or cheat and buy a bottle of cordial instead – Louise Robinson’s Cygnet Kitchen blog has a lovely looking recipe for an elderflower, lemon and mascarpone cake using just that. If elderflowers don’t float your boat, you could stick with a classic lemon drizzle, or experiment with other citrus fruits: Anne Shooter has a very nice looking orange, olive oil and walnut cake in her new book Cherish, and I have made the pink grapefruit and pistachio number in my book The A-Z of Eating for various spring christenings. Exotic fruits are another simple way to bring tropical warmth to your baking: Yotam Ottolenghi and Helen Goh have an unconventional fruit cake with pineapple and banana in Sweet, and Ruby Tandoh’s Flavour boasts a summer pineapple camomile cake that I think looks ideal for spring, too. Florals are another option – Sweet has several excellent ideas with rose water, while Nigella Lawson does a mean lavender cupcake. And don’t forget homegrown rhubarb, which brings a soft pink prettiness to bakes such as Nigel Slater’s cinnamon polenta cake or Nigella’s magnificent toasted marshmallow and rhubarb cake. Perfect for a blushing bride, or indeed, the greedy masses.