Patrick Ness could become the first author to win a Carnegie medal three times after his novel Release made the shortlist for the UK’s oldest and most prestigious children’s book award. Real-life stories from both the present and the past feature strongly on this year’s shortlist for the Carnegie, which has been running for 81 years and which counts some of children’s literature’s brightest names amongst its former winners, from CS Lewis to Arthur Ransome. Ness, who won the medal for Monsters of Men and A Monster Calls, drew from his own experiences of growing up gay in a religious family when writing Release. Ness’s novel is nominated alongside The Hate U Give by Angie Thomas, in which a teenage girl from a poor neighbourhood sees her unarmed best friend fatally shot by a white police officer. The American writer Thomas is the sole author of colour on this year’s shortlist: the Chartered Institute of Library and Information Professionals (Cilip), which runs the prize, is currently in the middle of an independent review into “how equality, diversity, inclusion and participation can best be championed and embedded” into the award, after last year’s 20-strong longlist failed to feature a single writer of colour. Also on the shortlist are Marcus Sedgwick’s Saint Death, which takes on migration between Mexico and the US; former winner Geraldine McCaughrean’s Where the World Ends, based on the true 18th century survival story of nine young boys left stranded on sea stacks by an isolated Scottish island; Will Hill’s After the Fire, which draws from the 1993 Waco siege on the Branch Davidians sect; and Lauren Wolk’s Beyond the Bright Sea, inspired by a true story from Penikese Island in Massachusetts in the 1920s. “These books are looking at our understanding of the world and the place we inhabit in it, as well as at how the past affects us,” said Hope. “It’s really heartening that authors, illustrators and publishers alike are giving a credence, an emotional capacity, to children and young people.” The Carnegie line-up is completed with Anthony McGowan’s Rook, which continues his chronicling of the lives of brothers Nicky and Kenny, and Lissa Evans’s Wed Wabbit, about a 10-year-old who is drawn into the world of her little sister’s favourite story. The shortlist for the Kate Greenaway medal, also announced on Thursday, sees children’s picture books tackle what Hope called “some deep” issues: Debi Gliori’s Night Shift and Pam Smy’s Thornhill both explore depression and bullying, while former winner Levi Pinfold is nominated for his illustrations in AF Harrold’s The Song from Somewhere Else, a book about two loners finding friendship. “There are some really meaty issues at the heart of these books,” said Hope. “They help us to make sense of a world which can seem senseless. We’re able to empathise more greatly, understand what it’s like to be in other people’s shoes. There’s quite a movement going on at the moment in children’s fiction around this.” Overall, Hope said the 15 children’s books in the running for the two medals, chosen from almost 240 entries, “offer moments of breath-taking poignancy and insight for all readers, young or old”. The Carnegie and Kate Greenaway medals are unique in that they are judged by children’s librarians. The winners, who take home £500 worth of books to donate to their local library, a golden medal and a £5,000 cash prize, will be announced on 18 June. Wed Wabbit by Lissa Evans (David Fickling Books) After the Fire by Will Hill (Usborne) Where the World Ends by Geraldine McCaughrean (Usborne) Rook by Anthony McGowan (Barrington Stoke) Release by Patrick Ness (Walker Books) Saint Death by Marcus Sedgwick (Orion) The Hate U Give by Angie Thomas (Walker Books) Beyond the Bright Sea by Lauren Wolk (Corgi) King of the Sky, illustrated by Laura Carlin and written by Nicola Davies (Walker Books) Night Shift, illustrated and written by Debi Gliori (Hot Key Books) A First Book of Animals, illustrated by Petr Horáček and written by Nicola Davies (Walker Books) The Song from Somewhere Else, illustrated by Levi Pinfold and written by A.F. Harrold (Bloomsbury) Town is by the Sea, illustrated by Sydney Smith and written by Joanne Schwartz (Walker Books) Thornhill, illustrated and written by Pam Smy (David Fickling Books) Under the Same Sky, illustrated and written by Britta Teckentrup (Little Tiger)