The death of Ken Dodd not only leaves the nation a sadder place, it also feels like the end of an era. Doddy, as everyone in the business called him, was the last link with a music-hall tradition that stretched back through time to include legends such as Max Miller, George Robey and Dan Leno. He adapted his act to the demands of TV and radio, but he was essentially a man of the theatre who could induce in a thousand or more spectators a sense of collective ecstasy. I claimed, when I interviewed Ken on his 90th birthday, that he and Laurence Olivier were the two performers in my theatre-going experience to be kissed with genius. But of what did that genius consist? For a start, a love of language that enabled him to usher us into a world of grotesque fantasy: a place of hairy Danes with bacon sandwiches strapped to their legs, of satyr-like seniors indulging in snuff orgies, of men with a third eye on the end of their finger. Even childhood was not immune. “I was born one day when me mother was out,” Ken used to quip. “We were so poor the lady next door had me.” That takes us back to Dan Leno who recollected a bizarre infancy in which he varnished the furniture, the cat and the interior of his dad’s boots with strawberry jam. Ken could fire off verbal gags, on every topic under the sun, faster than any comedian I’ve ever encountered. But he was also visually funny, making extravagant use of props, costumes and his own wayward teeth and unruly hair. Max Miller induced delight the moment he appeared in silky plus-fours looking like a raffish tipster. Ken would sometimes pelt on stage sporting a maroon maxi allegedly made out of 28 moggies, a mustard-yellow suit run up by a colour-blind tailor and a cone-shaped hat. If a test of a great comic is that they make you laugh before they’ve said a word, it is one Ken passed with ease. Props were also central to the act: not least the famous tickling stick, which could be seen as either a childish toy or a surrogate phallus. At the Palladium in 1965, the ticklingstick extended to the back of the stalls leading Ken to exclaim, in naive wonder: “The size of it!” Music was also pivotal. Ken started out as a burlesque baritone and developed this into a sendup of a fictive operetta entitled The Stupid Prince. He would offer a spirited rendering of Granada while wearing a hat decorated with ping-pong balls that he would bat into the auditorium with the back of a guitar. Best of all was the moment when he would strap a vast drum to his chest, beat it like a Salvation Army major and belt out rude ditties before crying to the audience: “Give in?” Comedians today mine their experience and expose their souls. Ken Dodd assumed a persona to give us an anthology of comedy that embraced the verbal and the visual, the whimsical and the surreal, the manic and the melodic. He was part of a great tradition and, with his passing, the music hall has lost the last of its luminaries.