Italy’s anti-establishment Five Star Movement has joined with conservative parties to elect the speakers of both houses of parliament, but there was no immediate sign they might extend the pact and form a government. The 4 March national election ended in a hung parliament, with Five Star becoming the largest party, while a rightist alliance including ex-prime minister Silvio Berlusconi’s Forza Italia party and the anti-migrant League emerging as the biggest bloc. After days of behind-the-scenes talks, the two factions joined forces to elect Five Star heavyweight Roberto Fico as president of the lower house and Forza Italia veteran Elisabetta Casellati as president of the Senate – both highly prestigious posts. The conservative alliance came close to collapse on Friday after the League sided with Five Star to reject Forza Italia’s first choice for the Senate position. But hasty overnight negotiations patched up the row, at least for the short term. “I am very happy, moved and proud that parliament has started to work and that the centre-right has held together,” League leader Matteo Salvini said after Saturday’s twin votes. The election of the speakers opens the way for formal government consultations, which will be led by President Sergio Mattarella and are expected to start early next month. Later on Saturday, incumbent prime minister Paolo Gentiloni officially handed in his resignation and that of his government to Mattarella, as normally happens in Italy when a newly elected parliament appoints its speakers. Gentiloni, however, would remain in place to take care of day-to-day operations until a new government was formed, the secretary of the president said in an emailed statement. The Five Star Movement and the right have enough seats in parliament to govern Italy but there are many impediments to such a deal in terms of policy mismatches and personality clashes. “Here we have seen that there are [parliamentary] forces which carry considerable weight. But for us government is something different,” said Giorgia Meloni, head of the far-right Brothers of Italy party, which is in the conservative alliance. “For us Five Star absolutely does not represent any sort of guarantee, just like the Democratic party,” she added, referring to the centre-left PD which lost power in the 4 March election. Nonetheless, Saturday’s ballots showed that Five Star is evolving. It used to excoriate such parliamentary deal-making as old-style politics, so agreeing to a deal in both houses suggests it might prove more flexible in future. The election of the speakers also represented a blow to Berlusconi, who dominated Italy’s centre-right for almost 25 years but must now play second fiddle to Salvini after the League overtook his Forza Italia party in the 4 March vote. 