At one point on Wednesday evening, Laura Muir feared her hopes of a first global medal were about to be swallowed up by an epic snowdrift somewhere outside Carlisle. Yet 24 hours and a £1,500, seven-hour taxi ride later, she was celebrating a superb bronze after a pulsating women’s 3,000m final at the world indoor championships. No one has ever doubted Muir’s ability or courage. Yet in the final of the 1500m at the 2016 Olympics – and again at the world championships last year – her death or glory approach led some to question whether she was tactically naive. Not this time. When the favourite, Genzebe Dibaba, whose controversial coach Jama Aden remains under investigation by athletics’ governing body, the IAAF, shot clear of the field with four laps to go, Muir did not rush to close the gap. Instead she tracked Dibaba and the Dutch athlete Sifan Hassan, an approach that took her desperately close to a silver – a medal that was almost in her grasp until Hassan swerved out from lane one to three on the final bend to stop her passing. “I knew Dibaba was going to make a big move,” said Muir, who finished in 8min 45.78sec – just 0.73sec behind the Ethiopian and 0.10 behind Hassan. “So it was a matter of not over-exerting myself and falling off a cliff like I did in Rio. I raced smart and came away with a medal, which was the main thing. “I’ve known the ability is there. It’s just been a matter of trying to judge it tactics-wise. I’ve been fourth, fifth and sixth at world championships and seventh in Rio, so to come away with a bronze here is excellent.” Afterwards Muir said she had not felt Hassan move across her. Perhaps she was being overly diplomatic or, given what she had gone through just to get from Glasgow to Birmingham, was able to put a small dose of race interference into context. “There was a time when I thought we weren’t going to make it,” she said. “When we were leaving the house there was a lot of snow and the taxi was two hours late, so we didn’t know then if it was going to turn up. “And going through Carlisle it was crazy. We couldn’t see the bonnet, the windscreen wipers were freezing. It took us about six hours to arrive and we got here at 11pm.” The 24-year-old Muir, who is in the final year of her veterinary degree at the University of Glasgow, had started Wednesday working in a small animal hospital. Yet her plans to get down to Birmingham by plane – and then by train – ended when Storm Emma vented its wrath. “I went to vets school on Wednesday morning and saw a couple of appointments were cancelled so I got to go home early,” said Muir, who races in the 1500m heats on Friday. “We tried to get flights but all of them were cancelled so it was a matter of trying to get a taxi. I never expected the weather we had, or that the airport was going to be shut.” Earlier, the first gold of these championships was won by the Russian high jumper Danil Lysenko, who is competing as an authorised neutral athlete because his country is suspended due to state-sponsored doping. In a surprise result, the 20-year-old cleared 2.36m to beat the favourite, Mutaz Barshim (2.33m), into silver. The German Mateusz Przybylko took bronze with a leap of 2.29m. There was a second Russian gold minutes later, with the women’s reigning Olympic and world high jump champion, Mariya Lasitskene, confirming her status as favourite with a winning leap of 2.01m. The American Vashti Cunningham took the silver medal with a clearance of 1.93m, the same height as the Italian Alessia Trost, who claimed bronze.But there was frustration for Britain’s Morgan Lake, who also cleared 1.93m but missed out on a medal after failing more times earlier in the competition.