The coming-out movie, commonly found on the film festival or arthouse circuit rather than at a multiplex, has always been a reliable source of angst. For a sign of how times have changed, try this: at a London preview last week of Love, Simon, a glossy rom-com about a US high-school student (Nick Robinson) inching slowly out of the closet, audience members were invited to ride a giant Love, Simon ferris wheel in Leicester Square in homage to the film’s giddy, fun-fair climax. There were few takers –well, it was raining – but that’s not the point. Even Beautiful Thing in 1996, which represented the previous benchmark for making a mainstream coming-out story that wouldn’t scare the horses, never had a ferris wheel erected in its honour. Money makes a big difference. With the corporate clout of 20th Century Fox behind it, Love, Simon is the first gay teen movie from a major studio. In its eagerness to please (Simon’s opening line is: “I’m just like you”) and its relentless upbeat jauntiness, the film makes Beautiful Thing look like Fassbinder. Breakthroughs come in different shapes and sizes, though, and it would be unfair to disparage this hugely entertaining picture simply for being big and fluffy and pink. It’s important also not to sentimentalise its significance. Fox certainly would not have funded Love, Simon were there not plentiful profits to be made. Tolerance has its commercial benefits; a gay film need no longer appeal exclusively to small or specialised audiences. Back when Beautiful Thing opened in 1996, the UK age of consent for gay men had only recently been lowered from 21 to 18 (still two years higher than the heterosexual one). Lesbians and gay men were banned from serving in the armed forces, the insidious Section 28 was seven years away from being repealed while phrases like “civil partnership” and “marriage equality” were as unfamiliar then as “social media” and “trigger warning”. In Get Real, a British coming-out movie that followed two years after Beautiful Thing, feel-good material still had to acknowledge the possibility of violence and homophobia. The title character in Love, Simon, on the other hand, delays his coming out only because of generalised concerns about being rejected, while the recent God’s Own Country includes a pair of casual coming-out-to-the-family scenes, conveyed in knowing glances, which only the eagle-eyed would spot. To borrow the parlance of the 21st-century teenager, it’s simply not that deep any more. The de-stigmatisation of homosexuality has removed from drama one of its oldest standbys: the threat of ostracisation and social ruin. Audiences in the 1960s could well comprehend the distress of the barrister, played by Dirk Bogarde, who is blackmailed over his sexuality in Victim, just as their 1980s counterparts appreciated the scandal of a married man with a gay lover in Making Love. But no version of those stories made now would have the same currency, just as history has endangered if not rendered extinct the conditions from which the 1997 comedy In & Out emerged. Inspired by Tom Hanks’s Oscar speech in which he accidentally outed one of his former teachers, In & Out gets itself into an awful tizzy over the farcical efforts of its main character, a teacher played by Kevin Kline, to hide his true sexuality. One of the cleverest coming-out scenes in cinema occurs in a film about another teacher, Ron Peck’s 1978 British drama Nighthawks. It ends with the geography teacher Jim (Ken Robertson) being outed in class by his pupils, who bombard him with hostile questions: “Are you bent? Are you queer? Do you wear women’s clothes? Do you carry a handbag?” The scene is highly effective, not least because of its staging: we hardly see Jim at all but the camera is placed in his stead so that the pupils seem to be haranguing us directly. Most importantly, it signals a watershed moment for him, a break in his routine of shame and denial. The ultimate inspiration among gay teachers, however, must be Martin Donovan in the 1998 comedy The Opposite of Sex. Taking the bricks and rocks thrown through his window, he builds a rockery. Coming-out movies (Show Me Love, The Edge of Seventeen, But I’m a Cheerleader) favour the young, if only because that’s the point at which sexual preferences first define themselves. A notable exception is Beginners, in which Christopher Plummer is a widower who comes out in his seventies. “I don’t want to be just theoretically gay,” he says, sporting a rainbow neckerchief and a much younger boyfriend. “I want to do something about it.” But it is the teen genre where openness and inclusivity have traditionally flourished. In Clueless, the audience realises some time before Cher (Alicia Silverstone) does that she is barking up the wrong tree in her pursuit of Christian (Justin Walker). She wants to play footsie, he wants to watch Spartacus. The most striking achievement of Love, Simon is its promotion of a gay character from sassy sidekick to authentic hero. In making gayness its subject, while treating it as no big deal, Love, Simon pulls off a rare conjuring trick with its hero’s sexuality. Now you see it, now you don’t.