In one of his last articles for the Guardian, Stephen Hawking confessed that, thanks to the celebrity he had gained – not many theoretical physicists could boast cameo roles in Star Trek and the Simpsons – and “the isolation imposed by my illness, I feel as though my ivory tower is getting taller”. And yet the last scholar who could be accused of living in an ivory tower, aloof from the problems of the world, was Stephen Hawking. Though he gazed at the stars, he never lost sight of the troubles of the Earth, including those of his own country. Which is why his final piece for the Guardian, published in August last year, was headlined, Jeremy Hunt can attack me all he wants – but he is wrong to say the NHS is working. A week earlier Hawking had issued a plea to save the health service from what he saw as a damaging set of policy decisions: “underfunding and cuts, privatising services, the public sector pay cap, the new contract imposed on junior doctors, and removal of the student nurses’ bursary”. There followed a direct clash with the health secretary, in which Hunt accused Hawking of spreading “pernicious falsehoods”. Hawking stood his ground, sticking with his view that the politician was being selective with the data – explaining that: “For a scientist, cherrypicking evidence is unacceptable.” It would not have been a surprise if a man of Hawking’s stature, for decades the best-known scientist in the world, had come to believe he had transcended such parochial matters as the healthcare system of his native land, and that he should now concern himself only with questions of a global, if not cosmic, nature. He did indeed wrestle with such issues, suggesting our future might depend on establishing “human colonies amid the stars”. But he never lost sight of the local, immediate and earthbound. Similarly, many of those elevated to the status of national – or international – treasure take pains to be consensual figures, reluctant to take sides lest they alienate any section of their adoring public. But Hawking was unabashedly partisan, especially on the NHS. After he’d laid out his fears for the future of the health service, he wrote: “If that all sounds political, that is because the NHS has always been political. It was set up in the face of political opposition.” Not for Stephen Hawking any academic detachment. He got stuck in. Just before Christmas, he joined a group of NHS campaigners in a lawsuit protesting against a shake-up of the NHS that he feared would lead to further privatisation. The case is due to be heard soon. Nor was Hawking’s activism confined to healthcare. He was a forceful protester against the Vietnam war and for the Palestinians, and he was loudly critical of Brexit, warning before the referendum that leaving the EU would be a “disaster for UK science”. In late 2016, after the Brexit vote and the election of Donald Trump, Hawking wrote that “we are at the most dangerous moment in the development of humanity”. As an advocate and activist, Hawking was phenomenally effective. Of course, it helped that he was a brilliant communicator. One colleague today suggested that his physical disability actually sharpened his communication skills, by forcing on him a compelling conciseness. His reliance on a speech synthesiser only seemed to add to his impact. Without a natural voice, he became a distinct moral voice. Hawking had great moral authority. He could say with deep conviction that the NHS saved lives, because it had saved his. The very fact that he was alive, half a century after he had been told he would die, was testament to the wonders of science, technology and medicine – but also to the care and professionalism of the doctors and nurses who had tended to him over the decades. So the death of Stephen Hawking is a loss to our understanding of the universe, but it also represents an earthier blow. We have lost that rarest of human beings: a campaigner who, when he spoke, compelled the world to listen. • Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnist