It’s a rare recipe than works as a starter, main or cheese course. Served as a starter or main, a rocket (arugula) side salad wouldn’t go amiss. As a dessert or cheese course, the tart will stand alone or can be accompanied by a little crème fraîche. Figs and hard goat’s cheese also work extremely well instead of the pears and parmesan. serves 6–8 75g light brown sugar50g butter3 tbsp balsamic vinegar2 tbsp chopped walnuts1 tbsp thyme leaves6 ripe but firm pears, quartered and cored For the pastry100g butter200g plain (all-purpose) flour, plus extra for dusting100g parmesan cheese, finely grated1 egg, beaten1 tbsp thyme leaves To make the pastry, whizz the butter and flour in a food processor until it resembles fine crumbs. Add a pinch of salt and the parmesan and blend for a few seconds. Add the egg and thyme and blitz again until the pastry just comes together into a ball. Knead briefly until smooth, shape into a disc and wrap in plastic wrap. Chill for at least 20 minutes. Preheat the oven to 180C (Gas 4). Heat the sugar in a 25cm tatin dish or ovenproof frying pan until it melts, shaking and swirling from time to time so it melts evenly. Increase the heat slightly and add the butter and vinegar, allowing the mixture to bubble for a minute or so. Remove from the heat and sprinkle with the walnuts and thyme. Arrange the pears on top, rounded side down, in snug, concentric circles. On a lightly floured surface, roll the pastry into a circle 2cm larger than the dish or frying pan. Using a rolling pin to pick the pastry up, cover the fruit snugly, tucking the edges in to enclose everything securely. Bake for 30 minutes until the pastry is golden and the caramel is bubbling at the edges. Leave to cool for 10 minutes before placing an inverted plate (ideally one with a lip to catch the sauce) on top of the pan. Wearing oven gloves and holding the plate and pan tightly, flip the whole lot over. Remove the pan to reveal the tarte, pushing any dislodged pears back into place if necessary. 