Darwin residents are in clean-up mode and tens of thousands are without power or drinkable water after the strongest cyclone to hit the city in 30 years caused widespread destruction. Emergency services said the strength of the storm was “a real wake-up call” for the city. Tropical Cyclone Marcus passed directly through Darwin about midday Saturday as a category two storm, bringing 130km/h wind gusts and rain, and felling hundreds of large trees and powerlines throughout the city and suburbs. Multiple streets, including the arterial Stuart Highway, were blocked by fallen trees. The cyclone, which diminished to a category one, has now reintensified to a two and is expected to cross the Kimberley coastline in Western Australia later on Sunday. Trees are quite literally rolling down roads thanks to #CycloneMarcus VIDEO: Debra Witte @TheNTNews pic.twitter.com/Ra40sLmInf #CycloneMarcus in #DarwinNT #northernterritory well under way pic.twitter.com/Yh1GnnGa6p The cyclone warning was cancelled for Darwin on Saturday afternoon and residents began clearing debris from gardens and streets, using chainsaws to clear trees from blocked roads. Up to 23,000 homes remained without power on Sunday morning and the Greater Darwin area, including Palmerston, was warned to boil water and let it cool before drinking or using it to brush teeth. There have been multiple reports of homes and buildings damaged, some seriously with roofs ripped off or ceilings caved in, and fallen trees crushing cars, garages and walls. There have been no reports of serious injury. In Coolalinga a tree fell on a gas cylinder at a petrol station, prompting evacuations. The NT chief minister, Michael Gunner, said all schools have been told to remain closed and the public service will operate on a skeleton crew. It was “very positive news” that there had been no reports of injuries, and almost felt “too good to be true”, he said. “We do want you to go check in on your neighbours,” Gunner said. “There has been a lot of community spirit already. I’m probably asking Top Enders to do what they’ve already done.” He thanked the recovery crews for their work, even amid concern for their own homes and families. “We are going to get the territory up and running and open for business ASAP but we are operating on safety first.” There was no estimate of the recovery cost yet, he said, as the current priority was recovery. The sound of chainsaws post #CycloneMarcus. The clean up has begun. pic.twitter.com/KONMuXrX2p The region had been on high alert for days, with people preparing cyclone kits, stocking up on food and water, and clearing debris from yards and homes. About 130 people, including homeless people and clinic patients took cover in city shelters on Saturday, including courthouse carparks. The cyclone led to the cancellation of flights in and out of Darwin from Friday night, as well as the postponement of sporting events including the Tiwi Islands footy final and the NTFL grand final. On Sunday NT police, fire and emergency services warned people not to travel unnecessarily as there remained some danger. Not all roads had been cleared and more than 400 power lines were brought down during the storm. “Many hazards are present and public safety is our priority,” regional controller Warren Jackson said. “While assessments of damage are undertaken, it is safest for community members to stay home. “I think this is a real wake-up call for Darwin given that it was in what we’d say is the lower end but it was a category two. You can see there was a significant amount of damage.” Jackson said most people had followed advice and there had not been any reports of major concern in the aftermath of the storm. However, police were concerned at the number of people taking risk during the cyclone on Saturday, including driving through floodwaters and walking outside. #CycloneMarcus @TheNTNews my friend Barend took this. It shows why you need to stay in during a cyclone. It is so close. pic.twitter.com/FhAhskyDPw “We watched people put themselves in peril today,” Jackson said on Saturday. “Despite all the warnings, in the middle of the storm we saw people driving around into flooded waters, around trees that had clearly fallen.” Many of the fallen trees appeared to be large, shallow-rooted trees several decades old, some planted in the aftermath of Cyclone Tracy. Really hope #TCMarcus will renew the conversation about removal of all African Mahogany trees in Darwin. The tragic death of schoolboy Aidan Bott in 2006 should have been enough for change - and the failure of the species to withstand a cat 2 needs to be addressed. #safetyfirst On Saturday police officers rode jetskis to rescue four people from two boats during the cyclone after one lost its mooring and collided with the other. One of those rescued was a man in his 60s with respiratory problems, the ABC reported. A fifth person refused to leave the boat. Defence personnel were assisting emergency services with recovery efforts on Sunday, with a priority on hospitals and the airport. While clean-up continues, the Northern Territory is keeping an eye on the continuing wet season weather. Another monsoon trough is forming in the Arafura Sea to the north and may develop into a tropical low mid next week, the Bureau of Meteorology said. The Golden Arches have taken a beating in #TCMarcus @TheNTNews pic.twitter.com/h98mwLMXYu Surveying the damage around #Darwin: main drag of Mitchell St cut off; trees and powerlines down everywhere. Widespread power outages, including my place. #CycloneMarcus pic.twitter.com/ANnezDdkVp