Floyd Landis said the only people who still believe in Team Sky are those who think the US president, Donald Trump, is telling the truth as the former cyclist called for Sir Bradley Wiggins to be stripped of his 2012 Tour de France title. The American, a one-time doper turned informant, delivered a scathing assessment of Wiggins and the Team Sky principal, Sir Dave Brailsford, who remained silent amid further calls for his resignation. Landis said Brailsford had to take ultimate responsibility for any drugs taken by Team Sky cyclists. A parliamentary select committee report this week concluded that Wiggins, and possible support riders, had taken performance-enhancing drugs to prepare for the Tour de France under the guise of legitimately treating a medical condition. Wiggins said his use of the powerful steroid triamcinolone before three of cycling’s Grand Tours was to treat allergies and denied crossing any ethical line, as was claimed by the digital, culture, media and sport select committee report. Landis said Wiggins would definitely have benefited from the substance. “It’s 100% performance enhancing,” Landis told the Guardian. “Certain steroids increase body mass and certain ones decrease it. But they are stress hormones designed to help the body respond to fight or flight syndrome and increase physical ability in a life-or-death fight and that’s what cycling is. It’s undeniable it gives a performance enhancement. There’s no ambiguity.” Landis was stripped of his 2006 Tour de France title for doping, after being told of a positive test for testosterone three days later. Some may distrust him because of his drug‑taking history even when Landis’s testimony about widespread doping in cycling contributed to the downfall of Lance Armstrong. “ “I don’t know what the authorities will do about Team Sky,” Landis said, “but they kicked me out and took my title for taking steroids [in fact, he tested positive for synthetic testosterone], so the same should happen to Wiggins.” Landis, 42, believes the sponsors will walk away from Team Sky in the wake of this latest crisis. It follows the failed drug test by Chris Froome last year. A urine sample submitted at the Vuelta a España showed double the allowed amount of asthma medication salbutamol in his system. “Corporations soon won’t want to put their name next to a cycling team. If I were running a business and wanted to keep its image positive I would have left Team Sky a long time ago. On top of the Froome case you put it all together and the only people who are going to try to defend Team Sky are people who still believe Donald Trump. It doesn’t matter how much you put the truth in front of their face it makes no difference. “It’s not going away; this is the new reality for these guys. I’ve been in this world. I know how the dynamics work and Brailsford has to take responsibility for what was going on.” Meanwhile Froome came out swinging in his support of Team Sky and Brailsford, rubbishing the select committee report. He is preparing for the Tirreno-Adriatico race in Italy, his second competition since news of his adverse drug test was made public after an investigation by the Guardian and Le Monde. But he was again facing questions about doping following the damning DCMS select committee report. The MPs’ concluded that triamcinolone was used to prepare Wiggins “and possibly other riders supporting him” for the 2012 Tour de France. But Froome, who has won the Tour four times, rejected any such association when speaking to reporters in Italy. “I’ve never seen anything like that.It’s not my experience within the team that that’s how the team operates,”he said. Asked whether he was part of the Team Sky riders prepared the same way as Wiggins for the 2012 Tour de France, Froome replied: “No. That’s absolute rubbish. I’ve seen that accusation but no, that’s complete rubbish. “I can only speak from my own experiences in the team. I’ve been there for eight years, since day one, when the team started. I certainly have a very different picture to what’s been painted in the headlines. I’m proud to be part of the team. I wouldn’t have stayed so long, I wouldn’t have been in the team, I wouldn’t still be in the team, if I didn’t believe in the team and the people around me.” “ Dave B [Brailsford] has brought all those people together and we’ve got a fantastic group.” Froome continues to race while fighting to prove his innocence in the background, alongside his legal team but he said he will not let anything deflect his focus from racing. “That’s part of something I’ve been dealing with over my whole career as a pro cyclist. I’ve come up against adversity and I’ve learnt how to compartmentalise things. Right now I’m here to race Tirreno and I’m focusing on that.”