There was a “common plan” to use the network of companies orbiting Cambridge Analytica to get around election spending and co-ordination laws, Christopher Wylie, the Cambridge Analytica whistleblower, has told a parliamentary committee. “For me, this is about the integrity of the democratic process, which is more important than anything else,” Wylie said, before emphasising his words: “I am absolutely convinced that there was a common plan and common purpose with Vote Leave, [pro-Brexit youth group] BeLeave, the DUP and Veterans for Britain.” All four groups had employed the services of Aggregate IQ (AIQ), a Canadian company that Wylie said was “set up and worked within the auspices of Cambridge Analytica [and] inherited the company culture of total disregard for the law”. But at the point they employed the services of AIQ, he said, it had effectively no public presence. “All of these companies somehow, for some reason, all decided to use Aggregate IQ as their primary service provider, when Aggregate IQ did not have any public presence, no media, no website. The only way that you could find them on the internet is if you went to [Cambridge Analytica minority owner] SCL’s website and called up SCL Canada. So, first question that I have is why. Why is it that all of a sudden this company, that has never worked on anything but Cambridge Analytica projects, that had no public presence, somehow became the primary service provider to all of these supposedly independent and different campaign groups,” he told the MPs. “When you look at the cumulation of evidence I think it would be completely unreasonable to come to any other conclusion: this must be co-ordination, this must be a common purpose plan.” Following the publication of a Buzzfeed article in 2016, shining light on the work done by BeLeave, Wylie said he went to Aggregate IQ because “I was concerned that something unlawful happened. I mean, it doesn’t pass the smell test.” “I went and actually spoke with Aggregate, who were very, very pleased with themselves with how that project went – understandably, they won – and said, can you show me what it was you were doing, how can you untease it, what did you do,” Wylie said. “They conceded to me – and this is a verbatim quote, and I stand by it, I remember Jeff Sylvester [the chief operating officer of Aggregate IQ] telling me this: it was, quote, ‘totally illegal’. “AggregateIQ was just used as a proxy money-laundering vehicle,” Wylie told the hearing. “What [Vote Leave mastermind] Dom Cummings did is he just went round and found places he could launder money through to give it to AIQ so they could overspend. And that is my genuinely held belief. “For me it makes me so angry, because a lot of people supported leave because they believe in the application of British law and British sovereignty. And to irrevocably alter the constitutional settlement of this country on fraud is a mutilation of the constitutional settlement of this country. You cannot call yourself a leaver, you cannot call yourself someone who believes in British law, and win by breaking British law in order to achieve that goal.” Silvester told Canadian publication Times Colonist on Sunday: “AggregateIQ works in full compliance within all legal and regulatory requirements in all jurisdictions where it operates. It has never knowingly been involved in any illegal activity. All work AggregateIQ does for each client is kept separate from every other client.” Wylie also alleged that Aggregate IQ’s work in other countries paint a picture of a company not fit to work on British elections. Elaborating on claims first reported in the Guardian last week, he said that Aggregate IQ worked on projects involving disseminating material hacked from the current president of Nigeria during a campaign in 2015, and distributed extremely violent video content aimed at influencing the vote in that nation’s elections. “I could talk more about some of the other projects that AIQ has worked on,” Wylie said. “So, for example, Nigeria, the Nigerian project in 2015, that Carole [Cadwalladr] at the Guardian has touched on in her reporting, where the company utilised the services of an Israeli private intelligence firm. That firm is Black Cube, that’s not been reported, although Channel 4 has undercover footage that they haven’t been able to put into the public domain of Alexander Nix talking about the relationship with Black Cube. Black Cube on the Nigeria project was engaged to hack the now-president of Nigeria, [Muhammadu] Buhari, to get access to his medical records and private emails. AIQ worked on that project. So Aggregate IQ was handed material in Nigeria from Cambridge Analytica to distribute online. So that’s distribution of kompromat and that’s also distribution of incredibly threatening and violent video content, which I’ve also passed on to the committee. The videos, which AIQ distributed in Nigeria with the sole intent of intimidating voters, included content where people were being dismembered, where people were having their throats cut and bled to death in a ditch, they were being burned alive. There is incredibly anti-Islamic and threatening messages portraying Muslims as violent. “So you’ve got Aggregate IQ, which received 40% of Vote Leaves funding, also working on projects that involved hacked material and kompromat and distributing violent videos of people being bled to death, and this is the company that played an incredibly pivotal role in politics here.” In a statement issued after the hearing, Black Cube said it has always operated within the law. ‘Whilst we are flattered that we are seemingly being connected with every international incident that occurs, we will state that Chris Wylie’s testimony is a flagrant lie,” it said. “We categorically declare that neither Black Cube, nor any of its affiliates and subsidiaries, have ever worked for, or engaged with, SCL, Cambridge Analytica, or any of their affiliates and subsidiaries. “Black Cube has never operated in Nigeria nor has it worked on any project connected to Nigeria, and none of its employees have ever set foot in Nigeria.”