As Easter weekend approaches, celebrations and festivities have begun around the world – and some of them have put a new twist on traditions. Animals at London zoo have been getting Easter off to a cracking start by enjoying some egg-themed fun. The zoo’s lemurs and squirrel monkey enclosures have been decorated with colourful papier-mache eggs, which when broken, reveal treats. Mark Habben, ZSL’s zoological manager, said: “We always like to find fun ways for the animals to join in the festivities – while there will be no chocolate for our animals this Easter, we’ve prepared a veggie-filled egg hunt for our lemurs and squirrel monkeys.” The zoo’s komodo dragon is also being given an Easter egg hunt treat, although rather than colourfully decorated eggs, the species’ natural diet is eggs. Komodo dragons use their tongue for their sense of smell, and can detect food from up to six miles away. It’s normally Christmas that is associated with snowy scenes, but this year the UK could experience a white Easter. The Met Office says: “Heavy rain coming from the south will meet cold air coming from the north, and there could be significant snowfall in the Midlands, Wales and the north of England. This is most likely to be on high ground, but Stoke-on-Trent, Derby and Nottingham could all be affected.” One Easter show of goodwill that didn’t go down as planned was on Southeastern railways. As part of a special #SouthEaster initiative, the company gave away Easter treats to customers at various stations. INFO - Keep your eyes peeled for some #SouthEaster treat giveaways at stations this morning https://t.co/yaiknBzw3L pic.twitter.com/zQxXGUEFqT However, social media reaction suggested a chunk of customers would have preferred them to concentrate on delivering a more reliable service. “Is the treat a train that arrives on time?” replied one commuter. “Why not just provide the service we pay for instead? I’d prefer that to a pound shop Easter egg,” tweeted another. Southeastern trains were recently voted the second worst service in the country. Easter will be a tricky time for train travellers across the UK, as over 400 sets of engineering works are planned, including the closure of Bristol Temple Meads and Manchester Victoria stations. An Easter egg hunt of a very different kind is taking place at Cheddar Gorge in Somerset. The famous caves have been decorated for a glow-in-the-dark Easter egg hunt, taking place every day until Sunday 8 April. Children can claim a prize by visiting the cave and finding a secret code “left by the Easter Bunny”. Easter controversy has hit a Canadian ice cream manufacturer, as an online petition has been started to ask them to stop using the brand name Sweet Jesus. “This is a mockery of taking the Lord’s name in vain and also highly offensive to Christians,” said the organisers of the protest. “The imagery used to promote the brand is also anti-Christ and therefore anti-Christian, for example, using upside-down crosses on the labels of the ice-cream cups.” The chain of restaurants selling ice creams, cakes and hot chocolate originated in Toronto, and has just opened its first branch in the US. The company said: “Our name was created from the popular phrase that people use as an expression of enjoyment, surprise or disbelief. Our aim is not to offer commentary on anyone’s religion or belief systems.” Some more traditional Easter events have also been taking place. During the Holy Thursday Mass, Pope Francis II urged priests to stay spiritually close to their flocks, and not to lecture them with church law. Francis said priests can tell adulterers not to sin again, but that they should also help them “to look forward and not backward”. In Windsor, the Queen distributed “Maundy money” to 92 pensioners, one for each year of her life. At St George’s Chapel, Windsor – where Prince Harry will marry Meghan Markle on 19 May – she gave out red and white purses. The red purse contained £5.50, and the white purse contained specially minted silver penny pieces. The Maundy money ceremony dates back to 1213, when King John of England distributed alms for the poor in Rochester, Kent.