Darren Lehmann will leave his post as the Australia coach after the fourth Test against South Africa, which begins on Friday. Cricket Australia confirmed his departure, which had appeared unlikely when it was announced earlier in the week he would remain until the end of his contract. That was to run until the end of the 2019 Ashes series in England but now Lehmann has joined the casualties of Australia’s Cape Town debacle. Cricket Australia announced its chief executive, James Sutherland, would speak to media at 2.45pm BST in Johannesburg following Lehmann’s resignation. Lehmann had been cleared by a Cricket Australia investigation into the ball tampering, with Sutherland saying on Tuesday the coach had no prior knowledge of the plot. At the time, Sutherland said it was “inaccurate” to say Lehmann had resigned, but now he has decided to quit. “It’s the right time to step away,” Lehmann said. “I’m ultimately responsible for the culture of the team and I’ve been thinking about my position for a while. “Despite telling media yesterday that I’m not resigning, after reviewing Steve Smith’s and Cameron Bancroft’s hurting it’s only fair I make this decision. “This will allow Cricket Australia to complete a full review into the culture of the team and allow them to implement changes to regain the trust of the Australian public. This is the right thing for Australian cricket.” He added: “Like all Australians we’re extremely disappointed and as a team we know we’ve let so many people down and for that we’re truly sorry. “The players involved have been handed down very serious sanctions and they know they must face serious consequences. They’ve made a grave mistake but they are not bad people.” He choked back tears as he thanked his wife Andrea and four children and close friends “for allowing me to do this job and supporting me 100 per cent every step of the way”. He added: “It’s been a wonderful experience coaching the Australian cricket team. I hope the team rebuilds from this and the Australian public find it in their hearts to forgive these young men and get behind the 11 who are going to take the field tomorrow.” Meanwhile, the Cricket Australia chief executive, James Sutherland, has said he is committed to his job and will not resign in the wake of the scandal. “I’m absolutely committed to my job,” he said, speaking to media in Johannesburg. “My employment and tenure is a matter for Cricket Australia but I’m not resigning, and what’s happened over last few days has only strengthened my resolve to ensure Australian cricket and the Australian cricket team gets back on track and gets back in a place where it has not only the full respect but the pride of the Australian community.” He said that Lehmann had “provided fantastic service” as coach. Sutherland added: “I’ve seen at first hand the pride in which he has gone about his work, the love he has for the job and his incredible work ethic, and one of the things that strikes me about Darren and his character as a coach is the way he genuinely cares for and loves his players. I have huge regard and respect for the way he’s gone about his job. “It’s been clearly a difficult week for him, the players and for everyone involved in the Australian cricket team and Australian cricket more broadly.”