My daughter has my mother’s fingers, my father’s ankles and my eyebrows. As she grows, I can see the composites of my family in her. One night, as I go to tuck her in and stroke her hair before turning off the landing light, as I do every night, for just a fragment of a second, a pregnant pause that startles me, I see my mother’s face on her. It was a quick stab of an image change, like you might see in a horror film for effect. Except it wasn’t scary Lying there, eyes closed, still and at peace. Like the last time I saw my mother. On the table at the funeral director’s. I had gone with Dad to say goodbye. I didn’t want to, but we were both sure it was something we needed to do. My aunt had dressed Mum in a red sari and painted her fingernails red. This was why I’ll never forget her hands. Because on seeing her red nails, I crouched and let out a guttural, uncontrollable yelp, before tears streamed down my face. Mum never painted her nails. I couldn’t be convinced, that on dying, she should be immortalised in flames, cremated, with nail varnish. It didn’t feel like my mum. It felt outside the moment. I look again at my daughter and her face looks like her face. It was only for that one second that she looked like my mum. Only that one second flash – a quick stab of an image change, like you might see in a horror film for effect. Except it wasn’t scary. If anything it was comforting. There’s a framed picture of Mum overlooking her bed from my wedding day. I’ve cropped myself out because I was stressed in that particular moment and didn’t want my photo taken. But Mum did, because it was her son’s wedding day and everything about it was radiant aside from my grumpy face. My daughter knows she is dead. “Daddy, your mummy died, didn’t she?” occasionally she’ll ask. “Yes,” I’ll reply. “Why did she die?” “She got sick,” I say. “And she didn’t get better.” I don’t know how to explain lung cancer to a three-year-old yet. “Am I going to die?” she asks. “Yes,” I tell her. “But not for a very, very long time.” Often we think about the traits or memories or trinkets that remind us of those we have lost. It’s not often that we think about skin in this way. My daughter’s hands, imprinted with the same look and feel as her grandmother’s, bring me closer to Mum. Knowing she lives on, in this tiny way, helps me grieve. When Mum ballooned in weight because of the course of steroids she was on, her hands remained her hands. In her final weeks, as she became gaunt and haunted, her hands remained her hands. It was only on that funeral director’s table, fingernails painted red, that she suddenly felt not there anymore. My daughter doesn’t really understand it when I tell her that her hands remind me of my mum’s. She accepts this fact and carries on living her life. “Who is your mummy?” my daughter asks as I remind her to hold my hand. We’re walking to the shops to buy chocolate to make a cake for my wife’s birthday. “Her name was Jayshree.” “She died,” my daughter reminds me. “I have her hands now.” She lets go of my hand and holds one up. She’s wearing gloves. I stop and smile. I take a glove off and turn her hand so the back of it is face up. “See your little finger and how it is bent ever so slightly? My mummy’s hand bent like that, too. Every time I look at your hands, it reminds me of my mummy and I feel happy.” “Not sad?” she asks as I put the glove back on her. “No,” I tell her. “Not sad. Because I have you to remind me of her always. I’m sad you two will never meet, but I am happy that you make me think of her always.”