An apparent ball tampering controversy involving Australia’s Cameron Bancroft overshadowed play during day three of the tourists’ third Test against South Africa in Cape Town. Bancroft appeared to be holding a small yellow object in his hand around the time he was working on the ball shortly before the tea break. Slow-motion replays, both on TV and broadcast on the big screen at Newlands, appeared to show Bancroft then putting the small object into his underwear in an apparent attempt to hide it. English umpires Richard Illingworth and Nigel Llong did talk to Bancroft at the time, and he produced what appeared to be a black sunglasses bag from his right pocket in way of explanation. The TV replays seemed to suggest the player put the small yellow object down his trousers. The officials chose not to change the ball or penalise his team the statutory five-run on-field penalty for illegally changing the condition of the ball. Although the umpires appeared satisfied with Bancroft’s explanation on the field at the time and allowed play to continue, match officials could review other footage. Reverse swing has been a major part of this series, and players can increase that by roughing up the ball with foreign objects, which is strictly prohibited in cricket. Australia, who are falling a long way behind in the game, appeared desperate for wickets to turn it around. Ball tampering has been an issue raised throughout Australia’s tour. In Port Elizabeth, Warner was highlighted for the impact of the bandages on his hand – the result of finger injuries suffered while batting – on the ball, and on day one in Cape Town Australia bowler Pat Cummins inadvertently stepped on the ball. After the first Test in Durban Australia’s coach, Darren Lehmann, said both sides would try various “techniques” to get the ball to reverse swing. “Obviously, there are techniques used by both sides to get the ball reverse and that’s just the way the game goes,” Lehmann said after the Durban Test. “I have no problems with it, simple. You’d have to ask the umpires and ICC about that one [whether it is legal]. I don’t mind the ball moving, I have no problems with it at all.” Former players were quick to react to the incident on social media, with South African-born former England captain Kevin Pietersen accusing Lehmann of being involved in the plan. My 2cents worth - This will be Darren Lehmann’s greatest test as a coach, cos I will struggle to believe that this was all Bancroft’s idea. #SandpaperGate. Another former England captain, Michael Vaughan, tweeted: “Mr Bancroft may end up on the naughty step.” The Bancroft incident was the latest in a string of contentious moments in the series. On Friday at Newlands, the Australians lodged an official complaint with their South African hosts over what they called the abusive behaviour of home fans in Cape Town. Lehmann said several of his players had been verbally abused by the crowd, abuse which included references to the players’ families. Lehmann called the fans’ behaviour “disgraceful” and Cricket South Africa ordered an increased security presence in the crowd on Saturday. That included police officers. Aiden Markram’s 84 helped South Africa increase their lead to 207 runs at tea on Saturday. Markram was out just before the tea break to lift the Aussies, as South Africa ended the session 151-3 for their second innings. Earlier, the hosts had wrapped up Australia’s first innings for 255 when Kagiso Rabada took the one Australian wicket that South Africa needed, removing Josh Hazlewood with an edge to Hashim Amla at slip. Rabada finished with four wickets, as did fellow pace bowler Morne Morkel.