The Week in Patriarchy is a weekly roundup of what’s happening in the world of feminism and sexism. If you’re not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. I’ve spent this week thinking a lot about redemption. Lower-level staffers in the Trump White House are eager to get out but can’t seem to find new jobs (don’t have much sympathy, to be honest), but as Hope Hicks exits it’s clear that she’ll be doing her redemption tour in no time. In the same way I imagine Ivanka will manage to rise from the ashes of her father’s disgusting tenure, Hicks will be fine. She’ll leverage her celebrity and good looks into some sort of narrative that paints her as an unwitting victim – just as Ivanka did recently when she suggested it was “inappropriate” for a reporter to ask her what she thought about her father being accused of sexual harassment and assault. We can’t let the women of this administration take advantage of how white femininity is put on a pedestal. Don’t forget, for example, that it was Hicks crafting responses to her then boyfriend Rob Porter’s domestic violence allegations. The stink of bigotry is just as strong on them as anyone else. Retailers across the country are changing their policies on selling guns thanks to the incredible activism by the students in Parkland. There’s still a lot of work to be done, but the momentum of this movement does feel – and I hope it is – unstoppable. My daughter came home from school and said they had a lock down today. She wrapped her arms around herself & said, “Mama, I was scared.” She told me she kept saying to herself please don’t let it be a bad guy. We should be ashamed. This is the world we sustain for our babies. Looking at a man's bookshelf or collection of records or list of favourite movies like pic.twitter.com/oPNc6FAOG3 @nra my favorite teacher at Dalton high school just blockaded his door and proceeded to shoot. We had to run out The back of the school in the rain. Students were being trampled and screaming. I dare you to tell me arming teachers will make us safe. The Lt. Governor of Georgia is threatening to use the state to punish private actors for political expression he finds distasteful pic.twitter.com/kxNwMV7Fgf James Hamblin on how active shooter drills could affect kids’ mental health; PR Lockhart on the questions about race and empathy that the Parkland shooting aftermath has brought up; and this incredible story of how Harvard protected a serial sexual harasser for decades. I’ve just launched a video series with Eater about the intersection of food and politics! Check it out and watch me talk to folks like Cecile Richards and Lindy West about everything from pies to performative eating. People are killing themselves over healthcare debts. There are no words. I’m planning on doing some cooking to relax my soul, but this video of a cat watching a horror movie is also doing the trick quite nicely. 