A British soldier who was killed by an roadside improvised explosive device while fighting against Islamic State in Syria has been named as Sgt Matt Tonroe. The 33-year-old, who was embedded with US forces, died alongside an American solider during an operation in Manbij, northern Syria on Thursday. Five others were wounded in the attack. The Manchester-born parachutist was serving in the 3rd Battalion, Parachute Regiment, and had previously fought in Afghanistan and the Middle East. Tonroe’s commanding officer paid tribute to his “bravery and talent as a soldier”, and said this “was matched by his compassion as a human being”. He is survived by his mother, Michelle, his brother, Alex, and girlfriend, Olivia. The IED explosion is believed to have occurred just metres from the US-backed Manbij military council headquarters. The town was under Isis control until 2016 and has recently been the subject of tensions between Nato and the Turkish military over the presence of Kurdish forces. In a statement naming the soldier, Tonroe’s commanding officer said: “Matt Tonroe was a deeply intelligent man and one of life’s characters. He was a caring and considerate soul, a loving and dutiful son, and a friend to many. Yet he had a steel core, served his country with pride and was a first-class soldier, proven in combat, faced risk willingly and was ever ready for more. He thus died as he lived: daring and fearless in duty. We mourn his loss dearly, are proud to have known him and will honour him by continuing this fight.” The defence secretary, Gavin Williamson, added: “My thoughts and prayers are with the family and friends of Sergeant Matt Tonroe at this dreadful time. Sgt Tonroe served his country with great distinction and it is clear from the tributes made by his colleagues that he was not only exceptionally dedicated and courageous but also a gifted and intelligent instructor who was respected by everyone he served with. Sgt Tonroe fought to protect British values, our freedoms and to keep us back at home safe. His sacrifice, unflinching commitment and bravery will never be forgotten.”