Michael Gove has attempted to reassure Conservatives angry about Britain conceding on fisheries during the Brexit transition by urging them to keep their “eyes on the prize”. The environment secretary said he understood the fishing industry’s grave disappointment at Theresa May’s agreement that would effectively keep the UK inside the common fisheries policy (CFP) until 2020, but without the same level of influence. However, he argued in parliament that the implementation period was a necessary step on the path to the ultimate goal. The comments came as sources told the Guardian that the prime minister was taken aback by the level of anger about the issue during a meeting of coastal MPs, including a number of Scottish Tories. They said Downing Street had expected discontent about the fact that free movement would continue through the transition period, but not realised the strength of feeling over the issue of fish. In fact, officials believed that a promise from the EU for specific safeguards for allowable catch limits, which went beyond simple consultation, would be seen as a victory for the UK. Instead the prime minister faced a furious reaction from Scottish MPs, and will have to endure the embarrassment of key Brexiter Jacob Rees-Mogg and others staging a boat trip stunt outside parliament to highlight anger on Wednesday morning. Called to the House of Commons chamber as a result of an urgent question by Alistair Carmichael, the Lib Dem MP for Orkney and Shetland, Gove admitted the UK had not got what it wanted from the negotiations but said control of fishing waters had been delayed, not abandoned. “There is disappointment in fishing communities – I know, as someone whose father was a fish merchant, whose grandparents went to sea to fish, I completely understand how fishing communities feel about this situation at the moment. I share their disappointment,” Gove told MPs. “Our proposal to the EU was that during the implementation period we would sit alongside other coastal states as a third country and an equal partner in annual quota negotiations, and in making that case we did so after full consultation with representatives of the fisheries industries. “We pressed hard during negotiations to secure this outcome and we are disappointed that the EU were not willing to move on this.” Gove said the share of the quotas would not change during the implementation period and both sides were obliged to act in good faith. He said that in December 2020 the UK would be negotiating as a third country and independent coastal state, with full control of its fishing waters. In a warning to Conservative MPs who have expressed anger at the deal, he said: “There is a significant prize at the end of the implementation period and it is important that all of us accept that the implementation period is a necessary step towards securing that prize ... It is critical that all of us, in the interest of our whole nation, keep our eyes on that prize.” Carmichael said there was a mood of palpable anger in the industry. “This is not what they were promised,” he said. “If they can let us down like this over a deal for a transitional period, how can we be sure they will not do it again when it comes to the final deal? When it comes to it, will they trade away access to waters for access to markets?” The Scottish Conservative MP Douglas Ross, who has been critical of the deal, said there was “no way I can sell this deal in the transitional period as anything like a success to fishing communities in Moray, Scotland or the UK”. Fishing communities, he said, felt “let down and angered by this government”. Gove said that he understood people would be disappointed the UK’s proposal had not been accepted. “We accepted it in order to secure the greater prize,” he said. John Lamont, MP for Berwickshire, Roxburgh and Selkirk, said MPs had made it clear to both May and Gove that the end goal must be for the UK to regain control over its fishing waters at the completion of the transition period. After attending the meeting with May, he said there could be no doubt about the importance that politicians such as he placed on the issue. “Anything less than full control over our vessels and waters will be rightly seen by the fishing industry as an opportunity lost,” Lamont told the Guardian. “I am hugely disappointed that fishermen in Scotland will have to wait another two years to leave the CFP. Nevertheless, the UK government is committed to leaving the CFP, unlike the SNP, whose offer to Scotland’s fishermen is lifetime membership of the hated CFP.” Rees-Mogg said: “The European commission would not allow us something? In a negotiation it is about the importance we put on something as to whether we get it, therefore, what did we get in return?” Gove said the concession had meant the UK had secured an implementation period “to prepare for all the benefits Brexit would bring”.