Three hours in, I feel weightless, almost giddy. I’m lying on the sofa with my boys, eating chocolate, watching telly, and it is no exaggeration to say that I am having the time of my life. For the first time in eight and a half years, I am not in charge. This exotic sensation of relaxation is completely unfamiliar – and yet stirs a distant memory of who I used to be. The kids-in-charge experiment began at 1pm, and I can’t believe how well it’s going. In truth I’d been dreading it, braced for carnage, but so far it has been nothing but fun. At 1.01pm the boys had raced to the bakery and spent £10 on cakes, before charging on up the road for lunch in McDonald’s. I’m very much enjoying the absence of washing-up, and curious to see what they will eat next. Jake proposes a trip to the corner shop for provisions. I float along the pavement beside him, laughing at his jokes; his mood is unrecognisably effervescent, fizzing with wit, and I tell him he’s on cracking form. He halts and turns to me, his expression suddenly earnest. “But don’t you see? This is the real me. Your rules make me go,” and he shrinks, hunching his shoulders and drawing his wrists together as if cuffed. “But our rules have unleashed the real me,” and he skips off into the shop. I stare after him, stunned. What if he is right? What have I been thinking all these years, grimly policing bedtimes and broccoli and pee on the toilet seat? By other parents’ standards I’d always considered myself relatively permissive; I’ve neither the time nor energy to be a helicopter/tiger mum. But now, as the tension of everyday parenting melts away, I’m beginning to see the grinding joylessness of family life under my rules. In the shop, I watch Jake’s brain struggle to adjust to the heady concept of limitlessness. He dances up the aisles, dazed by possibilities, turning out of habit to seek permission as he reaches for a sack of crisps. Seeing my smiley shrug, he grabs a chocolate bar next – then, like a prisoner acclimatising to freedom, two great handfuls. The only point at which I intervene is when he asks the shopkeeper for “two cans of Stella Art… Art… Artoize”. We come home with £52-worth of fizzy drinks, sweets, crisps and cookies, which the boys lay out across the kitchen table like a gaudy tablecloth spun from confectionery. Our fruit bowls and jars of lentils and seeds on the shelves now look as if they have been Photoshopped in from somebody else’s house. The kitchen resembles a reality TV set housing two ludicrously incompatible families. While the sugar-rush kicks in, an almighty pillow fight breaks out, and it begins to feel a bit Lord Of The Flies. Jake sets up an old Wii donated by a family friend. Ordinarily, the boys are allowed 15 minutes a day of TV after school, movies at weekends, and no other screens, unless a) at other people’s houses, b) on long-haul flights, or c) on holidays where a luggage allowance can’t accommodate a fortnight’s worth of Lego/books/lightsabers, etc. My iPad will occasionally be deployed in an emergency situation, but that’s the extent of the boys’ access to technology. Having grown up in the 70s without a television, I consider these rules quite generous – but then, the appeal of electronic devices has always been lost on me. Jake and Joe are hoping to use this opportunity to convert me to their charms – and so, at the age of 47, I play my first video game. It is called Bomberman Land. They’re so thrilled to see their mum operate a console, I almost want to enjoy it. Instead, I’m nonplussed, and very quickly bored. They get me to play Lego Batman next, but it makes me feel seasick. Puzzled by my failure to share their enthusiasm, they invite their eight-year-old friend John round. When Joe shrieks at him, “We’re never going to bed!” it strikes me that I might need some company, too. I rustle up some friends, Chinese delivery and wine, and we have the loveliest evening, joyously uninterrupted by the tedium of bedtime rituals. No teeth will be brushed, no toys tidied away. The kids don’t even need to be fed. They work their way through their provisions like locusts, until the house is littered in a confetti of wrappers. By 1.30am, I cannot keep my eyes open, and go to bed with three boys hunched beside me, playing Lego Harry Potter on the Wii. When I awake at 4.50am, I think I must be dreaming. Last New Year’s Eve, Jake stayed up until 3am – but that was at a party, and even then Joe folded by midnight. I would have said it wasn’t physically possible for them to last any longer. But beside me in the bed are three small boys, wide awake, eyes glued to the video game. At 7.30am, I find them asleep, fully dressed, surrounded by cookie crumbs and crumpled Fanta cans. Shortly after 8am, Joe appears downstairs. I ask how he feels. “Good. I nearly just vomited. But yeah, good.” He takes a can of Coke from the fridge, pours himself a bowl full of condensed sweetened milk, and eats it with a spoon. When it’s all gone, he moves on to the Nutella. To watch one’s child shovel spoonfuls from the jar into his mouth and do nothing is a kind of out-of-body experience – like observing a car crash involving your children and simply driving on by. It feels horrifying but oddly liberating. When Jake shambles downstairs – bumping off the walls, all coordination shot – the first words from his mouth are: “Can I have your phone?” And that is how the day proceeds. After John’s dad collects him, Jake and Joe summon a revolving cast of school friends who arrive with eyes like saucers, scarcely able to believe the scenes they find in our house. The curtains remain closed, my phone and laptop are commandeered, and the various devices absorb their unbroken attention. Nobody washes, or dresses, or even says much. By the evening, I feel rancid and sick. My stomach is in shock, reeling from all the sugar By afternoon, I realise what the atmosphere in the house reminds me of: it has the airless discombobulation of a student house in the 90s, the day after a big night out on ecstasy; time has been suspended, sleep forgotten, brain cells impaired. On the plus side, for the first time in about four years I’m left in peace to read not one but two Saturday papers cover to cover. If the boys are in thrall to their new freedom, a bit of me is too. I don’t have to cook, or chivvy, or entertain; I don’t have to do anything. By the evening, I feel rancid and sick. My stomach is in shock, reeling from all the sugar; all I want to do is go to bed. Jake and Joe, on the other hand, are having the time of their lives. “Brilliant!” they exclaim whenever I ask how they’re feeling. “This is the. Best. Weekend. EVER!” At around 10pm, I coax them to watch cartoons with me in my bed, calculating that once untethered from the Wii they must fall asleep, which thank God they do. “So, what do you want to do today?” They wake up with 11 hours left of their rules before we revert to mine. So far we haven’t even left the house. “Trampolining? Go-karting? Anything you want.” These activities are not typical features of our family weekends, but exist only in the prized category of annual birthday treats. “You’re in charge,” I remind them. “What shall we do?” Jake considers his options. “I think I’d just like to stay in and play on devices.” And this is what they do again, all day. All their funny and entertaining rules are forgotten; they don’t want me to do a chicken dance, or pillow fight; they forget all about emailing Donald Trump. They don’t even want KFC or Burger King, but send me back to the shop for another £20-worth of chemically coloured sugar. By now, pancakes are looking like a pretty nutritious food group to me, so while the boys stare at more screens I make some. As I line breakfast trays with colourful napkins, arrange toppings into pretty glass ramekins and serve the boys on the sofa, it dawns on me that I never, ever do this. I tell my kids I love them all the time – but when do I show it? I’m always too busy processing them through the interminable drill of teeth, shoes, PE kit, coats, to think to stop and make a fuss of them. I’d never noticed how often I say no to my kids until they banned it, but now I think about it I can’t remember the last time I said yes when they asked me to play. Mortified, I bound into the living room and challenge the boys to a Laser Tag battle. I might as well have marched into a crack den and proposed a game of croquet. Jake and Joe are dead-eyed and sluggish, stinking of stale sweat, oblivious to anything but the Wii; within 48 hours, technology and sugar have stripped all the vitality of childhood away, and turned them into drug addicts. The analogy sounds melodramatic, but the parallels are unmistakable. I think back to day one, and to Jake’s heady spirits. It had felt delightful. But I fear it was just what’s known as a “We’ve-Called-The-Dealer!” high, the only difference being that the boys’ drugs of choice are both legal and considered perfectly normal. The epiphany of the weekend is my neglect of frivolity, and we revert to my rules with a new resolve to make family life more fun. But if the boys had hoped their rules might relax mine on video games and sweets, the plan has badly backfired. When our mum told us that we were going to get to set our own rules, we wanted to start straight away. We were looking forward to doing it so much, and it was so exciting. We did the easy ones first, like unlimited screens and sweets, stay up all night; but then we thought of some whackier ones. When our friend John came round for a sleepover, it was more like the longest playdate in the world, because there was no sleep. I learned that no rules is the best thing ever, and I wish it was like that every day. If we did it again, I wouldn’t change a single rule. My favourite thing was Mum spending so much money on lots of sweets. On Saturday morning, I felt like I was going to vomit, but I didn’t, so I carried on eating them. Setting our own rules was fun, but it was quite unhealthy for us. By the end of the weekend my tummy stuck out about a metre. I think if we were in charge all the time, we might get ill. But I’d love to do it again. On the first day of kids’ rules, it was snowing and school was closed. My wife, Bridget, was at work, our one-year old son Ezra was with his childminder, and I was at home with our six-year-old daughter, Laila, who was busy wolfing down a bowl of Coco Pops. When we first told Laila that we were going to consent to her every demand, she started with the food: “I want Coco Pops for breakfast and chips with peas and fish fingers for dinner every day. And I want to eat my pudding before dinner – because pudding is the best part.” No more granola; no more boring old vegetables and grains. Then she got into the swing of things: no more arguments, no phone at dinner time, no set bedtime. Ordinarily, on a day off, Laila would have asked me to read her a book, or she would have drawn pictures or played with her toys. Not today. “I want to watch Ben & Holly’s Magic Kingdom”. Bridget grew up in a family that did not own a television until she was 16, and Laila watches less television than many of her friends – about half an hour every other Saturday. And now here she was, still in her pyjamas, watching what turned out to be two hours of television, the equivalent of eight weeks’ worth in her ordinary life. Bridget and I have been together for 10 years and my guess is that we don’t argue any more than other married couples, but we also don’t argue any less. Yet one of Laila’s rules was no more arguing. It didn’t take long after Bridget had returned from work for the first argument to begin brewing, but we had to stop ourselves. We focused on frying Laila’s dinner. When her food was ready, Laila refused to sit down on her chair: she wanted to eat lying flat on the floor. We couldn’t argue with her – or with each other – so we sat there growing silently annoyed. On the first night, Laila asked that Bridget and I put her to bed together – taking it in turns to read a book to her. That was lovely – our little girl snuggled up between us as we read Moominsummer Madness. At bathtime she had asked Bridget to join her in the tub. It was touching how many of her rules were aimed at spending more time with us. I wondered if this was a reaction to the fact that since her brother, Ezra, had been born, the amount of attention we could devote exclusively to her had inevitably been reduced. I had always thought that the greatest gift I could give my daughter was to make her aware of the music of Bruce Springsteen – I had sung his songs to her at bedtime since she was born – so I was a little hurt when she demanded a change the moment she was in charge. “I want something from Matilda,” she said. I dutifully looked up the lyrics to When I Grow Up – which, while lacking the narrative drama of Springsteen’s The River, was not half bad. We felt like terrible parents to be allowing it, but each time we suggested anything sensible, she would start screaming On the second day, Laila continued with her diet of Coco Pops, chips and television, but decided she didn’t just want us to both read to her: she also wanted to sleep in the same bed as Bridget. I was exiled to the sofa bed. I had hoped, perhaps naively, that there might be the tiniest hint of gratitude for the fact that Bridget and I were indulging her every whim. No chance. That night, neither Bridget nor Laila slept well and the following day the combination of sugar, sleep deprivation and freedom pushed her over the edge. She woke up grumpy and hungry. The Coco Pops may have been delicious but they weren’t filling her up. The hunger mutated to irritability. She refused to put on her coat or wellington boots to go out on to the snowy streets, and insisted on walking outside barefoot in tights and a summer dress. We felt like terrible parents to be allowing it, but each time we suggested anything that seemed like sensible advice, she would start screaming, calling us stupid and telling us to shut up. She screamed on the street and howled and writhed on the London underground as commuters tried to avert their eyes. She screamed her demands to watch her favourite programme in a way that was both terrifying and heart-breaking: “I want Ben & Holly NOW and when I say now I mean NOW!” she shouted. I felt grateful that the man who lived in the flat below us is in his 80s and hard of hearing. We tried to remind her of all the toys and books and crayons and games she had. Laila looked at them and said two words I don’t recall her ever saying: “I’m bored.” We have always tried to offer a united front in the face of challenges, but Bridget and I had very different ideas about how to deal with Laila’s behaviour. I had been raised in a family where I would not have dared to raise my voice to my dad – he was never physical but he exerted such authority that to talk back to him, even in my 20s, was unthinkable. Bridget’s parents encouraged her to show emotion – and as a teenager she threatened to throw a chair at her mother. And so, in the face of Laila’s meltdown, Bridget and I found ourselves arguing about the best course of action, which of course prompted Laila to point out: “You’re not allowed to argue in front of me.” Bridget stormed out of the room, accidentally stepping on a beloved furry rabbit ears headband, which broke, prompting more wails from Laila. Ordinarily, the ears would have not been on the floor because they would have been tidied away, but the Laila rules stipulated that she did not have to do any tidying. “Laila, I don’t like what you’re turning into,” Bridget said plaintively. “I want Ben & Holly!” screamed Laila, and deliberately tipped a glass of water on to the carpet. “That’s it,” said Bridget, “we are abandoning this bloody experiment!” Laila was beside herself. I wondered whether we had ended the experiment or whether the experiment had ended us. A few days later, I was putting Laila to bed and she was being her old self – funny, clever and loving. This transformation back to something close to her old self was, for me, an indication of the dangers in giving children what they want, rather than what they need. That said, being made aware of just how important Laila found spending time with us has led me to try to be more present for her when I am with her – and not to keep using my phone in front of her. The following morning, Laila was digging into a bowl of granola. “I’m wondering how the other families are doing with the children being the boss? I’m guessing it’s going bad.” “Why do you say that?” I asked. Laila looked up at me. “Because it went bad for us,” she replied. I came up with the rules by thinking about what my favourite things were and I tried to make them into a list. I also didn’t want Mummy and Daddy to argue because it is a bit annoying because it’s a bit noisy. I liked them both putting me to bed because it was nice to hear both their different voices. It was nice to be between them in bed because I could curl up with both of them. I think grownups should set the rules because it is more healthy. If I just ate chips and Coco Pops I would maybe vomit a hundred times a day. With more than 15 years between my five children, negotiating rules they all agree on turns out to be an immensely complicated process, and is possibly the reason we have so few rules in our house anyway. It’s brought home to me as I herd them around the kitchen table, hoping for a serious and productive discussion. Lester, the youngest at 18 months, swings his bare feet in his highchair, idly tipping a beaker of milk on to the floor. The eldest, Jimmy, 17, slouches at the far end of the table, glowering with a tangible sense that rules are only made to be broken. He only looks from his phone when he actually catches the gist of what I’m proposing. “So, like, we’ll be able to do anything we want and you have to let it go?” he says, pausing mid Snapchat to listen. Patiently, I start explaining that he can dictate certain rules I must obey, until I realise he’s turning my speech into a Snapchat Story, and I hurriedly have to shut the meeting down before I’m shared as a humiliating social media meme. With two distinct age groups in our family – the teenagers, Jimmy and Dolly, 14, and the pre-schoolers, Lester, Dash, three, and Evangeline, five – we create two sets of rules. The smaller children’s demands don’t look too exhausting, as they want to do things like eat more pizza and sweets, and watch more telly. But the teenagers challenge me. I feel like Theresa May during Brexit negotiations, as I start out convinced I can have my cake and eat it, but quickly realise I won’t get what I want and that it’s going to hurt. Not all of it’s painful – Dolly wants regular themed cooking evenings and a family games night, which almost breaks my heart – but Jimmy goes for the jugular, demanding a lift anywhere, at any time. This is my achilles heel. We live in rural Oxfordshire, on the edge of a tiny village with no school, shop or pub. It’s not as remote as living in the Brecon Beacons, or the Highlands, but we have to drive absolutely everywhere; by 7.30pm, when the smaller children are in bed, I’ll do anything not to have to run a taxi service for the teenagers. I hope this environment has given Jimmy, whose desire to be as far away as possible from family life is more finely developed than Dolly’s, a more profound relationship with the natural world. I sometimes feel he’s like a character in a Thomas Hardy novel, as he spends a lot of time walking to meet mates across ploughed fields, often by moonlight or in driving rain. I’m under no illusion he’s not up to all the usual teenage tricks, as he’s able to get pizza, and probably all sorts of other things teenagers enjoy, delivered to nearby fields where he meets friends. But I like to think it’s also given him a special appreciation of the eerie shriek of a fox at night, or the strange, blank stare of a swooping barn owl. But under his new rules, I’ll have to drive him everywhere. Despite my impending sense of exhaustion, the rules bring a sense of celebration to the house. Dolly finds the Monopoly and Cluedo sets, which haven’t seen an outing in a while, and several packs of cards appear, as if she’s setting up a casino in the playroom. At the supermarket, Evangeline and Dash are vigilant about picking out packets of pepperoni and mozzarella for pizzas, and add several extra bags of Haribos they’d never usually get past me to the shopping basket. On their watch, I feel more playful, and less didactic and shouty than normal. I give in to the chaos more readily Dolly and Jimmy are also quite demanding about meal planning and want a rolling programme of Mexican, Thai, Lebanese, Chinese and Indian meals cooked for them. I start off with huge culinary enthusiasm, knocking up enchiladas and guacamole, prawn toast and tom yum, fried haloumi and Lebanese salad from scratch every night. In theory, this is great for all of us, but as I’ve promised pizza on demand to the younger children, I’m also dealing with a gang of floury elves at my feet, squabbling over whose turn it is to sprinkle the mozzarella. It’s like running an international all-you-can-eat buffet every evening. By day four, I’ve swapped homemade sourdough pizza dough for ready-rolled, and bought a take-away Chinese for the teenagers. Under their rules, at the end of the evening, when I would usually whip through a single chapter of reading to the younger children, I now have to read “for as long as we want”. When I finally get back downstairs to the kitchen, I’m confronted by Jimmy, on his third bowl of Krave cereal, despite having eaten supper an hour before, demanding a lift to town to meet a friend. Late-night driving is a nightmare in the country, but especially at this point in the winter, when the nights are long, icy and bitterly cold. Under normal circumstances, I would not even consider it. The week is properly draining, and at one point the younger children become slightly deranged by their free-range life, fighting over sweets which seem to be strewn all over the house like sticky confetti. The biggest row of the week is between Dash and Evangeline, who both want credit for having come up with the idea of sweets on tap, and I find Dash screaming at his sister, holding a fistful of her hair, as she stuffs Jelly Babies into her mouth. “I want a rule! Where are my rules? I want some rules!” he wails. There were more surprising results, too. I’d expected the younger kids to be glued to the TV, but they seem to forget about it quite quickly. They love the amount of bedtime reading they get, but even Dash admitted that sleeping in his own bed was better, as there were “too many legs” in mine. On their watch, I feel more playful, and less didactic and shouty than normal. I give in to the chaos more readily, which is a revelation, and certainly more effective at thrusting me into the moment than any amount of meditation and mindfulness. Endless cooking of themed suppers requires careful shopping, but it’s also bonding. Amazingly, once I give in and stop fighting the idea, even the late-night driving has some benefits. Close to midnight, driving through the darkness, Jimmy and I have some of our best conversations. Away from the white noise of the younger children, I nag less and he opens up more, and it gives us precious time together. It was good to be the official voice in the way the house is run. I mean, we all do what we want most of the time anyway, but it was nice to actually have it in writing. Some of the rules seemed momentous when we set them, but in reality weren’t that life-changing. Like with sleep: I realised I’m quite responsible about the time I go to bed, as we have to get up really early to get to school in time. It was great being the boss for once, as she’s a massive boss. I’m 17, she’s 42, so we’re living in a constant power struggle anyway. I just enjoyed being more involved with cooking, and making sure we spend time together as a family. Mum’s usually quite tired by the time the kids go to bed, as they’re insanely noisy, but because we’d made a commitment to play games together in the evening, we kept to it. That felt special. • Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).