A Michigan State University official who oversaw a clinic that employed Larry Nassar was charged on Tuesday with sexually harassment and compiling nude student selfies on his work computer, in the first charges to spring from an investigation into how complaints against the disgraced former sports doctor were handled. William Strampel, who until December was dean of the College of Osteopathic Medicine, was also charged with failing to enforce or monitor protocols set for Nassar after a female patient complained of inappropriate sexual contact. The 70-year-old Strampel, who has been jailed, was scheduled for arraignment in the afternoon. His attorney, John Dakmak, declined to comment. The complaint, which alleges Strampel solicited nude photos from at least one female medical student, said he used his office to “harass, discriminate, demean, sexually proposition, and sexually assault female students in violation of his statutory duty as a public officer.” His computer contained approximately 50 photos of female genitalia, nude and semi-nude women, sex toys and pornography. “Many of these photos are of what appear to be ‘selfies’ of female MSU students, as evidence by the MSU clothing and piercings featured in multiple photos,” according to the complaint. He is also accused of grabbing students’ buttocks on the dance floor at the college’s annual ball and at a scholarship dinner. The maximum penalty for the charges ranges from one year in jail to five years in prison. Nassar pleaded guilty to molesting patients and possessing child pornography and is expected to spend the rest of his life in prison. Strampel took a leave of absence for medical reasons in December. He told police last year that he failed to follow up an order for Nassar in 2014 to have a third person present when providing treatment to “anything close to a sensitive area.” In letting Nassar resume seeing patients, he also said any skin-to-skin contact should be minimal and needed to be explained in detail. Nassar was fired in 2016 for violating the rule. More than 250 girls and women have sued Michigan State, Strampel and other current and former university officials, as well as USA Gymnastics where Nassar also worked. John Manly, a lawyer for many of the victims, said his clients were encouraged by the development. “It demonstrates that [the Michigan attorney general] is serious about investigating the systemic misconduct at MSU that led to the largest child sex abuse scandal in history and holding the responsible parties accountable,” he said. A Michigan State spokeswoman said the university would continue cooperating with any investigations and pointed to Engler’s past statements. “William Strampel did not act with the level of professionalism we expect from individuals who hold senior leadership positions, particularly in a position that involves student and patient safety,” Engler said last month.