This popular snack, though easy to make, is a lovely example of Hangzhou cuisine. The slippery wontons are served in a broth all floaty with shrimps, seaweed and spring onions: refreshing and soothing at the same time. Wonton skins can be bought fresh or frozen in most Chinese food shops; they should be very thin and supple. Serves 4 as a snack or appetiser, 2 for breakfast or lunchFor the wontonsginger 20g piece, unpeeledminced pork 150g egg ½, beatenShaoxing wine 1 tsp sesame oil ½ tsp saltground white pepperstock 3 tbspspring onion greens 3 tbsp, finely sliced wonton wrappers 200g packet plain flour to dust For the soupegg 1 cooking oil clear stock 750ml-1 litre papery dried shrimps 1-2 tbsp spring onion greens 4-8 tbsp, finely sliced cooking oil or lard 2 tsp salt and ground white pepperdried laver seaweed 4 good pinches For the wontons, crush the ginger with the flat of a cleaver blade or a rolling pin and put it in a cup with just enough cold water to cover. Place the pork, egg, Shaoxing wine and sesame oil in a bowl with 1½ teaspoon of the ginger water and salt and pepper to taste. Stir well. Mix in the stock, 1 tablespoon at a time. Finally, add the spring onion greens. Fill a small bowl with cold water. Take a wonton wrapper and lay it flat in one hand. Use a table knife or a small spatula to press about 1 teaspoon of the pork mixture into the centre of the wrapper. Dip a finger into the cold water, run it around the edges of the wrapper and fold it diagonally in half. Press the edges tightly together and lay on a flour-dusted tray or large plate. Repeat. To assemble the soup, beat the egg in a small bowl. Heat an oiled frying pan over a high heat, then allow to cool slightly before adding a little fresh cooking oil. Pour in the egg and swirl it around to form a thin yellow pancake. When it is just cooked but not browned, remove it from the pan. When cool, cut it into ½cm ribbons. Bring a large pan of water to a boil over a high heat. Bring the stock to a boil in another saucepan and keep it hot. In each of four serving bowls place a generous pinch of dried shrimps, 1-2 tablespoons sliced spring onion greens, ½ teaspoon oil or lard, and salt and pepper to taste. Break the laver seaweed into small pieces and distribute among the bowls. (If you are cooking for two, redistribute the seasonings accordingly.) When the water has come to a boil, drop in the wontons. Stir gently to make sure they do not stick together. When the water returns to a rolling boil, pour in a coffee cup of cold water to calm it down. Repeat this one more time. When the water has come to a boil for the third time, the wontons should be cooked through (cut one open to make sure). Just before they are ready, divide the hot stock between the bowls. Distribute the wontons among the bowls and garnish with a few ribbons of egg.From Every Grain of Rice by Fuchsia Dunlop (Bloomsbury, £25) I’ve been making this soup for years, nearly always the same way and never from a recipe. It’s so unbelievably good that I thought I’d better note down all the things I put in it. Essentially, it begins with crab and ends with crab. But then there’s cream and thyme and cider brandy … Serves 4-6extra virgin olive oil 1 tbsp butter 1 large knob onion 1, choppedfennel bulb 1 small, trimmed and choppedcarrot 1, peeled and dicedcelery sticks 2, choppedgarlic 2 cloves, gratedbay leaf 1 thyme sprigs 2 tarragon 1 good-sized sprigpaprika 1 tsp fennel seeds 1 tsp star anise 1 small white wine ½ glass tomatoes 250g, skinned and chopped, or 250g tinned chopped tomatoescrab stock 1.2 litres (see below)double cream 75mlcider brandy 1 small glass salt and black pepper For the crab stockbrown or spider crab 2 picked shells, including legs and bodyfresh flat-fish frames (skeletons) 2 onion 1, thinly slicedcelery sticks 2, roughly choppedthyme 1 small bunch parsley a few stalks (optional)garlic 1 or 2 cloves, bashed To make the crab stock, bash the crab shells to break them up into pieces and place them with all the other stock ingredients into a large pan with 2 litres of water. Bring to a simmer over a medium-high heat. Cook gently for 1 hour, using a ladle to skim away any froth that rises to the surface. Remove from the heat and cool, then pass through a fine sieve and set aside. You should end up with about 1.2 litres or so of stock. To make the soup, put the olive oil and butter in a heavy based pan over a medium heat. When it’s bubbling away, add the onion, fennel, carrot, celery, garlic, bay leaf, thyme and tarragon. Cook, stirring regularly, for 4-5 minutes. Add the paprika, fennel seeds and star anise and cook for a further 1 minute, then add the wine and chopped tomatoes. Stir well to combine and cook for a further 4-5 minutes. Add the crab stock, and bring up to gentle simmer. Cook for 25-30 minutes, then remove the soup from the heat and allow to cool for 20 minutes. Puree the soup in a blender, in batches if necessary, until smooth. (You could use a hand blender in the pan, if you prefer – make sure you get a smooth consistency, though.) Pass the soup through a sieve set over a clean pan. You may need to push it through with the back of a spoon or ladle. Return the soup to the heat and bring to a very gentle simmer. Stir in the cream and the brandy, then season with salt and black pepper to taste. Serve the soup in warmed bowls. You can finish it with a swirl of cream if you like, some cracked black pepper, and a little dressed crab meat – or a cracked crab claw.From Gather by Gill Meller (Quadrille, £25) This is an amazing, light soup made with prawns and squid and delicate fumet (fish stock) whose flavours are beautifully balanced by the sweetness of the carrot and the acidity of the tomatoes. Serves 4olive oil 4 tbsp onion ½, finely choppedtomatoes 100g, gratedsea saltsquid 100g, cut into 2cm pieces (or squid rings)potato 1 small, chopped into around 1cm piecescarrot 1, coarsely gratedfumet blanco (white fish stock) 1 litre, at room temperature (see below)peeled prawns 200g, cut into 2cm piecesparsley 1 tbsp, chopped For the fumet blanco (makes around 1.3 litres)fish bones 500g onion 1, roughly choppedcarrot 1, roughly choppedcelery 2 sticks, roughly choppedleek 1, roughly choppedbay leaf 1 For the fumet blanco, put all the ingredients into a large pan. Add 1.5 litres of cold water and heat slowly until boiling (this will take about 25 minutes), then take off the heat. Strain well through a very fine sieve. Heat the oil in a deep pan or casserole on a low medium heat. Add the onion, stir and leave to sweat for 2 minutes. Mix in the tomato and a pinch of salt, coating the tomato in oil and onion and allowing the mixture to continue sweating for 4 more minutes. Add the squid and stir into the other ingredients, then fry over a medium heat until the squid and onion just start to brown. Add the potato and carrot, stirring and frying for 2 more minutes, then pour in 200ml of the stock, stir and turn up the heat, mixing the juices from the bottom of the pan into the stock. Pour in the remaining stock and bring gently back to the boil. Turn down the heat, skim off any froth, and simmer until the potato is cooked. Take the pan from the heat and add the pieces of prawn. Leave the soup to rest for 5 minutes, which will allow the prawn pieces to cook through in the hot liquid while preserving their texture and flavour. Taste and season with a little more salt if necessary. Serve immediately in soup bowls, sprinkled with parsley.From Brindisa by Monika Linton (Harper Collins, £29.95) The simplest of soups, this clear, golden broth is the perfect cure for all that ails the mind, body or soul. There’s a reason why it’s called Jewish penicillin. “Use good chicken” seems like tired advice, but it’s particularly relevant here. Serves 4 For the soupwhole chicken 1.4kg, cut into pieces, or 1.4kg chicken wingsonion 1, whole and skin removedcarrot 1 medium, whole and peeledceleriac ¼, peeled (or 2 sticks celery)fresh thyme 3 sprigs fresh bay leaves 2 whole black peppercorns 1 tsp fine sea salt 1 tsp to serve fresh dill, matzo balls (see below) and Kosher egg noodles (available from most supermarkets) For the matzo balls (makes 8, or 4 portions) rendered chicken fat 30g, or finely chopped skinchicken stock or soup 135ml egg 1 fine sea salt a good pinch medium matzo meal 100g baking powder ½ tsp To make the matzo balls, chop the chicken skin (if using) finely, or pulse in a food processor until finely chopped. Combine the wet ingredients and salt in a large bowl, and then gradually add the matzo meal and baking powder, mixing all the time. Leave the mix to set in the fridge for an hour. Roll your matzo balls into 8 balls (about 30-40g each), then put into boiling, salted water, for 6 minutes. They’ll float and puff considerably. You can use immediately, or cool and freeze for another day. Lightly season the chicken pieces or wings with salt and roast at 190C/gas mark 5 for 30 minutes, until the outside has just started to colour. Put the roasted chicken into a large pot. Leave behind any resulting juice or fat. (Valuable, and delicious, but it will make your soup cloudy – save it for the matzo balls.) Add the rest of the soup ingredients to the pot, and cover with 2.5 litres of cold water. Bring to a boil over a high heat. Use a ladle to skim away the resulting scum, which will make the soup cloudy, and reduce to a low simmer. Continue simmering for 1½-2 hours. Remove the chicken pieces and leave to cool, then strain the soup through a fine sieve. Return to a clean pan. Boil for 5-10 minutes, to intensify the flavour, and season with salt and pepper if required. Pick the chicken from the pieces and slice the carrot to add to the soup. Serve with lots of dill, the matzo balls, and lokshen noodles.Owen Barratt is co-owner and head chef at Monty’s Deli, London N1 Serves 6unpodded peas 1.5kg (500g podded)mint stalks a generous handful spring onions 1 bunch, washed, root ends trimmedolive oil 4-6 tbsp fennel bulb 1 small, washed and roughly choppeddesiree or king edward potatoes 200g, washed, peeled and roughly choppedcelery 2 sticks, washed and roughly choppedmint leaves small bunch spinach or parsley leaves 75g Greek or similar good quality yogurt 170ml mint sprigs 6 small First make the pea stock: pod the peas and divide them into 2 bowls – the large peas with the medium ones and the tiny peas apart. Reserve the pods, wash them and place in a pan with the mint stalks, barely cover with water (about 1.25 litres) and bring to the boil. Simmer for 10-15 minutes or until the stock is flavourful, then strain. Slice the white part of the spring onions roughly and the green part very finely. In a heavy-based saucepan heat the olive oil and, over a gentle heat, cook the white part of the spring onion, fennel, potato and celery until just beginning to soften. Do not colour the vegetables – they should simply stew slowly in the oil. Add salt, pepper and a litre of the stock, and simmer until the vegetables are completely soft. Add the large and medium peas and simmer for 3 minutes. Finally add the mint leaves and the spinach or parsley leaves, remove from the heat immediately, and stir together so that the leaves start to wilt. Cool for a few minutes and then place the bulk of the vegetables in a food processor or liquidiser (take care not to overfill the bowl or flask as the contents will still be very warm and therefore dangerous). Slowly add the liquid from the pan and puree until smooth. Pour through a medium-gauge sieve into a clean container, pushing the debris through with the back of a ladle. Place the container over a bowl of iced water so that the soup chills as quickly as possible. (The quicker this is done, the brighter the green the soup will remain.) Add the remaining pea stock to the soup until the correct consistency is reached – remembering that the soup will thicken on cooling. Taste and adjust seasoning and chill until ready to serve. Blanch the small peas in a pan of boiling salted water, strain and chill in iced water, then drain. Add the finely sliced green parts of the spring onion with a touch of olive oil and salt. To serve, whip the yogurt with a little cold water until smooth and the consistency of single cream. Give the soup a good stir and a final taste, pour into six chilled soup plates, drizzle with the yogurt, sprinkle with the peas and garnish with the mint sprigs.From 30 Ingredients by Sally Clarke (Frances Lincoln, £25)