In Sydney’s Martin Place, a vending machine selling various abstract concepts is running low on Imagination but has plenty of Structure. The Intangible Goods vending machine, an art installation from the City of Sydney, sells small packets of homemade cards, maps and knick-knacks, dressed up to look like (admittedly fancy) chips and chocolate bars. There are 10 concepts, designed to address common mental health needs, from Bravery to Spontaneity to Purpose. The machine is designed to make psychology and mental health more approachable, say artists Mark Starmach and Elizabeth Commandeur. All proceeds go to mental health charities and schizophrenia research. At 1pm on Thursday, the vending machine is nearly empty. Business is booming. The machine itself only takes $2 coins, which makes things slightly difficult. In order to get enough Belonging and Spontaneity for the whole office I need to stand in line at the bank for a very long time. Inside the packets are a variety of physical objects, mostly cards. Structure has productivity tips, Friendship has 10 daily activities to keep in touch with old acquaintances. Spontaneity tells you to open the bag, blow in it, and pop it next to someone’s ear. Imagination has a pencil, and asks you to draw a series of impossible objects, which is really just Pictionary. Jess, a participant, has bought one packet of Chill and one of Structure. She says she was drawn to the mental health aspect of the project. “Mental illness is the one thing no one is paying attention to,” she says. “I think to a certain degree we all have these problems. “I’m always complaining that my husband doesn’t have structure and he’s always complaining I should chill. So I reckon we should get one each and see how it goes.” When she opens her packet, the top card says: “Wake up one hour earlier than usual.” “I’m not sure if it’s doable,” she says. She points at another that says “abstain from all forms of internet”. “I’m thinking this belongs more to the Chill pack, but it’s interesting,” she says. “I would like to see him actually do that. We might give it a try over the weekend.” Gisela, another participant, has bought Reassurance. “I heard about this so we just bought one because it sounded fun. Reassurance, everyone wants that.” “I thought it was a really cool concept,” she says. “The idea that everyone is so obsessed with material goods. This feels likes something material but is actually so much more important.” Commandeur and Starmach say they designed and created the packets themselves, and have a stock of roughly 4,000. “We surveyed about 500 Sydneysiders on what they needed most in their lives, and what their friends needed, and based on those results we worked with three mental health professionals,” Commandeur says. Her favourite is Belonging, which gives people a small map of Sydney and three stars to stick on a place that means a lot to them. Starmach’s favourite is Spontaneity. This is because he is not very spontaneous, he says. They have both been taken aback by the amount of interest the project is receiving. “We didn’t expect the demand we’re getting,” Starmach says. “Maybe it just shows our emotional and psychological needs in society.” The pair fill the machine with 250 packets a day and it usually sells out. “People get disappointed,” they say. “Sometimes we come here late at night just to see how it’s going, and it’s empty. People are just poking at it. It’s heartbreaking. “We’re worried about running out before it finishes. It still needs to go to Pitt Street Mall.” • Intangible Goods is part of the City of Sydney’s Art and About program. It will be at Customs House Square from 30 March to 3 April and Pitt Street mall from 4-8 April.