The daggers were already out for Bert van Marwijk after an awful coaching debut against Norway in Oslo. With limited preparation time, the Socceroos were disjointed and listless in a 4-1 drubbing at the hands of a lower-ranked opponent. The Dutchman got several of his selections wrong and Australia appeared a side unsure of what to do against a predictable, old-fashioned side content to lump the ball long. Normally predictable and dependable players made simple mistakes and looked all at sea. It was arguably the national team’s worst defeat for some time. Fears mounted about what the 65-year-old from Deventer, famed for his pragmatism and do-whatever-it-takes-to-get-the-job-done mentality, would do to Ange Postecoglou’s all-attacking, full-pressing team. Would the Socceroos just park the bus and hope for the best in Russia, instead of the bold and spirited display we saw in Brazil? Was a World Cup whitewash on the cards?Many of those concerns, some clearly over the top, have been allayed and daggers sheathed after a battling 0-0 draw with Colombia in London. Facing a team ranked 13th in the world – one that reached the last eight of the 2014 World Cup, boasts players on the books of Bayern Munich, Arsenal, Milan, Barcelona, Tottenham and Sampdoria, and beat France 3-2 in Paris only four days ago – there were worries the Socceroos could be well and truly blown off the park at Craven Cottage. But Van Marwijk’s team stood up to Los Cafeteros in a see-sawing 90 minutes in south-west London. While certainly they rode their luck at times, and had a left post and a dynamic Danny Vukovic dive to thank for keeping Miguel Borja at bay, this was a Socceroos performance of considerable merit. Not only did the Australians look composed and confident in their new 4-2-3-1 formation, but their speed of play and passing was light years ahead of that seen in their ordinary Oslo outing. Even the lack of Aaron Mooy, arguably Australia’s form player with Huddersfield Town, didn’t derail them. The back four was compact and unforgiving, while Massimo Luongo was a revelation in Mooy’s spot. The QPR midfielder had a hand in everything and showed why he deserves a regular place in Van Marwijk’s starting XI. The return of Tomi Juric to lead the frontline added some experience and allowed Andrew Nabbout to move back to his familiar position on the wing. Having Tom Rogic in the No 10 role, instead of makeshift playmaker Jackson Irvine, meant the Socceroos held the ball better and created more opportunities in the final third. In Norway they barely mustered a shot on goal, but against Colombia chances fell to Juric, Nabbout, Luongo and Matthew Leckie. Aziz Behich was a handful for them to contain and Josh Ridson put in a good sift. Even though the South Americans dominated possession, enjoying 62.6% of the ball, and Borja and James Rodríguez left their finishing boots at home, there was renewed steel and intensity from the Socceroos. The jump of in class of Colombia, along with a raucous atmosphere more like a World Cup game than the stale environment in Norway’s Ullevaal Stadion, rubbed off on Australia. They lifted and performed accordingly. Those rose to the challenge and showed why, on their day, they can challenge some of the best teams in the world.More time on the training park, and more time for Van Marwijk to get his messages across, led to a more professional, eye-catching display. A month-long camp in Turkey, combined with two more friendlies against European nations, is still to come and can only be beneficial, along with the return of Trent Sainsbury. The Socceroos are not the finished article yet and have a way to go. But doom and gloom about the upcoming World Cup campaign is unfounded. With more time with his players Van Marwijk can get his vision fit and firing on all cylinders. It may not be the evangelic and idealised outfit of Postecoglou, but it will be one that Australia can still be proud of. And maybe one that can match the famed feats of the Golden Generation and get out of the group stage. The former Netherlands coach has already given four debuts in two matches, installed a new tactical system and refreshed the Socceroos training camp. Players have spoken about the fun and relaxed atmosphere that exists already under him, compared with the tense and strained mood of the Postecoglou era. Postecoglou liked to remain distant from his players and keep them on their toes in a bid to create an edgy environment. But Van Marwijk is all about keeping his cattle content and comfortable. The early signs are that this different approach, this changing of the guard, can actually bear fruit. If the Socceroos can do it against Colombia, then matching France, Denmark and Peru in three month’s time is not beyond their grasp.