Jamie Carragher has been suspended from his pundit role on Monday Night Football and his broadcasting career at Sky Sports is hanging in the balance after he spat in the direction of a 14-year-old girl. It is understood Carragher will not appear on Sky Sports coverage for at least the next week as bosses at the channel review his position. The former Liverpool defender had been due to appear on the coverage of the Premier League fixture between Stoke and Manchester City but was stood down amid growing calls for his resignation. “Sky takes this matter extremely seriously and strongly condemns Jamie’s actions,” said Sky in a statement. “We have made that clear to him in person today and suspended him from his duties. It falls well below the standards we expect of our people.” Carragher said on Sky News: “It’s difficult to explain. It was a moment of madness, four or five seconds, where I’ve lost it. “My biggest regret is for the 14-year-old girl to be caught in the middle of it. That devastates me more than anything. I’ve got a daughter exactly the same age and I can’t say how I’d react if someone did that to her.” The Danish broadcaster TV3 also dropped him from their coverage of the Manchester United and Sevilla match on Tuesday. Peter Nørrelund, head of sport at TV3 Sport, said it is yet to make a decision about Carragher’s long-term future on the station but had pulled him from its coverage of the Champions League fixture. “Jamie should have been at Old Trafford for us tomorrow and we have taken him off that,” said Nørrelund, “It would have been like sending him into a lion’s den. I have seen the video and it certainly doesn’t look good. “It is a big story in England and I wouldn’t have thought that sending him to Old Trafford would have been a good idea,” he told Danish paper BT, “and then we want his reaction and explanation for what has happened too. I don’t know what will happen [long-term]. It is not good behaviour but we are all just human beings. We want to hear from him what happened. That is the same for all employees – whether it is the receptionist or Jamie Carragher – we are not going to sanction someone until we’ve heard from them what happened.” Carragher, who has two teenage children, claimed not to have seen the 14-year-old girl in the car following Liverpool’s defeat to Manchester United on Sunday. The driver had pulled up alongside Carragher and was goading him about the 2-1 defeat when he wound down his window and spat into the car, with the 14-year-old girl commenting on the video that his spit had hit her. He revealed he had already contacted the girl’s family and wrote on Twitter: “Totally out of order and I’ve apologised personally to all the family this evening. I was goaded 3/4 times along the motorway while being filmed & lost my rag. No excuse apologies.”