Donald Trump has threatened to veto the omnibus spending bill that was passed by Congress on Thursday, raising the spectre of another government shutdown. In a Friday morning tweet, the president cited the lack of immigration measures in the $1.3tn budget, which passed the House and Senate on Thursday hours after the 2,232-page text was released to lawmakers and despite opposition from groups on the right and left. Without new funding the federal government would be partially shut down, a third such closure in months. Trump’s move was a total reversal from White House statements issued on Thursday on the funding bill. Speaking then at the White House, Mick Mulvaney, the head of Office of Management and Budget, insisted that Trump supported the bill. “Is the president going to sign the bill? The answer is yes,” Mulvaney told reporters. The top Trump aide did note that the White House did not consider the omnibus bill to be ideal, as it contained compromises. “This is what it looks like when you don’t have 60 votes in the Senate and Democrats get to take their pound of flesh,” he said. The bill boosts military spending and takes some actions on gun control but does not include protections for young undocumented migrants brought to the country as children, known as Dreamers and protected under an Obama-era executive order, Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals or Daca. The budget does include $1.6bn for barriers along the southern border but it is not authorized to be used on the wall prototypes that Trump recently viewed in California. Trump’s 2016 campaign made building a wall on the US-Mexico border a signature issue – Trump repeatedly promised that Mexico would pay for it. “I am considering a VETO of the Omnibus Spending Bill,” Trump wrote on Friday morning, “based on the fact that the 800,000 plus DACA recipients have been totally abandoned by the Democrats (not even mentioned in Bill) and the BORDER WALL, which is desperately needed for our National Defense, is not fully funded.” The DACA program was canceled by Trump in September 2017. However, ongoing litigation has kept protection for many dreamers temporarily in place. Trump previously rejected a deal with Democrats that would have protected Dreamers in exchange for $25bn for a border wall. “DACA was abandoned by the Democrats,” Trump tweeted. “Very unfair to them! Would have been tied to desperately needed Wall.”