Philip Pullman is at work. Not writing, but carpentry (nice workshop, by the way; lots of kit. I guess 20m book sales buy you a chisel or two). “A plane is a lovely tool, it really is,” he says, planing away. “Because you take off little bits, little tiny bits, little shivers, little slivers of wood, until you’ve got the thickness that you want.” Woodwork and writing novels is all the same, really. Just craft. “I enjoy making all sorts of things,” he tells Alan Yentob. “I enjoy making things out of bits of wood, I enjoy the process of constructing a story and making it work better.” Perhaps, in some ways, carpentry is harder because if you go too far, there’s no going back. A plane has no undo-edit key. Pullman isn’t just very good at his craft – the main one, writing – he’s also good at talking about it. Such as on the importance of rhythm, for example. “You have to hear what you’re writing,” he says. “Because prose isn’t simply a sort of porridge with no structure. It’s got a metrical structure, and if you’re not aware of it, you damn well should be.” Yes! There’s too much porridge being served up. Please, sir, no more. For anyone who tries to do a bit of chiselling themselves, there’s a lot to take note of here. It’s not just a workshop, though. He talks about his own life and the influences that made him the person and the writer he is. Such as his mother reading him Kipling’s Just So Stories, which he loved for their intoxicating rhythm (there it is again). He began to discover the words for himself, and engaged with language. He talks about living abroad: the ships, the sea and the thrill of arriving in a new port. And time spent with his vicar grandfather in Wales, his love of the Bible and the hymns, which became a part of him. He talks about His Dark Materials, and how organised religion and religious power are evil. And about Milton, Blake and the business – and necessity – of growing up. And how Chambers Dictionary is the best because it tells you that feisty means farty. And about daemons and Dust. And about how he is a realist, not a fantasist, and that his main interest is the way real people behave and what it means to be human. And about teaching, and having to come to terms with his pilot father’s suicide. And about his own death, which he contemplates more and more. And so on … I hope he’s right about death; that it’s how it goes in The Amber Spyglass. So when you die, you have to give an account of yourself – tell the Harpies about your life, about what you saw, knew and did. If it’s true, and resonates with them, then you’re free, to dissolve and become part of the universe again. But then Pullman says: “It’s no good going there and saying: ‘Well, I watched the television mainly.’ That won’t get you out of the World of the Dead.” Which for me is a worry, as that is what I will have done. I better do more stuff if I’m ever to get out of the World of the Dead. Yentob has been known to photobomb (or docobomb?) his own Imagine films. There can be too much of him in them. But in this one he keeps a relatively low profile – sensibly, given all the sense and wisdom coming from the subject. Top punditry, too – other (top) writers, as you’d expect, and booky people: Pullman’s agent and his publisher, who couldn’t put The Ruby in the Smoke down. But also Maggie Aderin-Pocock, the space scientist, who talks about the place Pullman’s work has in the universe. Peter Hitchens, the Christian zealot and former Marxist, appears to tell us that Pullman’s work is propaganda and an attempt to undermine the basis of Christian faith. Rowan Williams, the former archbishop of Canterbury, believes it’s useful for the Christian church to have these questions asked. It’s a fascinating film about a truly amazing craftsman. As in writer. I’m not so sure about the carpentry. Looking at whatever it is he is planing, it looks uneven and gouged out – a bit shoddy, to be honest. It’s probably just a prop for the film, though, to illustrate the craft comparison. But maybe don’t give up the day job just yet, Philip.