The book I am currently readingA Dictionary of the English Language by Samuel Johnson (with regular help from the OED and Merriam-Webster). All words are good words. I find reading a dictionary the best way to befriend them at a time when they are so often abused in public life. The book that changed my lifeEvery book I finish reading (I don’t finish every book I start) changes my life. Some move me an inch; others take the ground from under me. Both experiences are essential. The book I wish I’d writtenHerman Melville’s Moby-Dick. The book that had the greatest influence on my writingThe Collected Stories by William Trevor. I learned writing by reading his work. The book that is most underratedJude the Obscure by Thomas Hardy, under-read even among those who love Hardy. His other novels seem more accessible but I always return to Jude. The book that changed my mindElbow Room by James Alan McPherson. It’s a collection of difficult stories and McPherson did not make any attempt to make them less difficult or challenging for readers. The book helps me understand Emily Dickinson’s statement of feeling “as if the top of my head were taken off”. In every reader’s heart there is a graveyard of unfinished books; for every book I like I also bury many I don’t like The last book that made me cryThis Real Night by Rebecca West. I was at an airport when I read the last 50 pages and I wept unabashedly – and I’m a dry-eyed reader in general. The last book that made me laughI Pose by Stella Benson. I discovered her in a Rebecca West letter and an entry in Virginia Woolf’s diary. The thought that I could have gone on without knowing Benson’s work is bafflingly scary. The book I couldn’t finishIn every reader’s heart there must be a graveyard of unfinished books. For every book I like I also bury many I don’t like. The book I’m most ashamed not to have readAll the books by Roald Dahl except for James and the Giant Peach. My younger son is a big fan of Dahl. Unfortunately I’ve only read one book by him so I’ve missed some opportunities for conversations. The book I give as a giftTwo Lives by William Trevor. The book I’d most like to be remembered forI don’t know! Does a chicken have a favourite egg among the ones she lays? They must all look like good eggs if she has some ego. If she doesn’t have any ego she still goes on hatching them.