For all the teams bar one, the past four years of Formula One has proved to be a bruising business. Mercedes have taken their dominant car and engine, allied it to an exceptionally slick and efficient squad and reduced the opposition to scrabbling for any honours left in their wake. Might 2018 herald a new challenge to the silver arrows’ juggernaut? Certainly Red Bull’s team principal, Christian Horner, believes Mercedes and Ferrari have reason to fear the mavericks from Milton Keynes. The past four years have been frustrating and disheartening but it has served as a motivation at Red Bull and the team come to Melbourne this week optimistic that they can make an impact, even if toppling the champions might be a tall order. After pre-season testing, every indication is that Mercedes have a very strong car again but Red Bull may now have the edge over Ferrari to be the closest challengers to the title holders. Horner is cautious not to overstate their chances – it is believed their Renault power unit remains around 40bhp down on the Mercedes – but he is unequivocal about the threat his team represents and why. “Mercedes and Ferrari fear Red Bull more than any other team because they know the potency and capability that we have,” he says. “We don’t conform to their control. We are truly independent and will do things and go about our business in our own way.” Red Bull won four drivers’ and constructors’ titles between 2010 and 2013. When the upstart team ruled the roost it was a period the established outfits did not enjoy and Horner has said recently he believes Mercedes and Ferrari are now acting in concert over the future of the sport. A belief that has doubtless fed into the outsider mentality of his team. “Red Bull is an energy drinks company operating a team in F1, of course it doesn’t sit particularly well when you are competing against iconic brands like Ferrari and Mercedes,” says Horner. “We are happy to be perceived as a bit of a maverick. If we can grab opportunities this year, that is what we will do. We have two great drivers and are not afraid of taking risks.” Grabbing chances feels like a rather understated ambition before the season has begun but Horner is realistic. “Mercedes are four times champions and with very little regulation change you would be foolish to bet against them,” he adds, before again emphasising that the engine deficit has defined their challenge. “Nobody has been in the championship fight for the last four years. Ferrari and Red Bull have both won eight races each. Mercedes have won everything else. It’s frustrating because a lot of it is beyond our control.” But for a variety of reasons the team remain hopeful 2018 promises more. Last year they were stymied by reliability issues, particularly from the engine. Early signs are that Renault have made major steps in this area and should that be the case are expected to deliver a significant performance upgrade by mid-season. The team are also in better shape to open their campaign than at any time in recent years. This season they expect to hit the ground running rather than face a slow start and the consequent focus on just trying to catch-up. Daniel Ricciardo believes this is the best prepared the team have been since he joined in 2014. Ricciardo is one part of a formidable driver lineup. Max Verstappen is the other and both are capable of taking the fight to Mercedes if given the tools. “It is the most exciting driver pairing in F1” says Horner. “You have the emerging, enormous talent of Max, and Daniel who is approaching his peak. It is a great contest between the two of them and that gets the most out of them.” That this year’s car has a great chassis was on display at testing. Its strength is clear through the slow and medium corners, and in braking stability, strength that comes from an evolution of the car that ended last season so well, particularly in Verstappen’s hands. After a trying season where he suffered seven DNFs, the final six rounds yielded two wins and a second place and the Dutchman scored as many points in those races as anyone else, including Lewis Hamilton and Sebastian Vettel. Red Bull believe in him and he in them, signing a new contract until the end of 2020. “Max stepped it up a gear last year, he really came of age,” says Horner. “What he went through will stand him in good stead for the future. Of course frustration boiled over but largely he kept it in check and coped well.” The team principal talks of reducing the gap to Mercedes and taking advantage on the tracks that suit Red Bull, which ostensibly may not seem very different to the approach of last season but this time, it could translate into a challenge from the off rather than a final flourish. “We are going into this season in a much better position compared to the last three or four years,” says Horner, who has a clear and fundamental expectation for 2018: “Our target is to compete with Ferrari and Mercedes.”