Atlético Madrid won comfortably at Lokomotiv Moscow to progress to the last eight but Borussia Dortmund drew 0-0 with Red Bull Salzburg so the Austrian side’s 2-1 win in Germany last week was enough for them to advance. Lyon, meanwhile, lost 3-2 at home to CSKA Moscow and were eliminated on away goals. The Atlético and former Liverpool striker Fernando Torres scored twice as his side steamrollered Lokomotiv 5-1 in freezing conditions to stroll into the Europa League quarter-finals 8-1 on aggregate. The Spanish club had a 3-0 advantage from the first leg and Ángel Correa promptly stretched their lead with an arrowed low finish into the far corner in the 16th minute after dribbling his way through the defence. The Polish full-back Maciej Rybus levelled for Lokomotiv four minutes later with a stunning long-range shot but Atlético’s passage to the last eight was rarely in doubt and Saúl Ñíguez put them back in front early in the second half. Torres scored from the penalty spot – his first goal since 28 January – and struck again five minutes later before the substitute Antoine Griezmann completed the night with a chip from just inside the area. Lucas Leiva, another former Liverpool man, was on target in a 2-0 victory for Lazio that saw them progress at the expense of Dynamo Kyiv. The Serie A club had drawn 2-2 at home in the first leg but Lucas gave them the advantage when he headed home from a first-half corner. The Dutch international Stefan de Vrij added a second late on to give Lazio a creditable 4-2 aggregate victory. RB Leipzig knocked out Roberto Mancini’s Zenit St Petersburg with a 1-1 draw in Russia. Leipzig, who won the opening meeting 2-1, went ahead through Jean-Kévin Augustin only for Zenit to level through Sebastián Driussi’s back-post volley. Yet the German club would advance to Friday’s draw despite Timo Werner having an 81st-minute penalty saved. Dimitri Payet scored a penalty for Marseille as they eliminated Athletic Bilbao with a 5-2 aggregate success. Having won 3-1 in the first leg, goals from Payet and Lucas Ocampos enhanced their overall lead. Inaki Williams pulled one back but any hopes of a Bilbao revival were extinguished with Aritz Aduriz’s red card. Two security guards received minor injuries after being attacked by Marseille fans. Police also said three supporters of the French team were detained. There was also trouble at Bilbao in the previous round against Spartak Moscow, when a police officer died after clashes involving both sets of fans outside the stadium. Sporting Lisbon needed an extra-time goal from Rodrigo Battaglia to overcome the Czech club Viktoria Plzen, who were trailing 2-0 from the first leg though Marek Bakos’s double drew them level. Sporting’s Bas Dost then had a stoppage-time penalty saved, ensuring the game went to extra time, where Battaglia’s 105th-minute header proved to be the difference.