Sir Roger Bannister, the first athlete to sprint through the four-minute-mile barrier, has been hailed as a trailblazer who “made the impossible possible” and inspired generations of British people to take up sport, following his death aged 88. Sebastian Coe, president of athletics governing body the IAAF, led the tributes that also came from medicine, academia and sports administration – fields that Bannister also took to with vigour and considerable success after he hung up his spikes aged just 25. “This is a day of intense sadness both for our nation and for all of us in athletics,” said Lord Coe, who also held the mile world record during his track and field career. “There is not a single athlete of my generation who was not inspired by Roger and his achievements both on and off the track. He made the impossible possible.” Bannister had only decided at the last minute to make an attempt on the mile record on 6 May 1954 because he feared that the high winds and rain would scupper his chances. But urged on by a boisterous crowd at the Iffley Road track in Oxford, and expertly paced by Chris Brasher and then Chris Chataway, he came home in 3 minutes 59.4 seconds. “The world’s best runners had been attempting the four-minute barrier for a quarter of a century. It was as much of a psychological barrier as it was a physical barrier. Bannister’s assault allowed mankind to enter a world filled with new possibilities,” said Coe. “It was a moment in history that lifted the heart of a nation and boosted morale in a world that was still at a low ebb after the war. We have all lost a giant and, for many of us, a deep and close friendship.” It was a moment in history that lifted the heart of a nation ... in a world that was still at a low ebb after the war After retiring as an athlete, Bannister became a doctor then consultant neurologist, a role he served with distinction, as well as the first chairman of the Sports Council, where he led the Sport for All campaign that expanded access to sport across Britain. He was knighted in 1975, and a decade later became master of Pembroke College at Oxford University. The university’s chancellor, Lord Patten of Barnes, called Bannister a superb doctor and servant of the college. “He was a man of great distinction and honour in every sense,” he added. “At the age of 88 he was still an active supporter of the university and we will miss him enormously.” Yet what struck many of those who met him was how humble he was despite his myriad achievements. As the UK Sport chair, Katherine Grainger, a five-time Olympic rowing medallist, said: “Sir Roger will always be remembered as a man who set the standard for British sport on the world stage. In the few times I was lucky enough to meet him, Sir Roger was incredibly modest about his own extraordinary sporting performances but always generous to others and those that came after him.” Hugh Brasher, event director of the London Marathon, said that Bannister’s friendship with his father, Chris, and Chattaway – had sustained in later life. “They were like the three musketeers in many ways,” he said, “And Sir Roger was incredibly erudite, well-read, kind and just a wonderful, wonderful man. “I believe breaking the four-minute mile puts him right at the very top of the sporting pantheon,” he added. “The memories of the day have endured for 64 years and I believe they will last for another century at least. It is an absolutely iconic moment not just in British but world sport. Paula Radcliffe, the women’s marathon world record holder, also paid tribute. “He really was a trailblazer,” she said. “What he did on the academic side was so impressive, too – combining study and sport. I grew up hearing stories about him, learning his story, and to meet him was a real privilege.” Sir Mo Farah, who has won more Olympic and world track and field medals than any other British athlete, said he was also saddened by the news. “I’ve met him several times throughout my career and he was always humble, supportive and encouraging,” he added. In a statement his family said that Bannister, who was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease in 2011, had “died peacefully ... surrounded by his family, who were as loved by him as he was loved by them. He banked his treasure in the hearts of his friends.”