Argentina’s former president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner will face trial over an alleged cover-up of Iranian involvement in a 1994 bombing of a Jewish community centre in Buenos Aires, judicial authorities announced on Monday. Eleven other former officials and people close to Fernández’s government will also be tried on charges of cover-up and abuse of power, the federal judge Claudio Bonadio said in a ruling released on Monday by Argentina’s official judicial information center (CIJ). The trial date has not been set. So far, four of the accused have been detained. In December, Bonadio asked lawmakers to remove Fernández’s immunity from prosecution, which she gained last year when she was sworn in as a senator. Legislators have not acted on the request. The immunity protects her from being arrested, but she can still be tried. The 1994 bombing of the Argentine Israelite Mutual Association center in Buenos Aires killed 85 people and wounded hundreds. Iran denies any involvement. Fernández, who was president from 2007 to 2015, denies any wrongdoing or involvement in any cover-up involving Argentina’s worst terror attack. The judge backed an assertion against Fernández made on 14 January 2015, by Alberto Nisman, a prosecutor who was investigating the case. Nisman said the 2013 agreement that Fernández’s government made with Iran in exchange for favorable deals on oil and other goods ensured that Iranian officials involved in the attack would escape prosecution. Nisman was found dead in his apartment with a bullet wound in his right temple four days later. His case remains unsolved. But last year, an investigation by Argentina’s border police agency concluded that Nisman was murdered, contradicting earlier official findings that Nisman had probably killed himself. Fernández has blamed the accusations on what she says is the bias of judges following the orders of her conservative successor, President Mauricio Macri. She recently said she wanted to go on trial as soon as possible to prove the “arbitrariness of the accusation”. Fernández has defended the 2013 deal with Iran as a way to solve the bombing case. But Jewish groups and others criticized it at the time, saying Tehran had failed to turn over suspects. A joint “truth commission” called for by the deal was approved by Argentina’s congress but it was never formed because it was later ruled by local courts to be unconstitutional.