The death toll in another day of violence in the besieged Syrian enclave of eastern Ghouta continued to rise on Friday with at least 78 new deaths, a day after thousands fled in desperation and largely emptied an entire town of its inhabitants. Most of the deaths on Friday, including of at least 13 children, came in the town of Kfar Batna, with monitors and medics saying the numbers would probably rise as more corpses are pulled from rubble. “I don’t want to say save Ghouta, I want to say save the international community, save humanity,” said one doctor in the besieged region that is home to 300,000 civilians. “The [UN] security council called for a 30-day ceasefire 20 days ago, and nothing changed because the international community has collapsed.” “All of humanity, civil society, the countries talking about human rights, all of that is just words,” he added. The civilian death toll in more than three weeks of relentless bombardment of the region bordering Damascus has risen to between 1,300 and 1,500, as forces loyal to the regime of Bashar al-Assad – backed by Russian airstrikes – fight to crush the last opposition stronghold near the capital, seven years into a popular uprising turned civil war. On Thursday, 12,000 people – mostly women, children and the elderly – sought refuge from the violence by fleeing towards government lines, the first mass exodus of civilians since the start of the offensive. Government forces have divided eastern Ghouta into three distinct zones, all under siege. The violence has continued despite a UN security council resolution calling for an immediate 30-day ceasefire and the delivery of humanitarian aid that was passed last month but has not been implemented. Residents in the enclave have said they want to be able to leave the besieged areas but with international guarantees that they will not be detained or otherwise punished by advancing regime troops. Unprecedented protests demand civil liberties and the release of political prisoners after four decades of repressive rule by the Assad family. The regime represses demonstrations in Damascus and the southern city of Deraa but protests continue. Defecting army colonel Riad al-Asaad sets up the Turkey-based rebel Free Syrian Army. Islamist groups join the revolt. Regime forces take control of the rebel stronghold in Homs after a month of bombardment. Other bloody operations are carried out, notably in the central city of Hama, after massive anti-regime protests. FSA fighters launch a battle for Damascus but the government holds firm. More than 1,400 people die in a chemical weapon attack on rebel-held districts near Damascus. The US and Assad ally Russia agree a plan to eliminate Syria's chemical weapons, averting punitive US strikes against the regime. Hostilities between jihadists and rebel groups turn into an open war in the north. The group that will become known as Islamic State takes Raqqa – the first provincial capital to fall out of regime control – from rebel forces. A US-led coalition launches airstrikes against Isis in Syria. The strikes benefit Kurdish groups, which since 2013 have run autonomous administrations in Kurdish-majority areas. Russia launches airstrikes in support of Assad's troops, who are on the back foot. Russian firepower helps turn the tables for the regime, which begins to retake rebel-held territory. The regime retakes Syria's second city, Aleppo. Russia and Iran, as backers of the Syrian regime, and Turkey, a supporter of the rebels, organise talks in Kazakhstan, between representatives of both sides. The process leads to the creation of four "de-escalation zones". A sarin gas attack on the rebel-held town of Khan Sheikhun kills more than 80 people, prompting Washington to attack a regime airbase. Further complicating an already drawn-out conflict, Turkey launches an operation against the Kurdish People's Protection Units which, with US support, played a key role in beating back Isis. Regime launches a ferocious assault on the remaining rebel-held enclave near Damascus, eastern Ghouta. In under four weeks, the Russian-backed onslaught kills more than 1,200 civilians. The top UN humanitarian official in Syria on Friday called for the resolution to be implemented, a day after he visited Douma, one of the besieged districts. “It was a very painful visit, people are in extreme and dire need for all basic requirements that a human being would want to have, starting with a bar of soap, food, or even a decent burial,” Ali al-Zaatari, the UN humanitarian coordinator in Syria, told the Guardian. Zaatari said UN personnel had provided some of those evacuated with aid including hygiene kits and bedding, and children had been vaccinated against polio. Most evacuees appear to be staying at camps around Damascus after being screened by the government. So far about 600 have been evacuated from Douma, including 300 on Friday, in addition to the 12,000 who fled on Thursday from other areas in eastern Ghouta. He said people were afraid to leave because they feared retribution from rebel groups and because of ongoing violence in the area. A sign near the area designated as a humanitarian crossing, apparently erected by rebel groups, says that people who cross it may be shot. Military-age males also fear leaving in case they face conscription or accusations of being rebel fighters. “It’s a mixture of factors; a lot of people said they were prevented from leaving by armed groups,” Zaatari said. “And of course the insecurity of having planes hovering above and not knowing whether they will be striking or just observing.” Residents are hoping for a deal between rebel groups and the regime or its Russian backers that would allow for either a reconciliation arrangement or a large-scale evacuation. On Friday, though, there were few indications that such a deal was imminent. 