The Week in Patriarchy is a weekly roundup of what’s happening in the world of feminism and sexism. If you’re not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. I’ve been thinking a lot about how to find calm in a time that is so volatile. The political chaos coming from the White House – sex (and sexism) scandals, firings, tweets and the never-ending Russia saga make it difficult to feel like you’re on steady footing. So instead of trying to keep track of it all, I’m homing in on the things that give me hope. Recently, that’s the students of Marjory Stoneman Douglas and their young peers across the country. It’s been a week since the march, and I’m still overwhelmed with gratitude for these young people and their ability to organize, articulate their grief and inspire us all. I wish they didn’t have to do it – but wow, are they capable. That’s my advice for the week: if you’re feeling the overwhelm, find that one thing that may give you a glimmer of hope or feeling of wellbeing. We could all use it. The kids win again: after conservative pundit Laura Ingraham mocked a massacre survivor for not getting into several colleges, advertisers are pulling from her show. Apparently people don’t like it when adults make fun of children who have just been traumatized – imagine that! Have we thought about a renewable energy source that relies on dread? I’m in a peculiar simulation where a man said women should be hanged for refusing to accept forced birth but the intolerant ones are those objecting to his getting a very cushy job with a giant platform so he can say stuff like that moreI give it a 2/5 for verisimilitude The piece is a good example of something that treats politics as largely an emotional contest between various groups of white people. https://t.co/mTnYtooeLY men should be glad women want equality not revenge Roxane Gay on the Roseanne reboot; Michelle Goldberg on the Atlantic’s Kevin Williamson hire; and Evette Dionne on R Kelly. On why young people will win the culture war on guns: they’re going to defeat an old white male minority. The creator of hit animated show Ren & Stimpy spent years grooming and assaulting young girls – something that was apparently an open secret. On a scale of one to 10, I’m mostly tired. Tired and fed up. Cecile Richards answering Vanity Fair’s Proust questionnaire is giving me lots of life; so is this Instagram account – the most amazing compilation of baby zoo animals (the meerkat pups, in particular, have won my heart.)