Thousands of train drivers, teachers, nurses, air traffic controllers and other public sector staff have gone on strike across France and begun street protests against Emmanuel Macron’s latest reform drive. France’s centrist president, who has been in power for nearly a year, has so far escaped large strikes and trade union action, managing to easily push through an overhaul of labour laws in the autumn despite limited street marches. But Thursday’s strike marks a new joint phase in trade union action – it is the first protest against Macron that has brought together civil servants and railway staff. The strikes will see train cancellations, some schools closed, about 30% of Paris flights cancelled, airport disruption in the south and some 150 protest marches across the countries. There are two different sets of grievances behind the strike day – both of which have the potential to cause a headache for the French government. France’s large public sector, which has 5.4 million state workers, is up in arms about Macron’s belt-tightening plans, with unions accusing him of seeking to dismantle the state sector. There has been rising anger among public sector staff that Macron has gone back on his campaign promises for better recognition and remuneration and in fact seeks to slash budgets, rely more on contract workers, introduce merit-based pay and voluntary redundancies to cut the number of public workers by 120,000 over five years. “Discontent and worry are spreading very quickly,” said Jean-Marc Canon of UGFF-CGT, one of the largest civil servants’ unions. Meanwhile, rail workers will use Thursday as the start of prolonged strike action that could last until June. They are protesting against Macron’s plans to push through sweeping reforms to France’s vast state rail system, including cutting costs by limiting special employment rights for rail-workers. From 3 April until 28 June, rail unions have planned strikes on two days out of every five Macron’s government has insisted it will stand firm on its programme to cut state costs and is hoping public opinion will be exasperated by train disruption and not support the strikes. A poll for Les Echos showed just over half of French people backed Thursday’s strike but a majority of private sector workers were against it. “We are going to continue reforming France in depth ... with the certitude that our country needs this transformation to make up for the ground lost over previous decades,” Macron told reporters during a trip to India last week. Thursday’s strike date was deliberately chosen to echo the start of nationwide protests in 1968 that led to the country’s biggest ever strikes and the notorious street battles between police and students of May 1968.