Cricket Australia has resisted widespread calls for the immediate sacking of Steve Smith after the Australian captain admitted overseeing ball-tampering during the third Test in South Africa. On Saturday night Smith admitted that he and batsman Cameron Bancroft conspired to “get an advantage” in Cape Town by applying tape to the ball on day three. Smith told media that he would not step down, saying he was still “the right person for the job”. “I’m not proud of what’s happened [and] it’s not within the spirit of the game,” Smith said. “My integrity, the team’s integrity, the leadership group’s integrity has come into question and rightfully so.” The chief executive of Cricket Australia, James Sutherland, said Smith would not be sacked or suspended until an investigation was completed by Cricket Australia’s head of integrity, Iain Roy. “We’re in the middle of a game right now and that game needs to conclude,” he told reporters on Sunday. “We certainly don’t have all the evidence at hand. We need someone to go over there and talk to the relevant people involved. “I have asked our head of integrity Iain Roy to travel to South Africa today … Iain’s brief will be to gather the relevant information to address this matter and to understand it better. “Once Iain submits his report, we will make further comment.” In an emotional press conference Sutherland said he was “shocked and disappointed” by Smith’s admission of cheating and said cricket fans would be right to feel aggrieved. “It’s a very sad day for the game of cricket,” he said. Smith’s retention of the role pending an integrity review flies in the face of calls for his immediate removal from politicians, sportspeople and former cricketers. Commentators in Australia and across the world have called for him to go, with some saying the team should forfeit the Test and fly home. Former England captain Michael Vaughan said Smith’s position was now “untenable”. “Steve Smith, his team and all the management will have to accept that whatever happens in their careers they will all be known for trying to cheat the game,” he tweeted. The more you think about what has happened in Cape Town the more I realise the Leadership needs to be replaced ... Positions are untenable ... & I say that with the utmost respect for most of that group ... #SAvAUS Steve Smith,his Team & ALL the management will have to accept that whatever happens in their careers they will all be known for trying to CHEAT the game ... #SAvAUS Australian Liberal senator Richard Colbeck, Nationals MP Darren Chester and Labor MP Andrew Giles called for Smith and the Australian team to be brought home. “Bring them all home, don’t want them representing my country! Tour over,” Colbeck tweeted. “It’s just not cricket,” Chester said. “Bring home anyone involved in cheating, apply penalties & salvage national reputation. Act quickly to fix the mess.” Olympic skier David Morris said Smith’s actions had made “all Aussie athletes look bad”. This makes all Aussie athletes look bad. We don’t deserve that for or hard work and proper representation of Australian sport. This hurts everyone deeply within the core fundamentals of what sport is about. A win means nothing if you don’t deserve it Former captain Michael Clarke didn’t go as far but labelled Smith’s actions “disgraceful” and “blatant cheating”. “I can’t believe the leadership group has made a decision to do this,” he said. “As a leader, you can’t ask somebody to do something you’re not willing to do yourself.” “It’s premeditated cheating, it is blatant cheating, it is disgraceful and it is not accepted by anyone.” WHAT THE ........ HAVE I JUST WOKEN UP TO. Please tell me this is a bad dream. Former Australian test cricketer Simon Katich also told Australian radio that Smith, vice-captain David Warner and head coach Darren Lehmann had “no option” but to resign or be sacked. Shane Warne, speaking before Smith’s press conference where he admitted to ball-tampering, also tweeted that he was “very disappointed” with the footage broadcast last night, where Bancroft was seen to drop the tape into his underpants to hide it from the umpires. Very disappointed with the pictures I saw on our coverage here in Cape Town. If proven the alleged ball tampering is what we all think it is - then I hope Steve Smith (Captain) & Darren Lehmann (Coach) do the press conference to clean this mess up ! Comedian John Cleese weighed in, calling Smith a cheat. I see Steve Smith,the Aussie cricket captain, in admitting 'ball-tampering', explained that the team leaders thought it was 'a way of gaining an advantage'Another way of 'gaining an advantage' is to cheat