North and South Korea have agreed to hold a leaders’ summit on 27 April that will be only the third-ever such meeting. Senior officials of the two Koreas met on Thursday to prepare for a rare inter-Korean summit, days after the nuclear-armed North’s leader Kim Jong-un made his international debut with a surprise trip to China. Kim is due to meet South Korean President Moon Jae-in late April at the truce village of Panmunjom in the demilitarized zone, followed by landmark talks with US President Donald Trump which could come as early as May. At the Unification Pavilion on Panmunjom’s northern side, the leader of Pyongyang’s delegation Ri Son Gwon said Thursday’s talks were aimed at paving the way for a meeting between the leaders of North and South – the first direct public reference to a summit by any Northern official or media outlet. “Over the past 80 days or so, many events that were unprecedented in inter-Korean relations took place,” said Ri, who is chairman of the North’s reunification committee. The rapid rapprochement on the peninsula was kicked off by the Winter Olympics in the South and comes after a year of heightened tensions over the North’s nuclear and missile programmes, which saw Kim and Trump engage in a fiery war of words. Events have moved quickly since then, with a flurry of official visits between the Koreas and an advance team of Southern performers heading north on Thursday before K-pop concerts in Pyongyang. Also on Thursday, China’s top diplomat, Yang Jiechi, was due in Seoul to brief Moon on Kim’s secretive visit to Beijing to meet Chinese President Xi Jinping for the first time. It was the North Korean leader’s first overseas trip since inheriting power after the death of his father, Kim Jong-il, in 2011. China has long been the North’s key diplomatic defender and provider of trade and aid, but relations have been strained by Pyongyang’s weapons programmes, with Beijing showing a new willingness to implement UN sanctions against it. Even so the two leaders hailed their nations’ historic ties, with Xi accepting Kim’s invitation to visit Pyongyang, according to the North’s official Korean central news agency. “There is no question that my first foreign visit would be to the Chinese capital,” it quoted Kim as saying, calling it a “noble obligation”. Kim pledged he was “committed to denuclearisation” on the Korean peninsula, according to China’s Xinhua news agency - but added this would depend on South Korea and the US taking what he called “progressive and synchronous measures for the realisation of peace”. Analysts say both sides had reason to hold the meeting - Pyongyang to secure Beijing’s backing and support, and China to protect its interests in what it considers its backyard. Robert Kelly, a professor at Pusan National University in South Korea, said: “Xi would not grant this meeting unless the Chinese were genuinely concerned about the summits to come and wanted some kind of role to play.” AFP and Reuters contributed to this story