My earliest memory of speaking on the telephone is calling my mum at the shop where she worked. I remember searching for the notepad she’d written the number on. It was only for emergencies, she said, and this was certainly that. The handset looked giant against my small hands. I dialled the number and told myself to sound grown up if Mum’s boss answered. But luckily, it was her. “Hi Mummy.” She gasped audibly. “Are you OK?” she said, panicked. “Why are you calling? Where’s your brother?” “He’s in the front room.” “Has something happened?” “I just wanted to ask…” “Are you OK?” she pressed. “Can I have a biscuit?” “What?” “A biscuit. Can I have a biscuit? I want a mint Club.” “No,” she replied brusquely. Then she hung up. That’s when I learned that phone calls are serious business. You never know what you’re interrupting, and if you’re going to demand immediate attention, it had better be worth it. Soon after, dial-up internet arrived in my house and, with it, instant messaging. Who needs a human voice when you have hundreds of people at your fingertips sending you choice cuts like, “Pass this on to 5 other people or you’ll be haunted” and, “lol u seen this monkey eating a bagel?” With messaging, people could ask exactly what they wanted, and reply when they wanted – far more efficient than meandering calls. And anyway, phone calls are for serious, important things and I had nothing meaningful to say at 13, at 18, even at 25. Eventually, I found myself with an active aversion to calls. If I had to order a takeaway, I’d go with the place offering internet booking; if I had to complain to customer services, I’d do it in writing. But now that I work in a proper office, I can’t avoid it. People ring me all the time. Can you believe it? They just call me up – total strangers. And I have to do the same to others, too. I’ve still not figured out how to make this exchange easier. I tried apologising as soon as someone answered but people found that weird. I tried making a joke of our lack of real acquaintance by saying, “You don’t know me, but I know you” but that had an unfortunate stalker vibe. I do have one foolproof solution: call divert.