New Zealand’s prime minister, Jacinda Ardern, has said she expects her country could become a republic within her lifetime. In an interview with the Guardian before flying to London for the Commonwealth Heads of Government meeting (Chogm), she said there was great fondness for the members of the royal family whenever they visited New Zealand. Although she could not remember the last time a voter had asked her about the country becoming a republic and admitted it was not a priority for her administration, Arden said New Zealand would eventually transition away from the monarchy. “When I have been asked for an opinion, I think within my lifetime I think it is a likelihood we will transition. It is not something this government is prioritising at all though. “The most important thing for New Zealand is we have a very special arrangement and relationship via our treaty of Waitangi, and the relationship between Maori and the crown, so before any conversation like that occurs, that is something that will needed to be resolved within New Zealand.” Ardern also revealed how she was faring as the new leader of her country and how her life had changed since she became prime minister. She said she had been given words of advice from Barack Obama who visited New Zealand for the first time last week. The former US president encouraged her to accept that she was doing her best, and a certain level of guilt came with the territory of running a country. “I ask him how he dealt with guilt,” sayid Ardern, who is expecting her first child in June and spoke to Obama about how he juggled leadership and family life. “He just talked about the things you can do to always do your best, and that there will always be elements [of guilt] in the roles that we do, and probably to a certain degree just accepting that we are still doing our best.” In February it was reported by the BBC that a “high-level group” of Commonwealth leaders met in London to review the governance of member nations  and to examine who should take over as head of the Commonwealth when the Queen dies. Ardern said the matter of succession was a decision for the royal family to make. “No one really wants to discuss [succession] because of course we all treasure the leadership globally that is displayed by the Queen, but ultimately that is a decision for the royal family,” Ardern said. Ardern’s chief press secretary said she did not anticipate being invited towedding of Prince Harry and Meghan Markle in May, as it was largely a ceremony for friends and family. In the interview Ardern highlight a potentially awkward aspect of her fame, being asked for selfies when shopping for underwear. “Certainly life has changed. It is just incredibly busy. But I really value being able to do normal things,” said Ardern. “Getting stopped in the middle of the lingerie section when you’re trying to stock up on a few things by an older man who wants a selfie is a little bit awkward.”