We’re looking back at some of the stories getting you talking today, with the blue passport procurement process provoking some of the most entertaining exchanges. Also worth a second look are conversations around Instagram “influencers” using their children to sell ideas and Labour’s support for disabled people. To join in the conversation you can click on the links in the comments below to expand and add your thoughts. We’ll continue to highlight more comments worth reading as the day goes on. Readers have been reacting to reports the blue British passports beloved of some prominent Brexit supporters keen for “restored sovereignty” will be made by a Franco-Dutch firm. Here are some of your thoughts shared beneath Thursday’s politics live blog. Once again, a minister blames the EU, this time for their procurement rules, instead of admitting that, as usual, it’s the UK government that is to blame for this perceived sleight on our sovereignty. As for procurement – that is largely governed by the WTO. The French meanwhile produce passports in France because they prefer the security of being able to regulate directly. Not that our government has any idea what national security actually means or looks like in practice, having cut the army, police and border force to shreds during their time in office, and refusing to administer any allowed EU restrictions on movement.Iwan Roberts Leavers truly believe that post-Brexit these contracts will go to British firms, when in reality they will go to China or India. They should check out the manufacturers of the Union Jacks they wave outside parliament – all made in China... A taste of things to come. And if leavers are looking for someone to blame, they should look no further than the Tory party which dismantled our manufacturing industry in favour of a service-based economy. This has nothing to do with the EU, it’s just that in some areas, continental firms are more competitive. In others, the UK gets the lion’s share of business. Concentrating their ire on something as insignificant as the manufacturing of passports, or fishing for that matter, demonstrates precisely why referendums are such a bad idea. They give rise to demagogues and populist thinking about niche issues that are unimportant in the grand scheme of things. Symbols over substance: Brexit in a nutshell.ParisBrit Will the blue passports contain their country of manufacture, with a CE mark, perhaps the EU flag and on being open play the national anthem, just like some Birthday cards do? A security feature suggestion: a watermark showing the Leaver’s protagonist, throwing fish into the Thames, when the could’ve given the fish to food banks.ID85521051 Hadley Freeman answers a readers question on the morals of “using” children to project a certain image online. The lifestyle that these influencers push – with their backdrops of white walls and expensive candles, tiny yappy dogs, luxury holidays and compliant boyfriends, is the overarching problem for me. These impossibly white-teethed people producing videos about extortionately-priced designer bags and other unattainable-for-most goods that they only have through courting greedy brands is pretty revolting and totally unrealistic. They use their audience (usually young) to achieve a lifestyle that their audience could never afford. You only need to see the comments of vulnerable people below (eg ‘I was feeling really anxious until your video came up in my feed’), as well as other sycophantic drivel, to see that the power that they yield.tulipred Columnist Frances Ryan says that as the Tories cut benefits, Jeremy Corbyn is perfectly placed to represent the interests of the UK’s millions of disabled voters. Here are some of your thoughts. Corbyn will do this I’m sure. Because disabled people in his own constituency will make sure of it – as was evidenced at a local Labour party meeting I went to last night. I also know that Corbyn is already committed to disability rights – he attended an event at my local disability project a while back, gave a speech, listened to other speeches, cut the cake amidst much joking and hung out with us there for ages.jessthecrip The only way forward to a brighter and caring society, where people with disabilities and mental health needs, people escaping and in need of protection from their abusive partners and attackers, people who are elderly waiting for care, is through Labour. There is no way Labour would have permitted the deaths of in excess of 120,000 elderly. And would have certainly not scapegoated the most vulnerable members of society by withdrawing social security at a time when most in need. Vote Labour. Jeremy Corbyn all the way and the only way. Time to put an end to the Nasty Party of Tories. Say no to suicide and destitution.Fishgirl23 Comments have been edited for length. This article will be updated throughout the day with some of the most interesting ways readers have been participating across the site.