There are a lot more homeless people using libraries these days. They will come in and stay in for hours and hours. Those who are dressed warmly are doing comparatively OK, but I wonder what those without gloves will do after the library closes. I hope they have a homeless shelter or somewhere else warm. We do what we can to help – sometimes we’ll phone the council hotline to try and find somewhere for them to stay. Many are so grateful when something is arranged. The great thing about libraries is that everyone can sit down and be part of our community. The homeless people that visit us will see families, the young and old and, hopefully, feel part of normal human life. That’s just as important as the books and computers we offer. Inside my library, there are also a lot of people you’d probably think of as quite well-off: such as retired types in tweed jackets. We see more of them in cold snaps, because they often live in quite big houses that cost a fortune to keep warm. There’s no social stigma about reading a book or a newspaper in the library. The thing about public libraries is they’re warm and open to all without any barriers. There will be no funny looks from the staff. You don’t have to buy a cappuccino to hang out all day and no one asks you why you’re there. My library does not even ask for ID if you want a library card to go on a computer. We have groups of old men who wait for the library to open, even in the snow, and are there almost all day. They’ve formed a sort of social club by themselves and I am glad they’ve found each other. In my experience, people who work in libraries love talking to people. I certainly do. I enjoy helping people, hearing their life stories on the way, and seeing what they really need, rather than simply what they have asked for. A good librarian is an extrovert and we use that to talk and to help. I’ve had people come in for a book and leave with computer course details, or signed up for an event. They’ll often know the names of my children, and me theirs. Come the evenings, we see the teenagers. Sadly, many have been turfed out of their homes by parents who don’t appear to care what their child is doing, even in the cold. You can tell it’s freezing when they don’t cause a fuss, just simply sit down and talk among themselves. We also get kids using the library for quiet study. That’s a rare thing in some homes. I like to think we’ve helped quite a few get to college or university. Libraries are a place of warmth in the community throughout the year, but that becomes quite literal during the winter. The idea of libraries no longer being here? That gives me the shivers. This series aims to give a voice to the staff behind the public services that are hit by mounting cuts and rising demand, and so often denigrated by the press, politicians and public. If you would like to write an article for the series, contact kirstie.brewer@theguardian.com