In January an Arizona humanitarian organisation issued a report citing numerous instances of border patrol agents slashing water containers left for undocumented migrants crossing the desert on foot. The agents’ actions have been officially disowned, but the US’s arid borderlands have been deployed as a natural barrier against unwanted incomers since long before the current president began fantasising about his “big, beautiful wall”. In 1994 the Clinton administration instituted a strategy called Operation Gatekeeper, the purpose of which was to “harden” security in towns close to the Mexico border, thereby funnelling those determined to cross unofficially into more arid and isolated parts of the desert, where they were more likely to die. The wanton waste of lifesaving water, in other words, is consistent with preserving the desert’s lethality. Told in three progressively more soul-searching parts, Francisco Cantú’s memoir of his nearly four years as a border patrol agent describes the borderlands and his work there with a raw-nerved tenderness that seems to have been won from both the landscape and, disconcertingly, the violence he was implicated in. A third-generation Mexican-American, Cantú joined the US border patrol in 2008, aged 23. Having grown up in Arizona and studied international relations in Washington, he wanted to see the application of theory at ground level: “I’m tired of reading about the border in books,” he tells his mother. The daughter of a Mexican immigrant herself, she is his intermittent confidante and the book’s moral lodestar, troubled by the perils of her son’s job and by his involvement in what she sees as a racist institution. But he assures her that “stepping into a system doesn’t mean that the system becomes you”. The years that follow test that assertion. The borderlands are a zone of exception, set apart from their contiguous nations, and not only by climate – what the writer Tom Miller has called a “thin Third Country”. The literary voices of the region have often sublimated something of the landscape’s austerity. It’s hard to imagine Charles Bowden or Cormac McCarthy, with their disdain for embellishment and indulgence, writing out of, say, Maine or West Virginia or any other more forgiving environment. There are echoes, too, of McCarthy’s spareness in Cantú’s eschewal of speech marks and his rendering of Spanish dialogue untranslated. The unflinching quality of the author’s gaze, both inward and outward, recalls the same lineage. But there is an emotional generosity in the writing that sets Cantú apart. Perhaps his most concrete influence is the “vast and smouldering” terrain of southern Arizona – malpaís, or bad country, where volcanic processes seem to have calmed only momentarily. Part one describes Cantú’s training and induction into the work of the field agent – for instance, “cutting sign” to reveal the recent passage of crossers: “toe digs, heel prints, kicked-over rocks, the shine of pressed-in dirt, fibres snagged on spines and branches.” What does it mean to be good at this, he at last begins to wonder, when being good at it involves not only saving the lives of migrants but destroying their water bottles and pissing on their abandoned belongings? The second part describes his transfer to an office-based intelligence division and his growing realisation that the compromises of the work are unpicking some foundational part of his spirit. This middle section has the most memorable writing – prismatic, allusive, self-interrogative, starkly lyrical. It’s a mark of the seriousness of Cantú’s moral reckoning that he resists easy judgment of either his often boorish colleagues, for whom those crossing the desert are merely POWs – “plain old wets” – or his quarry. Cantú does not spare himself, but most of the book’s ire is reserved for a border control and immigration system that promotes such iniquities, and for those pitiless gangs on the Mexican side for whom the system’s victims are an exploitable commodity. He is told about another agent who became distrusted for what his colleagues perceived as undue softness. His crime had been to help an injured female migrant out of the desert. “They framed him for brutality. They made it look like he had beaten someone up in the field.” There is a sense of Cantú as a spectator and an outsider; in his moral vigilance is a kind of loneliness. His vocation is to something other than apprehending “illegals”, and however many acts of individual kindness he and his colleagues might carry out, they are dwarfed by the larger injustices. “My mind had become so filled with violence,” he writes tellingly, “that I could barely perceive beauty in the landscape around me.” For all the scorched corpses, “purple with dependent lividity”, and the cavalcade of punishment killings meted out by the cartels, the violence that preoccupies Cantú is of the systemic kind, that which “rips and ripples through a society, through the lives and minds of its inhabitants”. Totemic of that violence, and antithesis of the “unnatural” border, is the wolf that invades his dreams, a creature identified by Jung, we are told, as representing the “animal impulses of the unconscious”. Jung is one of several thinkers recruited by the author to elucidate his themes of violence and trauma. Another is the war correspondent David Wood, who describes the “moral injury” suffered by returning soldiers, whose symptoms are sorrow, remorse, guilt, shame, bitterness and moral confusion. The scales don’t fall softly from Cantú’s eyes. 'It’s like I’ve been circling beneath a giant,' he tells his mother Cantú’s attempts to resolve his own moral injury – to make peace with the wolf of his nightmares – culminate in the book’s third part, when he befriends an undocumented Mexican man while working as a barista in Tucson, having finally quit the agency. The reality of his previous work is brought home forcefully when José is deported and separated from his family, and Cantú becomes involved in the tortuous legal efforts to bring him home. Pre-empting us, Cantú wonders if he is merely “seeking to dole out some paltry reparation”. But he has become an outsider, and his familiarity with the system ranged against his friend counts for nothing. The 10-page penultimate section is handed over to the voice of the deported José, separated from his wife and children – a voice whose Dictaphone immediacy sounds a note that echoes back sombrely into the previous pages. “I have to break the law,” he explains – to Cantú, to all of us – as he plans his next attempt to cross the desert that might kill him. “It is a situation of emotion, of love.” The scales don’t fall softly from Cantú’s eyes. “It’s like I’ve been circling beneath a giant,” he tells his mother, who we sense has been quietly waiting for this moment, “my gaze fixed upon its foot resting at the ground. But now … it’s like I’m starting to crane my head upward, like I’m finally seeing the thing that crushes.” Cantú has said that in writing the book he was “trying to grapple honestly with my own culpability and with all the ways that I can and cannot extract myself from the work that I did”. He asks himself towards the end, “What would redemption look like?” In the epilogue, full of light and space, an answer is suggested in his reawakening to the beauty beneath the desert’s taint of violence. I was reminded of Mark Twain’s line: “Nothing helps scenery like ham and eggs.” Redemption, he recognises, is not the same as absolution. • William Atkins’s The Immeasurable World: Journeys in Desert Places will be published by Faber in June. • The Line Becomes a River: Dispatches From the Border is published by Bodley Head. To order a copy for £11.25 (RRP £14.99) go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.