The Emoji Movie has been hailed as the worst picture of 2017 at the Golden Raspberry awards (AKA the Razzies), making it the first animated feature in 38 years to earn the top dishonour. “Leading this year’s list of movie-misfires is the emoticon-based, talking poop opus,” the Razzies said in a statement announcing the recipients, saying the film came in a year when “Hollywood’s recycled trash heap attained an all-time high” and saw a “toxic-level lack of originality”. The annual awards bestowed on the worst the movie business has to offer were announced on Saturday in their traditional spot, the day before the Academy Awards. The Emoji Movie landed four of the 10 Razzies given out this year, also taking worst screenplay, worst director, and worst screen combo, which was given to “any two obnoxious emojis” from the movie. Tom Cruise’s attempted reboot of the Mummy franchise landed him worst actor. He now has no Oscars after three nominations, but two Razzies. Cruise and Brad Pitt won for worst screen couple for 1994′s Interview with the Vampire. Tyler Perry took worst actress for Boo 2! A Madea Halloween, the director’s 10th time donning a dress and playing his signature white-wigged matriarch. Kim Basinger took worst supporting actress for Fifty Shades Darker, putting her in the special company of Faye Dunaway, Liza Minnelli and Halle Berry as actresses who have won both a Razzie and an Oscar. Mel Gibson, who last year won the Redeemer award for getting an Oscar nomination just a few years after getting a Razzie nomination, is back at the bottom again as far as the Razzies are concerned, taking worst supporting actor for Daddy’s Home 2. Baywatch won the inaugural Special Rotten Tomatoes Award: The Razzie Nominee So Bad You Loved It! The award is the result of an online poll held in conjunction with the review site Rotten Tomatoes. The rest of the Razzie Awards are determined by what the organisation says is over 1,000 voting Razzie members in 27 countries and from every US state except Montana. Worst picture The Emoji Movie Worst actress Tyler Perry, Boo 2! A Madea Halloween Worst actor Tom Cruise, The Mummy Worst supporting actor Mel Gibson, Daddy’s Home 2 Worst supporting actress Kim Basinger, Fifty Shades Darker Worst screen combo Any two obnoxious emojis, The Emoji Movie Worst remake, ripoff or sequel Fifty Shades Darker Worst director Tony Leondis, The Emoji Movie Worst screenplay The Emoji Movie Special Rotten Tomatoes Award: The Razzie Nominee So Bad You Loved It! Baywatch