Prep 30 minCook 1 hr 10 minServes 6 For the broth1 white onion, peeled, topped and tailed, to create flat surfaces for the griddle 2 large thumbs ginger, peeled and halved lengthways½ daikon, peeled3.5 litres water 1kg mixed root veg (carrot, swede, turnip, celeriac, parsnip)250g mushrooms (chestnut, oyster or shiitake)1 fennel bulb2 celery sticks½ tsp sugar25g salt 20 star anise1 small cinnamon stick2 cloves1 tsp coriander seeds1 tsp fennel seedsVegetable oil, for frying 120g block firm tofu, sliced into thick, short batons 75g dry flat rice noodles per person To garnish Black pepperBird’s eye chillies, finely slicedSpring onions, thinly sliced1 shallot, peeled and thinly slicedA handful of coriander, roughly chopped16-20 enoki mushroomsGreen leaves (pak choi, chard, cress, spinach) Char the whole onion, ginger and daikon on a griddle. Boil the water in a large pot. Add the charred veg, root veg, mushrooms, fennel and celery. Add the sugar, salt and spices, cover with a lid and simmer for 20 minutes. Remove and set aside the mushrooms, then simmer the broth for 40 minutes. Remove and reserve the remaining vegetables from the pot. Meanwhile, fry the tofu in hot oil for five minutes on each side, until golden brown, then drain on kitchen paper. To serve, cook the noodles according to packet instructions, drain thoroughly, then portion into bowls and season with black pepper and chilli slices. Top with the tofu, sliced stock veg, spring onion, shallot, coriander, enoki and leaves. Ladle over the hot broth, submerging everything. Serve at once with more of the garnishes. Prep 20 minCook 2 hoursServes 6 For the broth1 large chicken, trimmed of excess skin and fat6 litres water (or enough to cover the chicken)1 large onion, peeled, topped and tailed200g piece ginger, peeled and halved10cm piece daikon, peeled20 star anise4 cloves1 cinnamon stick2 black cardamom pods30g rock sugar (or 2 tsp caster sugar)15g sea saltFish sauce75g dry flat rice noodles per person To garnishBlack pepperBird’s eye chillies, finely slicedRed onion, thinly slicedSpring onions, slicedLeaves from a few sprigs of Thai basil1 handful coriander, roughly choppedLime wedges Submerge the chicken in a large pot of boiling water. Bring back to a boil, then leave to simmer. On a griddle, char the onion, ginger and daikon. Add to the broth with the spices, sugar and salt, and simmer for 45-60 minutes, skimming off impurities, until the chicken is cooked and the juices run clear. Remove the chicken and leave to cool, then tear or slice the meat. Return the bones and carcass to the stock to simmer for a further 30 minutes, then season the broth to taste with fish sauce. To serve, cook the noodles according to packet instructions, drain thoroughly, then portion into bowls and season with black pepper and chilli slices. Put the sliced chicken on top, garnish with red onion, spring onion, basil and coriander, then ladle over the hot broth, submerging everything. Serve immediately with lime wedges. Prep 30 minCook 4 hrsServes 6 For the brothWater2 large oxtail chunks1.5kg beef shin, flank or beef rib1kg beef bones2 litres chicken stock1 large onion, peeled and topped and tailed 200g ginger, peeled and halved1 hand-size piece of daikon, peeled, halved30 star anise6 cloves2 cinnamon sticks1 heaped tsp coriander seeds 1 heaped tsp fennel seeds 2 black cardamom pods30g rock sugar (or 2 tsp caster sugar)3 tsp salt6 tbsp fish sauce75g dry flat rice noodles per person To garnishBlack pepperBird’s eye chillies, finely sliced Red onion, thinly slicedSpring onions, slicedA handful of coriander, coarsely choppedLime wedges Bring a large pot of water to a boil and add the meat and bones. Boil for 10 minutes to clean the meat, until froth surfaces. Take them off the heat, discard all the water and rinse the meat. Wash the pot, fill with four litres of water, bring to a boil, add the meat and stock, cover and simmer. Meanwhile, char the onion, ginger and daikon on a griddle, then add to the broth. Add the spices, sugar and salt to the broth, and simmer, covered, for two hours, skimming off impurities. Remove the meat and, once cooled, slice thinly. Leave the bones and oxtail in the broth to simmer for one hour then season with fish sauce to taste. To serve, cook the noodles according to packet instructions, drain, then portion into bowls and season with black pepper and chilli slices. Top with sliced meat, red onion, spring onion and coriander, then ladle over the broth, submerging everything. Serve with lime wedges. Prep 30 minCook 2 hrsServes 4 1 onion, peeled and roughly chopped 3 tbsp vegetable oil450g braising beef, beef tendons or rib, cut into bite-sized cubes15g ginger, peeled and finely chopped 2 garlic cloves, peeled and sliced2 stalks lemongrass, finely chopped1 tsp ground coriander1 tsp paprika4 cloves400ml coconut water or water200ml beef or chicken pho stock, beef stock or white wine1 bay leaf 10 star anise 1 cinnamon stick400g potatoes, peeled and cut into chunks200g whole baby carrots 2 tsp salt1 tsp sugar2 tbsp fish sauce (optional)2 handfuls fresh or frozen peas75g dry flat rice noodles per person To garnish Black pepperChilli flakes (optional)Lime or lemon wedgesThai basilA handful of coriander, roughly chopped Sweat the onion in the oil on a low-medium heat, then turn up the heat and brown the beef on all sides. Add the ginger, garlic and lemongrass, and fry for about five minutes). Add the ground coriander, paprika and cloves, fry for two minutes, then pour in the coconut water and stock. Add the bay leaf, star anise and cinnamon, cover and simmer for 40 minutes. Add the potatoes and carrots, season with the salt, sugar and fish sauce, if using, and simmer, covered, for 30-50 minutes, until the meat is tender, with some bite to it. When ready to serve, stir in the peas, bring back to a boil and cook for five minutes. Meanwhile, cook the noodles according to packet instructions, drain and rinse, then portion into bowls and season with black pepper and chilli. Ladle the stew on top, and serve with the garnishes. Prep 30 minCook 1 hr 15 minServes 2 For the brothSee vegan pho recipe, top For the noodles60g block of firm tofu, sliced into thick, short batons1 tbsp vegetable oil2 shallots, peeled and finely sliced60g mushrooms, (chestnut, oyster, shiitake), sliced1 tbsp soy sauce1 tsp sugar or maple syrup75g dry flat rice noodles per person80g beansprouts1 boiled egg, peeled and halved For the sauce1 shallot, peeled and finely chopped2 tbsp cooking oil100ml vegan pho broth1 bird’s eye chilli, finely chopped (optional)1 tbsp brown sugar1 tbsp soy sauce1 tbsp black bean sauce Juice of ½ lime To garnish2 spring onions, halved and sliced lengthways12 sprigs coriander leaves and stalks, chopped1 red chilli, sliced2 lime wedgesThai basil leaves Follow the vegan pho recipeto make the broth. Fry the tofu in hot oil for five minutes a side until golden brown, then drain on kitchen paperblot. When cool, cut into 1cm cubes. Wipe clean the pan, then fry the shallots in a dash of oil until soft. Add the tofu, mushrooms, soy and sugar or maple syrup and fry for two minutes, until the mushrooms are soft. Remove the stock veg from the broth and cut. For the sauce, fry the shallots in the oil in a small saucepan until light golden. Add the vegan pho rest of the ingredients and a dash of cooking oil, and bring to a gentle boil to reduce for a few minutes. To serve, cook the noodles to packet instructions with the beansprouts, drain and rinse, then portion into bowls. Top with the cooked vegetables, tofu and mushrooms, half an egg per bowl and the garnishes. To eat, dip the cold noodles and remaining veg in the sauce, and drink the hot broth from separate bowls, garnished with spring onion and coriander and a squeeze of lime. Prep 20 minCook 10 minServes 2-3 For the stir-fry400g dry rice noodles2 vegetable tbsp oil70g jerusalem artichokes, peeled and thinly sliced100g sugar snap peas, sliced lengthways50g celery leaves and tips, chopped2 tbsp oyster sauce2 tbsp soy sauce200ml pho stock, or white wine, vegetable stock or water2 pinches black pepper1 white onion, peeled and chopped3 garlic cloves, peeled and sliced80g beansprouts To garnishThai basil1 handful coriander, roughly chopped Cook the noodles for a minute short of the packet instructions until al dente, drain and rinse. Heat a dash of oil in a large frying pan over a high heat until very hot, then fry the jerusalem artichokes, sugar snap peas and celery. Add a tablespoon each of the oyster and soy sauces, the stock, white wine or water, and cook for a couple of minutes. Season with the black pepper, then transfer to a plate. Heat another dash of oil in the same pan, then stir-fry the onion for a minute. Add the garlic, noodles and remaining oyster and soy sauces and stir-fry for a couple of minutes. Add the beansprouts and a dash more stock, stir-fry for a further minute, then transfer to serving plates with the vegetables. Serve immediately garnished with Thai basil and coriander. Uyen Luu is the author of My Vietnamese Kitchen (Ryland Peters & Small, £16.99). Get it for £12.99 at the Guardian Bookshop, guardianbookshop.com.