Lucy Bronze’s inclusion in the latest women’s world XI reflects both the changing landscape of the international game and England’s evolution. The Lyon right-back is the first England player to have been included in the annual Fifpro world XI selected by more than 4,100 leading female players across 45 countries. A sense that the established order is being challenged – something encapsulated by the Netherlands and Denmark unexpectedly contesting last summer’s European Championship final –was further highlighted by the similarly inaugural presence of a Dutch winger, a Danish forward and a Spanish defender. Lieke Martens, who shone as the Netherlands won the trophy in Enschede, Denmark’s Pernille Harder and Spain’s Irene Paredes all also feature in the showcase XI for the first time but England’s key midfielder Jordan Nobbs and Jodie Taylor, Euro 2017’s leading scorer, should count themselves unlucky not to be included. That represents a quantum shift from 2015 when of the England side that won a bronze medal at the World Cup in Canada only Karen Carney was ranked in the world’s top 40 players. “It’s a very nice feeling,” said Bronze, one of four Lyon players in the world XI. “The awards voted for by players are the best ones; they voted for me because they didn’t like playing against me.” Bronze now believes her decision to swap Manchester City for France last summer will enable her to help lift Phil Neville’s England to new heights. “We’ve always believed we can outwork other teams,” she said. “And now we’ve added a new side: being brave on the ball. We’re not scared to maintain the ball. England won’t be dictated to. That’s what I’ve learned since joining Lyon last summer. Lyon are the best team in the world at keeping possession.” The Barcelona winger Martens, who received the most votes from her fellow professionals and is Fifa’s current women’s player of the year, said: “I am a little surprised that I received most votes of all players. Last year was very special. We achieved something beautiful with the Dutch national team. It says a lot that six Dutch players made the list of 55 most voted players.” Alex Morgan, the lone American in the Fifpro team, said: “It’s always exciting to be considered as one of the top players in the world. For women’s football to have our own world XI is incredible. It helps promote the women’s game. It helps female footballers recognise the talent among their peers and I’m really happy to encourage and be a part of that.” Australia’s Sam Kerr missed out on the Fifpro team six months after her omission from the Fifa world player of the year shortlist sparked outrage. The striker and her Matildas team-mate Alanna Kennedy were named on the world XI longlist of 55 but failed to make the final XI. Goalkeeper Hedvig Lindahl (Sweden, Chelsea) Defenders Lucy Bronze (England, Lyon); Nilla Fischer (Sweden, Wolfsburg); Wendie Renard (France, Lyon); Irene Parades (Spain, PSG) Midfielders Camille Abily (France, Lyon); Dzsenifer Marozsán (Germany, Lyon); Marta (Brazil, Orlando Pride) Forwards Pernille Harder (Denmark, Wolfsburg); Lieke Martens (Netherlands, Barcelona); Alex Morgan (United States, Orlando Pride)