Before the first Test against New Zealand, Joe Root hinted at changes in the way England were going to go about their business. None were evident at Eden Park. Jimmy Anderson continued to open the bowling with Stuart Broad; the batting was as sturdy as a marshmallow in the first innings and England recorded their tenth defeat in twelve overseas Tests, none of which were won. In their last eight matches abroad they have lost by an innings five times. It must be sinking in that he is not in charge of a multi-talented team. This is reflected in the goal set by Root on the final day of the Test at Eden Park. “Before play I asked them to show how much it means to play for England and I thought we got that. The character that the guys showed was a step forward.” That may be true but if selected to play for your country, a task that brings honour and a reasonable remuneration there is an assumption that there will be universal commitment to the cause come what may. “But we need to be much better in Christchurch‚” added Root. “We did not adapt quickly enough in that first innings. We are used to the ball seaming and swinging in England but there were no partnerships. It was important to show character but there must be some soul searching in time for the game in Christchurch.” The second and final Test starts there on Friday. This is a remarkably friendly series compared to anything witnessed in South Africa recently and both captains were ever ready to praise their opponents afterwards. “They battled very well especially on the last day‚” said Root. “We were always under pressure and you have to give them credit.” Ben Stokes, who was at the crease for 270 minutes for his 66, was England’s best batsman even though the manner and timing of his dismissal – he played a rare swat at another bouncer from Neil Wagner and was caught in the covers just before the dinner break – was exasperating. This was a source of encouragement in Stokes’ first Test of the winter but there remain concerns about his back. Towards the end of his innings he received treatment on the field several times. “We just have to monitor him from day to day,” said Root. “If he’s not fit he won’t play in the next match. He showed great control and restraint here, which is not his natural game. He is growing as a player and showing greater maturity. Obviously he was disappointed by his dismissal but he put in a good shift.” The likelihood increases that Stokes may only be able to play in Christchurch on Friday as a batsman, which was the case in Auckland.