What is the government up to? Not very much, according to research out on Monday. Some serious number-crunching by the Times has revealed that Theresa May’s government is the most inactive for at least two decades. The number of votes held in the nine months since the general election – traditionally when a government enacts its vision – is lower than after each of the elections won by David Cameron or Tony Blair. What’s more, there’s no sign of things improving any time soon. The threat of rebel Brexit amendments is proving so troublesome to the whips’ office that key votes keep being postponed. As a result, this week MPs are being treated to two days of “general debate on European affairs”. Given that it’s only 381 days until Britain leaves the EU, you’d be forgiven for thinking there may be a better way for MPs to be spending their time. Indeed, the statute book could hardly be described as “Brexit-ready”. There’s still a huge number of bills that need to be passed before this country is legislatively prepared for life outside the EU. Part of the problem is that the government is so worried about losing votes on Brexit that it keeps delaying legislation. So the trade bill won’t be back in the Commons until May because there’s such concern in the whips’ office about Anna Soubry’s amendment that tries to force the executive to keep the UK in a customs union with the EU, even after this country has transitioned out of the EU. However, despite this, it would be a mistake to blame Brexit alone for this government’s paralysis. If anything, it’s Brexit that is keeping the Theresa May show on the road. Since May lost her majority, the government has struggled to find purpose. That disastrous result meant the prime minister had to effectively abandon her manifesto, scrapping most of her domestic agenda. Her drastic plan for social care went in the dustbin, along with the return of grammar schools and the axing of the winter fuel allowance. Given that May did little to win over or endear her Tory colleagues during the election with her vision, it’s hard for her to get her party to back her completely on any domestic measure. This is in part why No 10 has announced several reviews – such as the recent year-long tuition fees review – as it makes the government look like it is doing something while also not requiring any parliamentary agreement. Even on issues where there is Conservative party consensus, there are problems. Ministers complain that seemingly non-controversial bills are no-go areas, as they could fall prey to amendments upon which the government thinks it would be defeated. Thanks to Brexit, however, this inactive government still spends a lot of the time looking rather active. As Brexit was decided by a referendum, May has the clear job of actually delivering it. With the various EU council meetings, Brussels negotiations, parliamentary statements on such meetings and roadmap-to-Brexit speeches, May can accurately be described as a busy prime minister. In fact, the real danger points for the May premiership have come not when Brexit tensions have run high but when there has been an interval in the theatre of the negotiations. It was a disastrous cough-ridden conference speech that triggered the doomed Grant Shapps coup. Then, more recently and more seriously, it was the lull in the Brexit talks that prompted Nick Boles to go public with his frustrations at May’s “timid and unambitious” government. His big concern wasn’t what type of customs arrangements the government might plump for, but the lack of boldness on housing and NHS funding. Thanks to Brexit, these frustrations are often pushed down the agenda. They only bubble up to the surface occasionally. It’s a fair question to ask: how long can a government that can’t legislate on anything last? In normal circumstances, the answer would be not long at all. But Brexit has made our politics extraordinary. While there are a small number of Tories who are willing to vote against the government on it, there are a number of Labour MPs who feel obligated to honour the vote and support it. As for the Tories, they may not be able to agree on much these days but they can all agree two things: they don’t want Jeremy Corbyn in No 10, and if there were an election tomorrow there’s a very good chance Jeremy Corbyn would get into No 10. So they continue on, despite the fact that there’s no agreement on whether the government should try to be bold – even if that means losing a few votes – or have a more modest aim of keeping the show on the road. Of course, Brexit creates a high number of challenges – challenges that could get in the way of any government’s ambitious agenda, as Corbyn may later discover. But for May, who has no ambitious domestic plans that have her party’s full backing, it’s a godsend. This government may be paralysed but Brexit means it certainly looks busy. • Katy Balls is the Spectator’s political correspondent