So, the fondest of goodbyes to NME in print form. As a former NME writer, I hadn’t seen it in years, though I’m not sure if I wholly agree with the view of the music press as a spent force “because people can get their music and information for free”. Is everybody absolutely sure that there’s no “need” for a music press? Two words: “Ed” and “Sheeran”. So what if people can access music/information elsewhere – the now-departed music press (not just NME, but also Melody Maker, Sounds, Smash Hits et al) meant so much more than telling people about the release of some dreary mainstream ear-poo. When it was strong, the music press was engaged in cultural resistance, fighting off record companies’ attempts to exploit it as an unofficial PR arm. The point was not blandly to regurgitate press releases, it was to listen, watch, assess, enthuse, refuse… and sometimes childishly rip the piss just for the sheer hell of it. Was it perfect? Of course not, in too many ways to detail here. However, those who think that assessing pop music isn’t a skill only need to watch The Voice, where the coaches’ tedious, repetitive drivel (“You have something very special”) shows you exactly what happens when artists take over critical duties. One big myth of music journalism was that writers secretly yearned to be in bands, when the vast majority couldn’t care less. Whatever their brand of music journalism (and there were many churches, darling), these people considered themselves to be writers, part of the creative conversation in their own right. Which is why usually skint hacks felt justified in informing rich and famous rock stars that their latest album was a symphony of tripe, feeling, quite rightly, that this was all the “information” their readers required at that time. At the risk of sounding pretentious, isn’t this cultural democracy in action, where wealth and commercial clout mean nothing and only quality counts? Nor was it just journalists who suffered from delusions of significance – pretty much everyone (musicians, photographers, band managers, record company heads, PRs), strutted about like they were the last star in town. The result: a vibrant, argumentative, occasionally insane music industry that most people would have back in an instant over the tepid, polite, under-financed, over-organised, Spotify-ed mewling of today. While music and information may now be “free”, does it do what the music press used to do – endlessly sifting, assessing and categorising acts; at its best, turning the music scene into a big crazy party that everyone wanted to go to? Back then, I wouldn’t even have bothered to become exasperated by Sheeran-Easy-Listening-Tune-Bot-Inc, because, while still probably successful, he’d have been correctly dealt with in a review or two. (“Nice sort – if he keeps this up, he could end up performing Hey Jude in the bigger tube stations.”) So, RIP NME and also a respectful nod to all the music hacks still out there. Whatever people say, in my eyes, you’ll always be necessary. • Barbara Ellen is an Observer columnist