Australian cricketer Cameron Bancroft has been caught on video shoving some yellow sticky tape into his underpants. Fortunately – or unfortunately – there was a cricket match in play at the time. The image of him shoving sticky tape into his underpants was broadcast live to the crowd at the Newlands ground in South Africa, and they booed. “I panicked quite a lot,” said Bancroft. Understandably. While only Bancroft’s hands touched his underpants, he did not sticky tape alone. Indeed, a veritable sticky tape conspiracy has unspooled in South Africa, where Australia’s national cricket team are currently on tour. The tape was granulated with dirt, creating a sandpaper-like surface that a non-panicking person sensibly keeps far away from their underpants, but which an unscrupulous “win at all costs” team ethic guided towards the surface of a cricket ball held in Bancroft’s hand. Bancroft – known as “Bangers” – admits: “We had a discussion during the break ... I saw an opportunity ... to change the conditions of the ball.” The aim was to get “an unresponsive ball to swing” or to damage the ball to the point that it would have to be replaced. The team captain, Steve Smith, has confessed he was in on the plan, concocted to provide the Australians an advantage. Outrage has erupted. The Australian newspaper has described it as an act of “shameful ignominy”. Fairfax belted the hyperbole for six: “This is cricket’s #MeToo moment”, Malcolm Knox claimed, comparing Smith also to a drink-driver, a laughing stock, a pustulant infection and the Bjelke-Petersen era of Queensland policing. In the same piece, no less. When a member of the bowling team interferes with the condition of the ball with the primary aim of altering its aerodynamics. To gain an advantage over the batsman by making the ball swing more in the air, to achieve reverse swing or to degrade the ball to a point that a new one is required. New balls are favoured by fast bowlers as they move quicker and bounce more. The ball can either be shined on one side – with the application of lip balm, saliva sweetened by a lolly, polish, sun cream or hair gel – or made more abrasive on the other – by scuffing the ball with a finger nail, rough paper, dirt or even teeth. The seam of the ball can also be picked. Ball tampering is outlawed by the Laws of Cricket. Under law 41, it is an offence for any player to take any action which changes the condition of the ball, however polishing it on clothing, removing mud and drying the ball with a pre-approved piece of cloth are acceptable. If an offence is found to have taken place during a match, five penalty runs are awarded to the batting side and the doctored ball must be replaced. If discovered retrospectively, other sanctions can be applied. Local book chain Dymocks has relocated Steve Smith’s autobiography to its “True Crime” section. The flag-waving contingent of Australian cricket fans who travel with the team greeted the first pitch appearance of the Australians after the scandal broke with silence and bare flagpoles. Now the prime minister’s involved. The Daily Telegraph reports that “Mr Turnbull said he had spoken to Cricket Australia chairman David Peever and hoped the sport’s governing body would take ‘decisive action’.” This is the same Malcolm Turnbull who just lost his 29th Newspoll in a row. You’d think that perhaps he’d have “decisive action” of his own to take? But, no. “I’ve expressed to (Cricket Australia) very clearly and unequivocally my disappointment and my concern about the events in South Africa,” Mr Turnbull, who is not a cricket industry professional, said. Meanwhile, in America, teenage children marched against gun violence. They shut down cities to protest the senseless murder of their schoolyard fellows. There are 33,000 Americans who are killed in shooting deaths every year. In Australia, we are having collective apoplexy about the surface texture of a cricket ball. Clearly, we must live in some kind of paradise. Or much of our commentariat do, given that they can so casually compare scuffing  sports equipment with the experience of stigmatised, systemic sexual harassment, assault and abuse. Paradise is a relative experience, of course. “I’m sure you’re sometimes gobsmacked at what passes for news in this country,” the host of an Australian political discussion show, Barrie Cassidy, opined only this weekend. He then related the story of a 10-year-old boy who has lived in the significantly less paradisal circumstances of indefinite detention in Australia’s asylum seeker processing centre on Nauru for the last five years. As this publication has reported, the traumatised child has repeatedly attempted suicide. Human rights lawyers and doctors have campaigned to relocate him to Australia for acute psychiatric treatment. The Home Affairs department, the federal government, the minister Peter Dutton, fought the action in court. It took a judge deciding that the boy’s life was in immediate danger to overrule them. Surely a government minister actively denying care to a suicidal little boy is “shameful ignominy”? Shouldn’t a “leadership team” of Australia’s representatives who abandoned a small, terrified child to violent despair be the ones met with a bare flagpole and silence? Making comparisons between Peter Dutton to the worst era of Queensland policing isn’t out of line; it’s statement of fact. Cameron Bancroft shouldn’t have cheated. Smith shouldn’t have told him to. It isn’t leadership to assume that the moral rules somehow don’t apply to you. But let’s be very aware that decades of marketing hype and sponsorship deals and brand-association between cricketers and other national leaders has encouraged the veneration of the national team as a pantheon of heroes, and with that, especial moral licensing. Yet even broader moral licensing is seemingly afforded to all of us by what our real national leadership is doing in our name. Dutton claiming his critics are “dead to me” is not some offhand insult, as much as it’s a strategy to render his actions as a minister remote from us, unrecognisable and inscrutable – his activities occurring offscreen, unrelated to our lived experience. It stretches the spectrum of what we can morally tolerate. We can be horrified by what our cricketers have done because they look like us and sound like us and they were exposed as cheaters. But Australia’s biggest moral leadership failures are a lot more serious than sticky tape on a ball. They’re just performed in a way we don’t recognise, and taking place in darker and more distant corners than a video feed is prepared to let us see.