Hernán Darío Gómez said there was a moment of “fright” followed swiftly by “pride” when the draw for Russia pitched his Panama team against England. The manager insisted that, if his side were able to win a game at their first World Cup this summer, the celebrations would be as big as when they qualified with an 88th-minute winner against Costa Rica and the country’s president, Juan Carlos Varela, declared a national holiday. “We’re a very young football country, in terms of our history, the league, and I think we got there quicker than we expected: I thought it would take longer,” Gómez said. “People are very happy to be at the World Cup but, if we have a good tournament, we would celebrate it the same. To win a game would be lovely.” Panama arrived in Europe for their penultimate get-together before their first appearance at the World Cup with their manager likening opponents Denmark and Switzerland to England and Belgium but admitting their preparation for these two friendlies has not been ideal. Some players made it to the team’s hotel only on Wednesday afternoon and judgment may have to be reserved until the summer. “We have not been together since we qualified, apart from when we played Wales in November,” Gómez said on the eve of facing Denmark at the Brondy Stadion. “It’s a game that’s very risky because, we have not been together for a long time now and if you don’t repeat ideas, players don’t remember them. “We have not had time to prepare, the opponent is strong and we’re ‘unarmed’, so we hope that this does not hurt [us]. They could score a lot of goals. We’ve had a [long] journey, few days, not much time, and anything can happen. [Defeat] won’t affect us as a group because we look at it from the point of view of the play but the way the country lives football, it could affect the [people]. Physically, the players look good but we can’t do any special work, we haven’t had time. That will come in May.” Asked if he had been paying close attention to Premier League games and had sent scouts to watch England, Gómez replied: “There’s no need. We’re all very modern now, we have all sorts of programmes, so we can see everything we need to see from Belgium, England and Tunisia.” Since the groups came out, they know everything about us and we know everything about them. Information is easier [nowadays], nothing can be hidden. It’s when the game comes that you see the reality.” Gómez likened Denmark to England, describing them as useful practice for the game in Nizhny Novgorod. “Denmark are a very good team and we want to play good teams for the World Cup,” he said. “This is why we’re coming to play these games. “European football is different to what we play in the Concacaf Cup, the Gold Cup and in qualifying. European teams almost all have the same style. They’re strong, quick, dynamic and they have something that’s very difficult for us: precision at speed, in one or two touches. Then they have individuals who make the difference. South American teams have individuals and technique too but in Europe it’s faster and very practical.” Gómez is heading into his fifth World Cup, with a third national team. He has not been at the tournament since 2002, when he led Ecuador. “I’m happy in Panama, the people show us affection: they love and respect the national team and what we have done. They wanted to see our shirt at the World Cup, hear our national anthem. “There’s lots of love at the moment. I feel as if it was the first time. I feel happy and proud. I would say to the people: enjoy it, it’s high tide, we have a lot to learn, have a good time and be happy.”