This is a classic, a dish that will never go out of fashion. If you’re looking for a treat or to impress someone, this is at the top of my list. Whenever I make this recipe, I look forward to the moment when the steaks are returned to the pan to be covered in sauce. At that point, I just know how good it’s going to taste. (Serves 4) 2 tbsp black peppercorns1 tsp white peppercorns1 tsp pink peppercorns4 fillet steaks, about 220g each Olive oil 2 tbsp shallots, finely chopped 50ml brandy 200ml double cream Knob of butter, diced 1 tbsp flat-leaf parsley, chopped 1 tsp wholegrain mustard (I use Pommery) 1 tsp brined green peppercorns, drained and rinsed Sea salt Black pepper, freshly cracked (optional) Using a pestle and mortar, gently crush the black, white and pink peppercorns. Place the crushed pepper into a sieve and shake off any excess powder, keeping just the crushed peppercorns. Season the steaks all over with the crushed peppercorns, patting them in with your hands so they stick, then season with salt. Heat a large, well-seasoned saute or frying pan over a high heat, then add a drizzle of oil. When it is hot, add the steaks and fry them for 3–4 minutes on each side until well coloured. This should give you medium-rare meat, which is how I like my steaks, but fry them for a bit longer if you like. Set aside to rest on a plate with a rim for 5 minutes, covered with kitchen foil, while you make the sauce. Add the shallots to the oil remaining in the pan and sauté for 1–2 minutes until softened, but not coloured. Add the brandy, stirring to deglaze the pan, and boil until it evaporates. You can flambe the pan if you’re feeling adventurous, but it’s not necessary. Add the cream and bring to the boil, then add the cooking juices that have gathered on the plate from the resting steaks. As the sauce thickens, whisk in the butter, then add the parsley, mustard and green peppercorns. Adjust the seasoning with salt and pepper, if necessary. Return the steaks to the pan and baste them in the sauce, then serve. •From Tom Kitchin’s Meat & Game by Tom Kitchin (Absolute, £26). Buy a copy for £22.10 with free UK p&P at theguardianbookshop.com