A humiliating defeat the Australia team deserved was made certain by a thoroughly predictable collapse. It came on a day from which this generation of players may never completely recover, at the end of a weekend that will be talked about for decades. When they were bowled out for 47 on this ground in 2011 it was met with dismay. This time around, losing 10 wickets for 50 after reaching 57 without loss, there is none of that. The anger crowds out the sadness. But the worst defeat for Australia in these fixtures since South Africa’s readmission was a sideshow compared to the repercussions in store after their plot to tamper with the ball was uncovered on Saturday. To begin, the golden boy of Australian cricket, Steve Smith, was stood down from the captaincy. After he was rumbled, Smith badly underestimated the situation when stating he would carry on in charge. Within hours of the country waking up on Sunday, it was clear that was not going to happen. The demotion was confirmed moments before play when both he and the vice-captain David Warner were stripped of their posts. Given that Cricket Australia’s code of behaviour allows for everything up to life bans in the most extreme scenarios, this could be the last of their worries. The only confirmed suspension to date is that of Smith, who will miss the final Test at Johannesburg after the International Cricket Council assessed his behaviour – giving Cameron Bancroft the go-ahead to tamper with the ball – as contrary to the spirit of the game. When he walked out to bat in the middle of the Australian capitulation the boos were vicious, then his stoush with Kagiso Rabada was a reminder of how long a week can be. The former captain’s eventual dismissal looked that of a man who had not slept a wink. He did not want to go, hoping Morne Morkel had overstepped, but nothing was going to save Smith on this sorry Sunday. If Newlands did not have the intensity of an international venue in the morning, for all the chaos that surrounded the game, it did again as Smith departed, with fans rushing to the player gate so they could relay to him just what they thought. Earlier, Bancroft’s dismissal was all too poetic, barbecued by his opening partner Warner when electing to take a single that was never there. The younger man was also fined 75% of his match fee and handed three demerit points by the ICC, but it stopped short of suspending him from a Test. This time last year Tim Paine was happy enough to give the game away to work for a cricket bat company. Now, some seven years after he was first wearing the Baggy Green and seven rounds of finger surgery later, he is captain – an astonishing rise for a player who was not even his state’s wicketkeeper in November. “Strange” and “bizarre” he said of his day. His first job when speaking was issuing an apology for all that had happened. At his press conference the CA chief executive, James Sutherland, did not give the gathered journalists what they wanted: a head on a stick. Instead, a process begins with the organisation’s head of integrity, Iain Roy, sent to South Africa to assemble a briefing for the board before a decision is made regarding what comes next. Between times, the head of the Australian Sports Commission, a government body, issued a public statement saying that Smith and Warner must be sacked. In keeping with the adage that the only job more important than the Australian Test captaincy is the prime ministership (or vice-versa), Malcolm Turnbull called the CA chairman, David Peever, to demand better. It was, as Paine said, a “horrible 24 hours” for Australian cricket. “It’s not the circumstances that anyone would like to be sitting here,” he said of his stunning promotion. Then of Smith and Bancroft, Paine acknowledged the trauma they were experiencing with three Australian newspapers headlining their Monday editions with one word, “SHAME”. Paine said: “The reality and the enormity of what has happened is starting to sink in. I don’t think we all expected this to be as big as it has been and particularly the fallout that we have seen from back home.” It was a also bitter day for Nathan Lyon, who, along with Josh Hazlewood and Mitchell Starc, was implicated as part of the “leadership group” that Smith had said reached the decision to have Bancroft tamper with the ball. It is understood that none of the three bowlers was involved. What the off-spinner did do on Sunday was become only the sixth Australian to reach 300th Test wickets. It was a moment that deserved so much better. When they finally dismissed the home side after lunch with a target of 430 in front of them, it was a case of when, not if, surrender would come. The answer to that was just after the tea break. “It was extremely difficult,” Paine said of the final stages of the four-day defeat, “but that’s no excuse for that you saw. We are still the Australian cricket team and we are expected to put up a better effort than what we did. It only rubbed salt into the wounds.” Deep wounds.