The 1960s was when everything was shaken up and anything went. A new generation got their hands on cinema, and they took it to places it had never been before: out of the studios and into the streets; into inner consciousness and psychedelic realms; out into the cosmos and the future. They made what went before look square, Daddio. It started with the French. Even in the mid-50s, François Truffaut was labelling the stuffy, classical studio fare that had gone before “le cinema du papa”. By the end of the decade, he and Jean-Luc Godard, among others, were ready to show the world the alternative. Their debuts, Truffaut’s The 400 Blows and Godard’s Breathless, were both made in 1959 (neither arrived in British cinemas until 1960) but they set the tone for the decade: hand-held cameras! Real locations! Politics! Jump cuts! Irony! Vitality! Modern life! Death to papa! The ripples spread from the French New Wave and suddenly other countries had their own new waves, in name or in spirit: Czechoslovakia, India, Brazil, Italy. In 1960 alone, Italy gave us Fellini’s La Dolce Vita and Antonioni’s L’Avventura. British cinema had its own variation of the new wave, starting with the Free Cinema documentary movement and the “angry young man” and kitchen-sink realism currents that launched the careers of Lindsay Anderson (This Sporting Life, If), Tony Richardson and John Schlesinger. But then in 1963 came another revolution in the form of the Beatles and Richard Lester’s A Hard Day’s Night, a piece of avant-garde pop playfulness whose surprise commercial success forced studio execs to acknowledge that they no longer knew anything. Some of those late-60s British movies are still my all-time favourites, in particular Antonioni’s Blow-Up and Donald Cammell and Nicolas Roeg’s Performance – both ostensibly by-products of that swinging London moment, but mining far darker and deeper themes. On both sides of the Atlantic, pop culture and the counterculture steadily took over, to the extent that by the end of the decade Hollywood itself was made “new”. The cumbersome old studio productions lumbered on, but a new breed of stylish, edgy new movies began to take hold: Bonnie and Clyde, The Graduate, Midnight Cowboy, Point Blank. There was still an awful lot of squareness around in the 60s. The highest-grossing movie of the decade, for example, was The Sound of Music – a movie that does absolutely nothing to represent the era. But even in mainstream Hollywood, certain films still had a clip to them. Disney has never produced a better movie than 1967’s The Jungle Book. Hitchcock gave us Psycho and The Birds. And Kubrick gave us the ultimate sci-fi head trip, 2001: A Space Odyssey. If you drew a graph of “fiscal responsibility” versus “wayward experimentalism”, the 60s is the point where they crossed. It was a golden age for studio-budgeted oddness, and so many of my favourite films from the era have that “how did they get away with it?” quality to them. European cinema was a trove of surreal and psychedelic curios such as Vera Chytilova’s Daisies, Wojciech Haas’s The Saragossa Manuscript, Sergei Paradjanov’s The Colour of Pomegranates and Luis Buñuel’s Belle de Jour. There were intense dramas such as Andrei Tarkovsky’s Andrei Rublev, Ingmar Bergman’s Persona and Roman Polanski’s Repulsion; exuberant pop nonsense such as Barbarella, Modesty Blaise and Smashing Time, or cult movies that were simply way cool, like Russ Meyer’s Faster, Pussycat! Kill! Kill! and Seijun Suzuki’s deranged spy thriller Branded to Kill. The 1960s were over before I was born, but in my own (mildly) rebellious youth, it was a revelation to discover movies so rebellious and youthful. And back in the pre-internet 80s and 90s you really did have to discover them, which only enhanced the experience. If you didn’t live near a decent repertory cinema (which I didn’t), you’d be lucky to find them playing on late-night television, or at your local video rental store. So now those films are viewed through a double layer of nostalgia, not to mention a 21st-century political filter that exposes many of them as archaically white- and male-centric, but that sense of vitality and possibility is still palpable. Despite the youthfulness, so many of those works have stood the test of time.