One January morning in 2014, I lurched upright in bed at about 6am and announced: “I think I’m having a heart attack.” The main audience for this was my five-month-old daughter, Leon, sharing the bed with us, often sleeping sideways and leaving little snow angels in the sheets. Next to her was my wife Sarah, squashed up against the wooden bars of an open-sided cot we’d clamped on to the bed. Leon was not fazed. She sucked her thumb, waiting to see what happened next. Sarah, more used to my cheery opening remarks, propped herself up on her elbows and squinted. “Pain in your arm?” she asked. “No.” “Pain in your chest?” “No.” She flopped on to her back and blinked. “What’s happening exactly?” “My hands feel too tight,” I said, as I placed my palms together and squeezed. I steepled my fingers and then pushed them against each other. Nothing looked particularly swollen, but the flesh was prickly and hot, as if my skin were suddenly being forced to accommodate much larger bones. “It’s like I’m toasted or vacuum-sealed or something.” I struggled for an adequate description. “My hands feel like Pop-Tarts.” Sarah rolled over. “Doesn’t sound like a heart attack,” she said as she closed her eyes. “Sounds neurological. Much more likely to be multiple sclerosis or something.” While Sarah slept, I went into the bathroom, taking Leon with me. Leaning her over one shoulder so I could feel her warm breath on my cheek, I pinched my fingers and felt pins and needles radiating outwards around my knuckles. My most reliable sense of identity has always resided in my hands. In my mind’s self-image I am still 16, stumbling and elbowy inside a flapping shirt and billowing cord flares. My hands, though, speak to the person I would like to be today: precise and gentle. But this morning I did not recognise my hands. They were filled with strange electricity, dangerous and uncontrolled, as if a sparking cable were jolting itself around inside me. I looked at my wedding ring, which has worn a neat little groove. I tugged at it and eased it upwards. The groove didn’t seem to cut deeper, as I would have expected if my hands were as puffy as they felt. Maybe I’ve slept funny, I thought, eyeing my daughter, who eyed me back. My worries about a heart attack faded. I explained away my tingling hands in a less alarming manner. “This isn’t illness,” I told Sarah. “It’s so much more awful than that. It’s old age.” “It’s middle age,” laughed Sarah. “Doesn’t that sound worse?” It wasn’t middle age. For a year or more before my hands started tingling, I missed a range of increasingly worrisome neurological symptoms. I developed a problem with door handles. I started reaching for them and missing. One door and then another, a clawed swipe through empty air. I assumed I would hit the target blind. And I would have to look and see I had not. It is a mildly amusing thing, to find yourself standing, hand extended and closed around nothing, while the door you’re trying to open just remains shut. I doubt I gave it much more thought when it first happened. Once I got the door open on my second attempt, I must have quickly filed the memory away alongside all other mildly amusing things, which is to say I forgot about it completely. I didn’t see the patterns, the waves rippling outwards from that missed door handle, cresting gently over the other doors, light switches, kitchen cabinets and cashpoint keypads. For at least a year, I failed to spot a silent disaster unfolding, a fundamental shift as the entire world and everything in it moved two or three centimetres away from me – but only if I wasn’t looking. I now realise that you have to work at being ill. To work at the interpretative side, the side that covers the whole muddling business of learning to live with illness. Self-involved as I have always been, I did not yet know how to reach inwards, to take a cognitive oddity and look for the wider patterns it might fit into. *** The tingling in my hands did not go away, and it was joined after a few weeks by a blast of electrical energy down my spine whenever I bent my head. This sudden jolt – I now know it is called Lhermitte’s sign, and it indicates a lesion on the spinal cord – was the most violent sensation I had ever felt. It led me to the GP and from there to a neurologist, Dr Quill. After a series of tests including two MRI scans and a lumbar puncture, we met again in July 2014 to discuss his preliminary conclusions. Dr Quill waited until I was seated and then leaned forward on his chair, hands together in his lap. “You have an inflammation of the spine,” he said. “And we’re trying to work out why. Some people have inflammation in the spine and it just goes away.” “And then there are the other people?” I asked. Something inside me seemed to fall away. 'Multiple sclerosis,' I replied “Some people have it because they have multiple sclerosis.” Something inside me seemed to fall away. “Multiple sclerosis,” I replied. I sensed a question was expected of me, but I could not seem to form one. “Yes.” Quill nodded. He peered at me. “Do you know what that is?” “No,” I laughed eventually. “I have absolutely no idea.” *** Now I know: it is a disease in which the body’s own immune system decides to attack the fatty, insulating coating of the neurons in the brain and spinal cord. This coating, made of a substance called myelin, protects our nerve cells and speeds up those vital electrical pulses moving from one neuron to the next, kissing across synaptic gaps in a brisk burst of chemicals. Without myelin, crucial signals between the brain and the body become garbled or go missing entirely. The kisses go unmet, and over time you start to feel the consequences, in fingers, in toes, in glitch and twinge. I envision the lightning-fast movement of these signals through Leon, as she learns to put nouns and verbs together for the first time, while I sometimes stumble over the simplest sentences. At times it seems that we are joined, the two of us, through the magical substance of myelin, as it advances through my daughter’s brain and as it is attacked in my own. Since the early days of her life, whenever the weekend came around, with Sarah still sleeping, Leon and I would get up together and head to the living room, where we would upend the Lego box. Toys she was far too young for and I was far too old for. Toys that were suddenly perfect for both of us. Our time with the living-room Lego feels idyllic when I look back on it now. Maybe it is suspiciously idyllic. I have forgotten that, for many months, it was me doing all the building. I think Leon just snoozed at first, strapped into a bouncy chair. As time passed, she would be a warm weight in my lap while my arms reached around her for bricks. Over the next few years, Leon steadily became more involved. She slowly moved from watching to wanting to take part – and finally to leading. And I started to notice the flickerings of her tentative nature as she reached for her first bricks and then tried to eat them. I noticed her easy smile but also her unpredictability, discovering that something that would make her laugh one day would make her sob with fury the next. The Lego has been like that: a series of revelations for both of us. Simple blocks, and yet we use them to make endless tumbledown cities and bizarre, craggy mountain ranges that fragment into archipelagos of rubble. Our cities belong to some doodling realm that exists in the margins, beyond the concerns of form and function. I call this place the Inland Empire, a name I stole from the sand-blasted territory, outside Los Angeles, where I was born. And there are two tales to this city. The first is Leon’s. The lurching advances in building complexity match the explosion in her cognitive abilities as one idea connects with another, as plans form, as capabilities are discovered. Then there’s my story. For the first few months of our Saturday ritual, I now realise I was witnessing something happening inside me. My fingers were growing numb, my limbs getting heavier, I was becoming clumsier. And then, at night, I would sometimes lie back in bed and discover that my mind was suspiciously quiet. There was not a single thought strolling around inside my head. It was an ominous kind of calm. MS comes in a handful of forms. Relapsing-remitting MS is the most common, in which new or worsening symptoms flare up in sudden attacks, or relapses, that can last from days to a few months before retreating. Many people with relapsing-remitting MS go on to develop secondary-progressive MS, in which symptoms grow worse, with fewer periods of remission. In primary-progressive MS, the rarest and most aggressive form, symptoms grow steadily worse from the start. MS can affect almost every part of the body, causing anything from tingling fingers to full-blown paralysis, and in between you can get everything from incontinence to difficulty swallowing, from fatigue to – in my case at least – bursts of euphoria. It can be life-shortening, but it is always life-altering. Two months after that conversation with Dr Quill, I was diagnosed with relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. No need for a second opinion, he said: it was a classic case. It was the same day Leon took her first steps – a juxtaposition so perfect, so trite, that I am generally too embarrassed to tell anybody about it. As Dr Quill talked me through the details, I was, of course, not really listening. I was leaning against Sarah, feeling the rise and fall of her breathing as she listened for us. We can handle this. At first, MS was like wearing an odd pair of spectacles. So it took a long time to realise that I was dealing with something not just wearying, but also potentially dehumanising. When I finally started to look around, I noticed the creeping symptoms of what is sometimes called cognitive decline, apparent in terms of memory, general awareness, and a diminished ability to navigate anything not straightforward. Several months after my hands started tingling, I was trying to put an Ikea bed together. With a bracing suddenness, I realised I had no idea what I was doing. For a few minutes I went back and forth between the various pieces of flat-pack around me until I finally admitted I could not get these pieces to converge in any way. A pressure began to build in my head, starting with clogged ears and moving upwards until pain and annoyance prodded at my scalp from the inside. This was the hot pain of embarrassment and confusion, of exam papers that do not ask the right questions, of planes that have not waited for you on the runway when you have overslept. The paper, the images of the bed being put together: how did these instructions work? Why wouldn’t they speak to me any more? Which elements did I start with? I sloped into the living room, trailing defeat. Sarah had Leon snoozing on her lap. “I can’t do it,” I said. “Something’s wrong. I don’t know how to start.” “You never know how to start,” said Sarah. “Nobody does. Sit down and it will all come back to you.” I got the bed made on my second attempt – the confusion had lifted and I suddenly knew exactly what to do. But it seemed that the scuppering of the initial attempt to make the bed was not my traditional reaction to flat-pack furniture – it was not anyone’s traditional reaction to flat-pack furniture. No, there had been a new shallowness there, a new inability to focus. My ability to deal with subtext was also diminished. In the evenings, or if I was particularly tired, I found I could no longer peer beneath the surface of what people were saying as easily as I had before. I was stuck in the literal. TV drama was freshly dense with additional value: everything that happened was a wonderful shock; I failed to see even the clumsiest of telegraphed twists. When I forgot the word windowsill, I described it as the little pavement that lies next to the glass I was also starting to lose the odd word. Parts of my vocabulary were flickering in and out of existence, as if my sentences were being fed through a cognitive hole punch. There were ways of coping. At work, as a video games journalist, I typed more and tried to speak less. Out with friends, I would settle on the periphery of a conversation, permanently exhausted. Only at home did I still try to make myself understood. Even the simplest, most tangible of everyday things sometimes required elaborate workarounds. I described a shower head as a speaker that water comes out of. When I forgot the word windowsill, I described it as the little pavement that lies next to the glass. I would say that Leon’s funnel or beak needed cleaning when I meant her mouth. At first it was liberating to be able to say, “I don’t know” and move on, and have the perfect excuse. MS, in the early days, when you take away the nerve pain, the buzzes, the pops, the intricate unfurling of a new symptom, seemed at its heart an agent of change and an excuse for coping with that change in any manner I wanted. But it was not liberating for ever. I sense now that the enjoyment I’d taken in forgetting is not the work of MS, neither is the speed at which I allowed myself to give up on trying to remember what I had forgotten. *** It is painful and comical to look back on the early days of MS. I was so desperate to feel that I understood what was happening, I created a new kind of logic. I became lost trying to understand my symptoms, perhaps amplifying them as I went. Treatments followed, including two stretches in hospital having a chemotherapy drug that sought to reset my immune system. Now, with the fourth anniversary of my diagnosis coming up, it appears to have done its work. What does this mean? It has hopefully bought me more time without fresh symptoms, more time to settle back into life with Sarah, who has navigated the years with resilience, wit and a calm wisdom. And it has bought me more time with Leon, now four and a half and at school, learning to read and make friends. I am still trying to make sense of those early years, though. I am trying not to distance myself from them, because I must live with the thought of MS hovering overhead at all times. Can you grieve for yourself? I asked myself one day. I was reading Joan Didion’s The Year Of Magical Thinking. Didion has MS, but this book focuses on the year after the sudden death of her husband, and in grief, she suggests, we experience strange things. Concentration is lost. Cognitive ability is reduced. Word blindness, blundering, forgetting. So was this grief in the mix? Can you grieve for yourself? I asked this, and heard the answer: yes. • The Unmapped Mind by Christian Donlan is published by Viking at £14.99. To order a copy for £12.74, go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).