Late-night hosts on Thursday discussed the fighting words exchanged between president Trump and Joe Biden, as well as the mounting legal troubles Trump faces as three different women file lawsuits against him. “Are you up to date on Trump v Biden?” Jimmy Kimmel began. “Joe Biden was at a rally in Miami. He was talking about Trump’s alleged behavior around women, and said if we were in high school, I’d take him behind the gym and beat the hell out of him.” Addressing Trump’s treatment of women and his “locker-room talk” defense, Biden said: “I’ve been in a lot of locker rooms my whole life. I’m a pretty damn good athlete. Any guy who talked that way was usually the fattest, ugliest SOB in the room.” “Trump, being the president, took the high road and ignored it because he’s too busy running the country for stupid stuff,” Kimmel joked. “Oh, he didn’t? Of course he didn’t.” Kimmel then read aloud Trump’s response to Biden on Twitter: “Crazy Joe Biden is trying to act like a tough guy. Actually, he is weak, both mentally and physically, and yet he threatens me, for the second time, with physical assault. He doesn’t know me, but he would go down fast and hard, crying all the way. Don’t threaten people, Joe!” “This is what it’s come to: two old men arguing about who could beat the other one up,” Kimmel said. “Do you think Joe Biden, when they were in high school, could he have kicked Trump’s ass?” The host then showed a class photo of Trump in 1964 at the New York Military Academy: “Based on the fact that he showed up to class every day dressed like a Christmas nutcracker, probably.” Meanwhile, NBC’s Seth Meyers addressed the legal troubles facing the president, including the Mueller probe and the continued personnel changes on Trump’s legal defense team. “Of course, Trump is already being scrutinized as part of a wide-ranging criminal investigation of his campaign and his ties to Russia, his financial entanglements, and his attempts to obstruct justice,” Meyers said. “You’d think it would be hard to add more legal problems to that list and yet, this week, Trump has been bombarded by one lawsuit after another.” Meyers then showed news coverage of three separate suits facing Trump. One is from Stormy Daniels, who claims the NDA she signed before the 2016 election is null and void because Trump never signed it; the second is from playmate Karen McDougal, who’s also filing to be freed from her non-disclosure agreement; the final suit comes from Summer Zervos, who accused Trump of sexual assault and is filing a defamation suit after Trump called the allegations “lies”. “Following this presidency is like trying to binge watch entire seasons of Days of Our Lives, Law and Order: SVU and Survivor on three TV screens at the same time,” Meyers joked. He continued: “These stories aren’t just salacious gossip. In each case, we’re talking about potential violations of civil and criminal law. Zervos is accusing Trump of sexual harassment and defamation. And in the cases of Daniels and McDougal, the payments could have potentially broken federal election law.” Meyers went on to note that on Thursday, Trump’s lead defense attorney in the Russia probe, John Dowd, resigned. “Trump,” Meyers added, “is apparently having trouble finding people to replace him.” Meyers explained that the Trump team reached out to Ted Olson, former solicitor general in the Bush administration. According to the Washington Post, Olson rejected Trump’s offer. “He didn’t want to work for Trump?” Meyers asked. “I can’t imagine why. That’s like asking to join the crew of the Titanic after it hit the iceberg.”