Cardinal George Pell’s defence barrister, Robert Richter QC, has accused the magistrate presiding over Pell’s committal hearing of being biased towards prosecutors, calling on her to disqualify herself from the case. Richter made the application while cross-examining Det Supt Paul Sheridan, who worked with the taskforce established to investigate Pell. Richter pressed Sheridan about events alleged to have occurred at a movie theatre in 1978, and about efforts police made to verify those allegations, including investigating when the film was screened. Magistrate Belinda Wallington intervened to say she was not convinced the film had screened within the timeframe Richter stated it had, and challenged the line of questioning. She also asked Richter to stop shouting. Richter, known for his theatrical questioning, responded by calling on Wallington to “disqualify herself from hearing this matter on the basis of a biased view of the evidence”. Wallington responded: “Your application is refused.” The case continued. The court also heard that when a police taskforce to investigate Pell was established in March 2013, no allegations against him had been made to police. Richter put it to Sheridan that the police investigation, named Operation Tethering, “was an operation looking for a crime and a complainant”. “It was a ‘get Pell’ operation, wasn’t it?” Richter said. “Despite the police looking for people and asking them to complain, it was basically a complete non-starter and was put on ice, as it were, for some time until there was an allegation, if you can call it that ... made in March 2014.” Sheridan, who was one of the detectives who travelled to Rome in 2016 to interview Pell at the Vatican, responded that Operation Tethering was an “intel process to see if there were unreported serious crimes”. But he agreed with Richter that no-one came forward to police for one year, and when police approached someone who made a complaint in 2002 that was later dropped, that person did not want to talk to them. Richter told Sheridan that police had put Pell and his defence team at “forensic disadvantage” by initially presenting them with allegations without telling them the specific date, time and locations the offences were alleged to have occurred. “That’s problematic for someone who is presumed innocent to get their minds around,” Richter said. Sheridan responded; “I’d agree that’s a challenge, yes”. On Wednesday afternoon, Det Senior Constable David Rae was cross-examined by Richter. When asked by Richter about any notes he took the first time he spoke to complainants making allegations against Pell on the phone, Rae responded that it was not his practice to take notes during the initial conversation. Richter put it to him that not taking notes was a breach of police procedures. “No, it’s my practice,” Rae replied. “Your practice then,” Richter replied, “is appalling.” Rae said the reason he didn’t take notes in the first instance of speaking to them on the phone was because he would “cut them short” and make an appointment with them to get a full and detailed statement. “Your practice is not to collect an evidentiary trail of what you assert,” Richter said. “I disagree with that assertion,” Rae replied. Richter also criticised Rae for not reading psychiatric reports of some of the witnesses. “Well what do you know about their psychiatric history as to whether or not they are people who make up things?,” Richter asked. “Nothing,” Rae replied. “You just took them at their word, yes?” Richter asked. “On face value I take them at their word,” Rae agreed. The officers were also accused by Richter of putting more serious allegations of abuse at the hands of nuns and other people on the “back-burner” in order to pursue what he described as “less serious” allegations against Pell. Pell, who is 76, is the highest-ranking Vatican official to be charged in the Catholic church’s long-running sexual abuse scandal. He has taken leave from the Vatican in Rome to attend court. He has strenuously denied all allegations, which relate to historical sexual offences. Further description of the charges against Pell cannot be given for legal reasons. When the hearing adjourns on Thursday afternoon, magistrate Belinda Wallington will decide whether there is enough evidence to order Pell to stand trial. Her decision is expected some time in April. The committal hearing continues.