A teenager has been jailed for more than 10 years after carrying out six “despicable and cowardly” acid attacks against moped riders in less than 90 minutes last year. Derryck John, from Croydon, south London, targeted the riders in an attempt to steal their vehicles in the north and east of the city on 13 July. “These were grave crimes. You attacked members of the public with what appears to have been an acid at the strongest end of the scale of acids,” the judge, Noel Lucas QC, told him at his sentencing hearing at Wood Green crown court on Monday. “You have not revealed the name of your accomplice or the precise nature of the corrosive fluid used or where you and your accomplice obtained it.” John sprayed his victims in the face with a noxious liquid, leaving one man with 30% loss of sight in one eye. He stole two mopeds and tried to take another four from their owners before being arrested at about 3am on 14 July. Lucas told John he and his accomplice had chosen to attack members of the public who were going about their lawful business as he sentenced him to 10 and a half years in prison. Lucas described the “life-changing” and “defining” impact the incident has had on John’s victims. And he commented on the prevalence of acid attacks. “I can state from my own knowledge of the offences arriving at this crown court that such offences have risen sharply in the last 12 months.” He said it was the second case of its kind that he had dealt with in the past three months. Lucas added: “It is clear to me that the carrying and use of corrosive liquids is rapidly becoming a serious and growing problem in London and, in particular, in this part of London. So, too, are crimes committed using scooters.” Having initially pleaded not guilty, John admitted his part in the crimes last month. He had been charged with six counts of throwing a corrosive liquid with intent to “disable, burn, maim, disfigure or cause grievous bodily harm”, two counts of robbery and four counts of attempted robbery. The 17-year-old would have faced a 22-year jail term had he been sentenced as an adult and convicted after a trial instead of pleading guilty, the judge said. The guilty pleas were entered “on the basis that the acid was thrown to incapacitate the victims” and that ‘the other male involved was much older than me’,” said Lucas, reading out a note from John announcing his decision to alter his plea. Ramesh Patel, of the Crown Prosecution Service, said John’s victims had suffered “searing pain and burning” and were forced to leave their jobs because of their injuries. “Had they not been wearing helmets all of the victims’ injuries could have been much more serious.” Earlier reporting restrictions had banned identification of the defendant due to his age. But Lucas told the court last month that there was an “overwhelming, huge public interest” in identifying the teenager after he pleaded guilty to 12 counts.