The landscape of television is changing rapidly – and so are the faces in front of the camera. We have a female Doctor Who. Undercover and Guerrilla placed black protagonists front and centre in prime-time drama, while Chinese Burn explores the lives of young East Asians in London. Streaming services bring us subtitled drama not only from Europe, but from Asia and South America. And yet, check the writers who are considered important and reliable enough for a 9pm prime-time slot “from the writer of …”, and you’ll find the vast majority are men. Female screenwriters have been aware of this for a long time. We all have our war stories. The exec who said “We already have a show written by a woman”, or the commissioner who felt that a female lead wouldn’t appeal to a wide audience. The times we’ve been the only woman in the writing team, routinely talked over and ignored. Like everyone else, we love to grumble … but add our personal experiences to the available facts and figures, and it’s clear that British television has a genuine problem. When an article listing one major channel’s commissions for 2018 was published, with only one woman’s name on it, the grumbling coalesced into a protest. We sent an open letter written to commissioners and to the industry in general. We’re not charity cases – we’re untapped resources I’ve been relatively lucky: I’ve worked with many talented women, some of whom were writing television for the first time. I signed the letter not in anger, but in hope. Because I don’t believe there is conscious or deliberate prejudice against women writers. The problem is a web of interlinked issues, all of which threaten the industry’s survival in this multiplatform age. It lies in the commissioners’ preference for an informal A-list of writers whose names guarantee viewers and awards – but who can’t possibly write everything, and whose dominance prevents other writers from rising through the ranks. It lies in the reduced funding for smaller channels, where up-and-coming writers would once have cut their teeth on lower budget commissions. In a lingering subconscious belief that men’s stories are universal and women’s are not, that anything written by a woman will be for a niche audience. In a writers’ room culture that often rewards the loudest voices, or encourages competition instead of collaboration. In the rise of “authored series” by a single writer, which reduce the opportunities available for writers moving up the ladder. A firm that trains no apprentices may get fantastic work from its current workforce, but in the long term, it’s doomed. These problems threaten far more than the livelihoods of women writers. They threaten the quality and the relevance of everything the industry creates. And it’s not just about us. In publishing this letter, we’re very aware that there are many others who also never make it on to that hallowed list of “safe pairs of hands”. We’re aware that there are no black, Asian and minority ethnic (BAME) screenwriters with the reputation to land a prime-time authored series. That, where working-class writers once moved through the training ground of the soaps to single plays and then series, money and geography now exclude them from networking, training, and the unpaid or underpaid “shadow schemes” that lead to regular writing work. That disabled writers face physical and financial challenges even getting to meetings. That women in their 40s and above find work drying up, while male writers the same age are hailed as experienced professionals. These categories are not exclusive. The letter was signed by BAME, working-class, older, disabled, lesbian and queer women. Our interests intersect, and the change we seek must benefit everyone. So what can we do to bring television writing into the 21st century? I can’t speak for all writers, but I’d appeal to commissioners and executives to look beyond the obvious. There are new stories out there, told by new voices, that will attract new audiences – as well as existing ones. A writer from the soaps or from daytime television has a fantastic training in storytelling and economical production. A writer from children’s television or a digital platform has imagination, passion, and an understanding of future audiences’ interests and needs. We’re not asking for anything we don’t deserve. We’re ready to learn and develop our skills. We’re not charity cases – we’re untapped resources. Work with us. • Debbie Moon is a Bafta-winning screenwriter and the creator of CBBC’s Wolfblood