It’s the word that has been splashed all over papers and analysis in the wake of the ball-tampering scandal. The definition in the Oxford dictionary couldn’t be clearer: to cheat is to “act dishonestly or unfairly in order to gain an advantage”. There can be no question that the Australian cricket team acted dishonestly and unfairly in an effort to gain an edge over their South African opponents, resorting to methods clearly outlawed by the ICC. But, despite being given three opportunities to endorse this fact, Cricket Australia CEO James Sutherland refused to buy in. At first, Sutherland responded by answering that the conduct of Cameron Bancroft, Steve Smith and David Warner was “not in the laws of the game”. In other words, by breaking the laws of the game, they cheated. Asked three times by the same reporter to confirm this, however, Sutherland resorted to further distracted musing: “I am angry and disappointed,” was his second attempt. “It’s not a good day for Australian cricket,” was his third. By the time a third reporter had piled on, Tim Whittaker – Cricket Australia’s communications manager – decided it was time to intervene. “James has answered the question,” he said, but what was most obvious to all present was that he had perfected the politician’s skill of doing the exact opposite, deliberately. If there’s one thing Australians hate more than cheating, it’s politicians avoiding the question. CA simply can’t afford any more ill-will from the Australian public, but Sutherland’s press conference was a set up from the beginning – beholden, as he is, to the organisation’s commitment to due process. For a start, the investigation into the team’s misconduct is unfinished. The most bizarre aspect of that is the head of integrity, Iain Roy, has somehow managed to already clear Darren Lehmann of any wrongdoing, despite the fact he has admitted that a review into team culture under the coach is necessary. As head coach, Lehmann simply cannot dodge responsibility for any of the breeding, tolerance or loss of control of this culture. The second is that CA cannot be seen to disturb the course of justice as it faces a battle between their own attempt to utilise their code of conduct to punish the players as harshly as possible, and the Australian Cricketers’ Association’s right to represent those accused. The semantic battle about to take place was evident in ACA chief executive Alistair Nicholson’s comments from Johannesburg, where he insisted on simply calling the ball-tampering incident a “mistake”. “The players are remorseful for the mistakes they have made,” he said. He then added that the ACA was “providing legal and welfare support to all players,” and that the the players’ welfare should remain a “highly relevant consideration”. ACA president Greg Dyer also sought to centre the players’ wellbeing when asked about the proposed “cultural review” of Australian cricket: “This assessment must include all contributing parties to this culture, players, coaches and administrators, programs and systems,” said Dyer. In other words: the players are not the only ones to blame, and they must be supported through the process of coming to terms with – and redeeming – their “mistakes”. Sutherland’s hands, in other words, are tied, with the scene set once again for an epic battle between CA and its players. To answer as Sutherland did was necessary, if ceaselessly frustrating for sport fans who prefer outcomes to process. Ball tampering, as many have pointed out, may be a “mere” level two offence, but as Sutherland himself admitted “this issue goes beyond the technical nature of offences and various codes of conduct”. This is a nation cheated by its players’ hypocrisy, arrogance and, to date, lack of remorse. Adding salt to the gaping wound, reports have emerged of Warner drinking champagne at a hotel bar – an action that has purportedly alienated him from his team-mates as much as he has become from Australian fans. The image either depicts a man who has completely lost perspective, or one whose arrogance beggars belief. Yes, Warner might be going rogue (as his increased isolation from his team-mates appears to suggest), but for those watching on, it’s hard to distinguish a bad egg from a team whose behavioural standards as a whole have plummeted of late. Surely Smith is now aware of the gravity of the situation, but with Lehmann still at the helm and CA continuing to call for calm and process, the fans’ growing outrage means the two are on a collision course that shows no signs of abating.