It is one of the most adored theatre shows of recent times so there was little surprise when the musical Hamilton set a new Olivier awards record as the most nominated production ever. The musical received a remarkable 13 nominations for what are the UK’s most prestigious theatre prizes, breaking a record jointly held by Harry Potter and the Cursed Child and Hairspray, both with 11. The nominations for the 2018 awards were revealed on Tuesday by Elaine Paige and Alexandra Burke at an event broadcast live on Facebook. Away from Hamilton, the standout candidates were the National Theatre, London, with 22 nominations for four separate productions, including 10 for Follies; the Royal Court’s production of Jez Butterworth’s The Ferryman, with eight nominations; the Almeida theatre in Islington, with seven; and Imelda Staunton, nominated for best actress in both a play and a musical. But it was the unstoppable juggernaut of Lin-Manuel Miranda’s hip-hop musical, telling the story of American founding father Alexander Hamilton, that made Olivier award history with nominations in 10 categories. Newcomer Jamael Westman, who plays Hamilton, and Giles Terera, who plays his nemesis Aaron Burr, are both nominated for best actor in a musical, along with Ciarán Hinds for the Old Vic’s Girl from the North Country, which uses the music of Bob Dylan, and John McCrea for Everybody’s Talking About Jamie, a feelgood musical about a boy who wants to dress in girls’ clothes. January 2015 Hamilton, a new musical written by and starring Lin-Manuel Miranda, has its first performances off-Broadway at the Public theater in New York. Its subject is the US founding father who was the first secretary of the Treasury. February 2015 As the show opens officially, it wins praise from critics, particularly for its innovative blend of musical styles, from rap to operetta. In her four-star review, the Guardian’s Alexis Soloski calls the show "brash, nimble, historically engaged and startlingly contemporary". August 2015 After selling out its run at the Public, the show opens on Broadway at the Richard Rodgers theatre and there is huge demand for tickets. February 2016 The original Broadway cast recording wins a Grammy award for best musical theatre album. March 2016 Miranda visits the White House to perform songs from the musical and a video of him freestyling in the Rose Garden with President Barack Obama goes viral. First lady Michelle Obama calls the show “the best piece of art in any form that I have ever seen in my life”. April 2016 Hamilton wins the Pulitzer prize for drama. June 2016 The musical breaks records, winning 11 Tony awards – at a ceremony that takes place after news breaks of a mass shooting in Orlando, Florida. Miranda performs a sonnet in praise of his wife and son, ending with the words: “Now fill the world with music, love and pride.” July 2016 Miranda stops performing in the show to pursue other opportunities, including starring in a sequel to Mary Poppins. A spoof version of the musical, Spamilton, opens in New York. October 2016 A production of Hamilton opens in Chicago and runs concurrently with the Broadway version. November 2016 Vice-president-elect Mike Pence sees the show in New York. From the stage, actor Brandon Victor Dixon addresses him directly, saying: “We are the diverse America who are alarmed and anxious that your new administration will not protect us.” On Twitter, Donald Trump condemns their “terrible behaviour” and says he hears the show is “highly overrated”. January 2017 The first cast members are revealed for a West End production of Hamilton. December 2017 The show opens to five-star reviews at the newly renovated Victoria Palace theatre in London. March 2018 The London production of Hamilton gets 13 Olivier nominations, making it the most nominated show in the history of the awards. Three Hamilton actors, Michael Jibson, Jason Pennycooke and Cleve September, will compete in the best actor in a supporting role in a musical category with comedian Ross Noble, for his role as Igor in Young Frankenstein, the only non-Hamilton nominee in that category. Rachel John, who plays Hamilton’s sister-in-law Angelica Schuyler, is the only woman from the show to be nominated. She is in the best actress in a supporting role in a musical category. The show has won Tonys, a Grammy and a Pulitzer prize and is now poised to dominate the Oliviers at the ceremony next month, but Miranda, its composer-lyricist, has said that it was no overnight success and took him seven years to write. This year’s best actor category will be fought out between Paddy Considine for The Ferryman, Bryan Cranston for Network, Andrew Scott for Hamlet at the Almeida, and Andrew Garfield for the National’s Angels in America, which is currently playing on Broadway and received six nominations. Imelda Staunton is nominated for best actress for her role in Who’s Afraid of Virginia Woolf? She is up against Laura Donnelly, Lesley Manville and Audra McDonald. Staunton is also nominated for best actress in a musical for Stephen Sondheim’s Follies. Here, she is up against Janie Dee, Shirley Henderson and Josie Walker. The winners will be announced at a ceremony hosted by Catherine Tate at the Royal Albert Hall in London on 8 April. Julian Bird, chief executive of the Society of London Theatre, said this year’s nominations reflected “a strong and exciting performing arts scene in the UK with fresh, new work coming to the fore”. The nominations were announced after a record-breaking year for London theatre, with attendances topping 15m for the first time since audience data began to be collected in 1986. The latest figures show that attendances increased by 5.35% while box office gross revenue increased by 9.35% to £705m.