Andrew McCabe, the former FBI deputy director and a frequent target of Donald Trump, has been fired less than two days before he was due to retire. The attorney general, Jeff Sessions, confirmed McCabe’s dismissal in a statement late Friday, bringing to a close two decades of service at the nation’s top law enforcement agency. In a statement, Sessions said he was terminating McCabe’s employment immediately upon a recommendation from the FBI’s Office of Professional Responsibility (OPR). Sessions said the review found McCabe allegedly “made an unauthorized disclosure to the news media and lacked candor” during a review of the FBI and justice department’s handling of an investigation into the Clinton Foundation. “The FBI expects every employee to adhere to the highest standards of honesty, integrity, and accountability,” Sessions said. “As the OPR proposal stated, ‘all FBI employees know that lacking candor under oath results in dismissal and that our integrity is our brand’”. The most likely price Trump would pay, if he were perceived guilty of wrongdoing, would be a 2020 re-election loss. He can't afford to lose many supporters and expect to remain in office. Any disillusionment stemming from the Russian affair could make the difference. His average approval rating has hung in the mid-to-upper 30s. Every president to win re-election since the second world war did so with an approval rating in the 49%-50% range or better. As long as Republicans are in charge, Trump is not likely to face impeachment proceedings or to be removed from office. A two-thirds majority in the Senate is required to remove a president from office through impeachment. If public opinion swings precipitously against the president, however, his grip on power could slip. At some point, Republicans in Congress may, if their constituents will it, turn on Trump. Apart from impeachment, Trump could, perhaps, face criminal charges, which would (theoretically) play out in the court system as opposed to Congress. But it’s a matter of debate among scholars and prosecutors whether Trump, as a sitting president, may be prosecuted in this way. Robert Mueller is believed to have Trump’s tax returns, and to be looking at the Trump Organization as well as Jared Kushner’s real estate company. It’s possible that wrongdoing unrelated to the election could be uncovered and make trouble for Trump. The president, and Kushner, deny wrongdoing. McCabe swiftly pushed back on the nature of his firing, telling CNN his downfall was the result of “a series of attacks designed to undermine my credibility and my reputation”. McCabe, who stepped down from his role in January and planned to retire Sunday on his 50th birthday, when he would qualify for early retirement benefits, suggested his dismissal was part of an effort to undermine the special counsel’s investigation into Russian interference in the US election and potential collusion between the Trump campaign and Moscow. McCabe statement: pic.twitter.com/32vsbf6XWZ McCabe would potentially be a key witness in special counsel Robert Mueller’s inquiry. As the former deputy director of the FBI, he is expected to be in a position to offer more details around Trump’s decision to fire the bureau’s former director, James Comey, last year. McCabe has repeatedly been the subject of Trump’s ire, both privately and publicly. The president on multiple occasions implied McCabe, a longtime Republican, was biased, citing his wife Jill’s bid for a state Senate seat in Virginia. McCabe’s wife received campaign donations from a political action committee run by the former Virginia governor Terry McAuliffe, a longtime ally of the Clintons. Trump has erroneously stated that Jill McCabe’s campaign was funded by Hillary Clinton. Due to his abrupt dismissal, McCabe is expected to lose hundreds of thousands of dollars in pension. Trump hinted his days were numbered in December, tweeting: “FBI Deputy Director Andrew McCabe is racing the clock to retire with full benefits. 90 days to go?!!!” A justice department spokesman told the Guardian that McCabe had been notified of his dismissal before the press, but declined to state if Sessions had discussed the matter with the president.