Listening to Jeff Koons talk about his art, one first notices his usage and re-usage of certain carefully selected stock phrases. Part art theoretical, part shamanistic, Koonspeak is the language of “expanding” your “parameters”, of “coming into being”, of “transcendence” and “transformation” and a kind of well-rehearsed humility. Sure, a Koons Balloon Dog fetches over $50m at auction, but most of all he just wants to “participate”. His art, he explains, aims to reveal to the viewer the “essence of their potential”. Koons feels connected to the avant garde, to an artistic lineage that includes Manet and Picabia and Duchamp and Courbet and Warhol, and to the idea that “you can transform your life, transform your being, and transform the community around you”. What you think of Koonspeak probably depends on what you think of Koons’s work. He is one of the most famous contemporary artists alive, and undeniably the most polarizing. Therefore, the phrases he invokes to discuss his art read to some as those of a charlatan, thoroughly convinced of his own sage-like wisdom, and to others as evidence of his giddy, earnest reverence for his artistic forerunners and the institution of modern art. Koons, 63, is currently promoting his first New York gallery show in three years, a re-exhibition of his Easyfun-Ethereal paintings first shown 18 years ago at the Deutsche Guggenheim in Berlin. Cheeky and surrealist, the canvases combine cutouts from magazine advertisements – cherry-red lips and twinkling eyelashes and kitten-heeled feet – with corn kernels, synthetic meats, glazed donuts and toaster strudels. In the aptly titled Hair with Cheese, platinum, asymmetrically cut hairdos are placed atop liquefied cheddar. In Bluepoles, a large, dancing, blowup lobster has a bagel for a mouth. When asked what the impetus is for re-presenting these works, which feature both his own photography and images he came across and computer-scanned, Koons says, simply: “I don’t know.” “I know that I enjoyed making the pieces at the end of the 90s,” he adds. “The work is based in photomontage, a kind of surrealistic pop. I think the images are dynamic. They’re wet-into-wet paintings, so there’s a sensuality about them.” Sensuality, along with camp, pop and a certain guileless idealism, are what defines the Koons lore. Born in 1955 in York, Pennsylvania, to an interior decorator, Henry, and a seamstress, Gloria, Koons moved to New York City after studying painting at the School of the Art Institute of Chicago and the Maryland Institute College of Art in Baltimore. To fund his work, he had a short stint selling commodities on Wall Street, and by the early 1980s he was something of an art-world boy wonder, with The New, a series of Hoover vacuum cleaners displayed in fluorescent-lit perspex cases, and a few years later Equilibrium, his first solo show, in which Koons memorably presented a Spalding basketball floating in a glass tank of water and reagent grade sodium. What came next – miniature, bourbon-filled train cars, a porcelain sculpture of Michael Jackson and bubbles, a series of photographs showing Koons and his wife mid-coitus, a 43ft-tall dog topiary, and super-sized, mirror-polished, stainless steel balloon animals – is history, a body of work described by some as the “apotheosis of Walmart” and by others as “so intellectually provocative … it will make your head spin”. Nevertheless, Koons is now nothing if not a member of the art world establishment: outside a museum or gallery, one is most likely to encounter a Koons in the lobbies of particularly lush office buildings, outside various US embassies, or in the homes of oligarchs and oil barons. But Koons insists, still, that he doesn’t feel like one of the cool kids. “That’s interesting,” he says, when asked if he considers himself an insider or an outsider. “I’m aware that I have a tremendous platform and an opportunity to experience transcendence through my work. I’m very conscious of that. And that is something that’s still very much a personal experience. So, I think I’ll always keep feeling somewhat like an outsider.” One reason Koons might feel this way is that, despite the riches and the retrospectives and all that heightened consciousness, he has quite a few detractors, a group composed of traditionalists and minimalists and puritans, or those who simply call his bluff. Earlier this year, a group of French artists, collectors, and politicians denounced the planned installation of Koons’ Bouquet of Tulips, a memorial for the victims of the 2015 Paris terror attacks, writing that the “choice of work”, and its proposed location in front of the Palais de Tokyo museum, “seems surprising at the least, if not opportunistic and even cynical”. While Koons won’t discuss the Tulips kerfuffle, he does defend himself against attacks on his artistic bona fides; Koons, as most know, doesn’t physically touch his work but instead employs a Henry Ford-like assembly of painters and sculptors at his Chelsea studio. “I never think about it,” he says of criticism. “I’m grateful for the opportunity that I have. I always wanted to participate. And I’ve never taken that responsibility lightly.” He compares himself to a hunter-gatherer: “If you think of people going out and hunting and coming back, once you have enough for yourself you automatically want to share that with the community around you. And that’s the way the art works.” Koons adds: “I know that I make the work that I make, that my own intellectual needs are met and that I can expand my parameters and hopefully I’m able to touch the interior life of the viewers who see my work. There are certain individuals that respond to it, and I’m sure there’s some people that don’t. For whatever reason, they close themselves down, or they just won’t open themselves up.” There is truth to the idea that Koons’ work requires an openness: approached with defenses down and art-critic goggles removed, you often want to submit yourself to his sculptures. For a moment, cynicism and value-judgments fade. And this, Koons explains, is what “transcendence” is all about. “My work deals with a sense of idealism,” he says. “What I’ve found meaningful in life was when I came across things that helped me understand that by removing judgment and hierarchy, segregation, any form of disempowerment, you’re able to create a state where anxiety is removed and you’re able to experience transcendence.” What sorts of things does he speak of? Well, the canon: Duchamp’s Fountain; the music of Led Zeppelin and Michael Jackson; Warhol and Ruscha; and, either surprisingly or unsurprisingly, the rapper Lil Uzi Vert, whose name he pronounces with an affably unhip emphasis on the litt-le. “Little Uzi is very poetic,” Koons says effusively, “and he’s able to speak about a kind of microcosm that actually represents one community that can be looked at as a whole. I think it’s very pop; it’s very connecting. I just think it’s brilliant.” Koons adds that he enjoys lifting weights to the rapper’s music. Koonsworld, with its inflatables and its exultant language, seems at times unreasonably joyous, a departure from the long tradition, in which appear many of Koons’s heroes, of the “tortured artist”. He’s experienced lows, of course, but remains persistently idealistic, as if life were an Eden of art and discovery. “I’ve never felt tortured because I’ve found tremendous joy; joy in philosophy, the idea of becoming, everyday life, people and nature,” Koons says. “Some of the ideas we have about the tortured individual come from what happened, at different times, to artists who went through the revolution and didn’t have the support of the church or the state. They had to find their own way in the world.” This brings us to politics. Koons was one of many celebrity donors to the Hillary Clinton campaign and describes himself as a lifelong Democrat. His grandfather was the city treasurer in York and Koons mentions visiting John F Kennedy’s gravesite, the Eternal Flame, when he was a little boy. He’s described his work as having “no political alliances” but is not quite so coy himself. “There’s a lot of chaos in the political scene, there’s tremendous division and polarities and it’s important now to realize what values we hold dear,” he says. “I prefer when things are not as chaotic. And I feel very, very disappointed in the performance of the president.” But Koons, ever the diplomat, circles back to the topic a few minutes later. “You know, there are people in the Republican party I have tremendous respect for,” he says. “It’s just the values, as a whole, that the Democratic party represents are values of caring for those around you.”