The Hollywood actor Rebel Wilson spent more than $1.4m fighting her high-profile defamation case, her lawyer has told a Melbourne court. The Pitch Perfect actor is now fighting to have most of those costs repaid by Bauer Media, which defamed her in a series of articles published in 2015. It was revealed in the supreme court of Victoria on Thursday that Wilson spent well in excess of $1m over the 22-day trial, which was held in June. The court was also told that Wilson’s high-profile barrister Matthew Collins cost $9,900 a day, including GST. It is expected she will have at least 80% of those costs repaid by Bauer but Wilson is seeking more. Her barrister Renee Enbom argued that Justice John Dixon made an order on costs rather than have the matter go to a dedicated costs court. She said Wilson and Bauer Media were arguing over a difference of between $100,000 and $200,000. Dixon previously found that Bauer had relied on “hopeless”, or unwinnable defences during the trial, purely to keep Wilson “worried all the way to verdict”. Enbom argued that was an “improper motivation” and the matter of costs should be decided by the trial judge as a result. However, Dixon said he had already dealt with the matter by awarding Wilson aggravated damages and did not want to “interfere” with the normal process for determining costs. Enbom also argued Wilson may have to wait until the end of 2018 before recovering her costs if the matter went to a specialist court. In September, Wilson was awarded the highest defamation payout in Australian history of $4.5m, which included $650,000 in general and aggravated damages. It followed a four-week trial during which Wilson’s lawyers successfully proved to an all-woman jury that Bauer branded the actor as a “serial liar” who fabricated untruths about her age, real name and childhood in order to make it in Hollywood. Bauer Media plans to appeal against the $4.5m payout, with the matter listed for mid-April. Dixon adjourned the costs matter for a date to be determined.