Gianluigi Buffon issued a stern rebuke to his critics as he arrived in England to add to his record cap tally with Italy. The veteran goalkeeper announced his retirement from international football after Italy failed to qualify for the World Cup last November but later reversed his decision. Consequently he has been retained as captain by the caretaker coach Luigi di Biagio and is set to lead the side out in friendlies against Argentina in Manchester on Friday and England at Wembley next Tuesday. The decision has attracted some criticism but the Juventus No 1 insists he is still the best man for the job. Buffon, who holds a European record 175 international caps, said: “I’ve nothing to add to what has been said. Everyone knows the truth. My role in the squad has always been positive and I’ve always brought people together. I’ve always put us before me. “I’m not here to showcase, to show myself off. I can still be useful. I might be 40 but I’m the goalkeeper of Juventus. “Italy is a funny country where people enjoy controversy but any controversy about me is just sensationalism. After a while all this controversy will just fall away.” The 40-year-old has previously hinted that this season could be his last but he does not appear to have any retirement plans yet. Speaking at a press conference at the Etihad Stadium, Buffon said: “I don’t know if my last match will be with Juventus or an international but it will be low key and sober, normal. “I arrived at my first game on a scooter and the only car I have is the one that Juventus make available for me.” Di Biagio, who has stepped up from duties with the Under-21 side, hopes the four friendlies in the remainder of the season can help Italy move on from their World Cup nightmare. Russia 2018 will be the first finals to take place without four-time world champions Italy for 60 years. The games also provide a chance for Di Biagio to stake a claim for the job full-time but he insists that is not his focus. Di Biagio said: “Everything around the team has changed. We need a new start. “We have a small world championship in these four matches. It is a chance to test new players. We need patience and consistency, regardless of who is going to be in the driving seat.” The Argentina coach Jorge Sampaoli, meanwhile, claims Lionel Messi is the real leader of his side. There is a feeling this summer’s showpiece event could be Messi’s final opportunity to lift the World Cup, while still close to his peak, to truly stamp his authority on the global showpiece. “This is going to be his team,” said Sampaoli, whose side only secured their World Cup spot in the final round of qualifying fixtures last autumn. He is the best of all and is in a stage of maturity that can he can carry the team on his shoulders. “It is more his team than mine.” Argentina have spent the week preparing for their run-out against Italy at Manchester City’s training complex. The City striker Sergio Agüero has been with the group but, still troubled by the knee injury which ruled him out of last week’s Premier League game at Stoke, has not trained fully. He will not feature on Friday and is likely to remain with City rather than travel to Madrid for next Tuesday’s game against Spain.