The harder you step in mess, the more it spreads. Last Saturday Cricket Australia found a flaming bag of the stuff on its doorstep and, just like the headteacher in the high school movie, decided the best way to put it out was to stamp right down on it. CA has banned Steve Smith and David Warner from all state and international cricket for a year, Cameron Bancroft for nine months, and ordered all three to do 100 hours of community service. Smith will not be eligible for any kind of leadership role in the Australian team for another two years, Warner ever again. The three, and their lawyers, have seven days to appeal. The crime was petty, the cover-up clumsy, the punishment swift and vicious. Warner and Smith have both been cut from this year’s Indian Premier League, too. Outside of the treatment given to match fixers, there is no precedent in cricket for such heavy sentences. They are certainly not in line with those given to the other players who have been caught ball-tampering in recent years. But then CA did not charge these three with that, but with conduct unbecoming and bringing the game into disrepute. Which are such nebulous offences that it makes it hard to judge whether or not the punishments fit the crime. If they were even supposed to. Those charges suggest CA was more worried about addressing the outcry than the offence. And even then, it is not clear whether it wanted to appease its public, who are split about whether or not the bans are appropriate, or its sponsors and broadcast partners. It was only last week that CA knocked back a joint bid from the Nine and Ten networks for its TV rights because it was too low. Seven days later, CA’s negotiating position does not look quite so strong. But such is modern sport. It is not just the fans and your coach to whom you have to answer. Besides, sympathy for the three banned players is tempered by the sorry details laid out in CA’s press release. Warner came up with the plan to cheat, taught Bancroft how to do it, Smith signed it off, and then all three tried to cover it up. What’s worse, Smith and Bancroft had lied in their confessional press conference last Saturday night, when they insisted Bancroft had not been using sandpaper but sticky tape. According to the investigation, all the other people in the Australian dressing room, the coaches and team-mates, the bowlers who were actually handling the ball, knew nothing about the plan until they saw it unfold on TV, when Darren Lehmann is supposed to have called the 12th man, Peter Handscomb, to ask him to find out “what the fuck is going on”. Then he questioned the players after the close of play. It is a convenient truth for CA, and close to the best-case scenario it must have wished for when the news broke. A lot of prominent ex-players expressed a measure of scepticism about the initial findings, notably Michael Clarke, who wrote two pointed tweets after Cricket Australia’s chief executive, James Sutherland, gave his press conference on Tuesday night. “Too many reputations on the line for the full story not to come out,” Clarke said. “The truth, the full story, accountability and leadership – until the public get this Australian cricket is in deep shit!” On Tuesday night Sutherland sounded like a man reading from a textbook on damage limitation. He spoke about rebuilding trust with the public but failed to convince his audience that he was being entirely honest himself. He was better on Wednesday, until he got on to the wider culture of the team, when, in his best Sir Humphrey Appleby, he promised a “deep and far-ranging” review. There have been a lot of those in recent years. Presumably this one will be every bit as urgent as this week’s investigation, the judgments just as severe, the consequences just as far‑reaching. There are a lot of hard questions which have not been answered by these three bans. It is not clear why the players decided to change their story about the sandpaper, or why the lie stood for three days. It is not clear why, if this was really the first time the team had cheated in this way, the South African cameramen say they were tipped off to keep an eye out, or Warner felt he had to get Bancroft to do the tampering. It is not clear why, if CA was really “sick of Warner’s bullshit” as one report put it, that the governing body tolerated it so long. And it is not clear why it took all this for Lehmann to realise something was so wrong with his team. Turn back five years to another of Sutherland’s press conferences. In 2013 he explained why CA had sacked Mickey Arthur as coach and hired Lehmann to replace him. It was down to “poor behaviour, accountability and discipline”, Sutherland said. It was part of a bigger plan, designed by Sutherland and the general manager, Pat Howard, to “nurture our young talented, players” and “develop their character beyond their cricket abilities”. As Sutherland said back then, “it comes down to Australian cricket fans, they want a team they can be proud of”. How did that work out? Of course all the answers will be in that wide-ranging review, when, no doubt, Sutherland will be just as tough on himself as CA have been on Smith, Warner, and Bancroft.