Since there’s no avoiding the great engineer Isambard Kingdom Brunel in these parts – especially this week with the opening of a museum dedicated to him – you may as well engage with his legacy straightaway. Come to Bristol by train, alighting at Temple Meads station. When it opened in 1840, this was the western terminus of the Great Western Railway, 116 miles out of Paddington. Viewed from the front its majesty is emphatic, even ecclesiastical, given that its castellated form was, until the second world war, topped by a spire. From 2002-2008, the original terminal shed housed the British Empire and Commonwealth Museum, whose purpose was to show the effect colonial rule had on the rest of the world. Substantial and enduring, was the unsurprising answer. The empire also returned massive wealth to the city, central as its shipping was to the grim triangular traffic of slaves, cash crops and manufactured goods. The controversy of this much-discredited wealth remains hotly alive, especially when it comes to 17th-century slave trader (also lauded as a philanthropist) Edward Colston, and the famous concert hall which (for now) bears his name. First, though, to the battlefield of the immediate streetscape and the immense redevelopment taking place in and around the Temple Quarter enterprise zone. From the station, turn right into Temple Gate and across Temple Circus roundabout into Victoria Street. Halfway up on your right, at the mouth of Church Lane, you come to the timber-framed pub Ye Shakespeare and the Temple church. Corn Street still boasts the Exchange building and Old Post Office, both completed in the 1740s The pub, formerly an early 17th-century merchant’s house, became a well-known haunt of the area’s many thirsty dockers; the church is a blitz-gutted half-ruin made famous by the exorcism in 1788 of the so-called Yatton daemoniac, George Lukins. Head up Victoria Street and over Bristol Bridge. What passes below is not the Avon but the so-called Floating Harbour, formed by diverting the water of that river with lock gates, and providing a tidal bypass. On the corner ahead is the spired form of St Nicholas, now council offices. Turn left into Baldwin Street – coming into view on the right is another imposing building pressed into fresh service, the Old Fish Market pub. Before you reach it, cut right off Baldwin and up the steps by St Nicholas’s tower. Cross the street of the same name and head into a paved passage, All Saints Lane, running up to St Nick (as in Nicholas) Markets, an orderly clutter of stalls, pubs and independent traders, here in various guises since 1743. Turn left into the tight, elegant valley of Corn Street. If this thoroughfare has the feel of a conservation area, that is partly because it escaped the worst ravages of the Bristol blitz, in which the Luftwaffe, drawn by the targets of the harbour and aeroplane company, mounted six major bombing raids between November 1940 and April 1941. More than 1,000 people were killed, a similar number injured, and 80,000 homes destroyed. Corn Street still boasts the Exchange building and Old Post Office, both completed in the 1740s, as well as the Commercial Rooms and Old Council House, built in the following century. Cross over St Stephen’s Street into Clare Street, then left at the end into the space of the aptly named Broad Quay. Head straight on, down the eastern side of the harbour, parallel to the Watershed film house and cultural centre. Ahead is Pero’s footbridge and beyond it, once again, the water strip of the Floating Harbour. Make a brief-but-essential detour to Queen Square, by way of Assembly Rooms Lane and a dog-leg into Middle Avenue. This gracious and orderly square, with most of the houses now used as business premises, was the site of the savage Bristol Riots of October 1831, in which much of the north and west sides were destroyed. The unrest came in the wake of the House of Lords’ rejection of the second reform bill, designed to give fuller representation in the Commons to rapidly expanding industrial cities. A local magistrate and strong opponent of the bill, Sir Charles Wetherell, came to the area to open the new assize courts but was intercepted by a mob of protesters, who chased him to the Mansion House on the square’s north-east corner. The rioting went on for three days, with troops of Dragoon Guards sent to restore order. Work was halted on the Clifton Suspension Bridge. Among the citizens sworn in as special constables was Isambard Kingdom Brunel. Walk clockwise round the square, then leave on the south side and carry on into Farr’s Lane, then left on to Narrow Quay, with the magnificent Arnolfini gallery on your left – in a warehouse built in the same year as the riots round the corner. Cross Prince Street Bridge, then turn right along the wharf, beside the remaining stretch of the Bristol Harbour Railway, which once ran from Temple Meads to the Floating Harbour. You are now approaching the renowned bulk of the SS Great Britain and the legacy of its designer, Brunel. In the context of modern shipping, with vessels nearly a quarter of a mile long, this one has a bulbous quaintness about it, lying in its native dock after a life of pioneering and destitution. It was a product of a city at the heart of human – and inhumane – transport. The world’s longest passenger ship in the 1840s, it was the first iron steamer to cross the Atlantic, and played a crucial part in British migration to Australia. Take a less ambitious crossing – the ferry barely takes a minute – to the north side of the harbour. Follow the quayside round to the right-hand turn into Gasworks Lane. Cross Anchor and St George’s Roads at the roundabout slightly to your left, then take Jacob’s Wells Road for 100 metres to some stone steps between houses. Suddenly and – if you’re new here – unexpectedly, you are on a woodland path and climbing steeply. This is Brandon Hill. Keep going: it will flatten out, but not quite yet. Don’t begrudge the legwork as the rewards of this elevation are as great as if you were in an outdoor lift. After one more clump of trees around a major footpath junction, a large, striking tower makes you raise your eyes still further. You’ll have clocked it from a distance but it’s more dramatic than you were expecting. This is the Cabot Tower, the crowning glory of a rural patch, or rus in urbe, as good as any. The structure’s name is for John Cabot and commemorates the Venetian navigator’s 1497 voyage from Bristol to what later became Canada. The discovery that you can climb, free of charge, the 32 metres to the top may not be a first, but the sense of achievement when you get there is a high point. From here the city, and the region of which it is the hub, is laid out with almost topographical clarity. To the west, just visible above the roofs, are the twin towers of Clifton Suspension Bridge, Brunel’s peerless crossing of the Avon Gorge; the downs beyond; Filton and Westbury-on-Trym to the north; the eastern suburbs upriver, hanging on almost as far as Keynsham. Relatively close, looking almost touchable, are the ornamental giants of the university’s Wills Memorial Building down in Park Row, and next to it Bristol Museum & Art Gallery; further away are the Hippodrome, the City Hall and the cathedral. Make your way down the steep east side of Brandon Hill, out into Charlotte Street, right into Park Street, left into Frogmore Street and on to Colston Hall. From here, the Pipe Lane side, it’s all millennial modernity. However, behind it in Colston Street is the earlier, colonnaded building. It’s tempting, but crude, to see this view as emblematic – the new and shiny shouldering the old and shabby aside. Edward Colston was, and remains, that difficult English civic figure of merchant and philanthropist. Money came in through slave-trading, for centuries one of the city’s most lucrative commodities, and went out through almshouses and charitable endowments. An estimated 85,000 Africans were enslaved and transported during his time in charge of the Royal Africa Company in the late 17th and early 18th centuries. One of Bristol’s more recent exports, the trip hop band Massive Attack, have consistently registered their disapproval of the name and its associations by refusing to play at the hall. Largely as a result of this and similar protests, it is to be renamed when its refurbishment programme is finished. From Colston Hall, go down Pipe Lane, and left into St Augustine’s Parade. After the second street island, fork right into Quay Street, next right into Broad Street, then left into Wine Street. Two hundred yards along, turn right towards St Peter’s church, which brings you into Castle Park; it’s less dramatic than Brandon Hill, but a corresponding “lung” to the right of the city’s centre. The paths circling round to your right lead to the waterside way back to Bristol Bridge. Left over it and you are in Victoria Street, Temple Circus and the station.