Roma blew open the Serie A title race by beating the league leaders, Napoli, 4-2 on their own turf, hours after Juventus had overcome Lazio in dramatic fashion. The results leave Napoli a point clear of second-placed Juventus, who have a game in hand. Lorenzo Insigne gave Napoli a sixth-minute lead but Cengiz Ünder equalised a minute later with a deflected effort before Edin Dzeko nodded Roma ahead. The Bosnian netted a second with a superb left-foot curler, and Diego Perotti slammed home a loose ball six minutes later. Dries Mertens’s stoppage-time strike was a mere consolation. Earlier, a last-gasp goal from Paulo Dybala sunk Lazio at the Stadio Olimpico. Juve enjoyed the best chances, with Mario Mandzukic and Sami Khedira going close. But the game was set to end in stalemate until the final minute of stoppage-time, when Dybala danced his way into the box to hold off a challenge and hook the ball high beyond Thomas Strakosha. Elsewhere in Italy, Alberto Grassi’s 48th-minute strike was enough to see off Bologna and lift Spal out of the relegation zone. In La Liga, Real Madrid beat Getafe 3-1, Gareth Bale lashing in the opener from inside the area at a sparsely populated Bernabéu, before Cristiano Ronaldo stretched his side’s advantage after a through-ball from Karim Benzema. The Portuguese hit his 16th league goal of the season when he headed in a cross from Marcelo shortly after Francisco Portillo had pulled one back from the spot. Sevilla beat Athletic Bilbao 2-0, Luis Muriel and Franco Vázquez getting the goals, and Girona ran out 2-0 winners at Villarreal, with Cristhian Stuani and Anthony Lozano striking either side of half-time to take the newly promoted side to seventh. In France, PSG made light work of their first league encounter since Neymar’s season-ending injury, winning 2-0 at Troyes to restore their 14-point lead at the top of Ligue 1. The visitors broke the deadlock two minutes after the restart when Ángel Di María raced on to Julian Draxler’s through-ball and finished low into the bottom corner. Troyes then wasted two rare forays forward before Dani Alves’ brilliant pass released Christopher Nkunku, who dispatched the ball into the bottom corner. Timothy Weah, the 18-year-old son of the former Liberia striker George, came off the bench to make his debut. In Germany, Borussia Dortmund passed up the chance to regain second place, needing a 38th-minute equaliser from Marco Reus to salvage a point at RB Leipzig in Saturday’s late kick-off. The Germany forward superbly rounded Peter Gulacsi and scored to cancel out Jean-Kévin Augustin’s 29th-minute opener. That result meant that Schalke, who had seen off Hertha Berlin earlier in the day through Marko Pjaca’s goal, held on to second spot. The winger turned home a low cross in the 37th minute to seal a 1-0 win that took his side ahead of Dortmund and kept them a point clear of Eintracht Frankfurt, who beat Hannover by the same scoreline thanks to Danny da Costa’s strike. Wolfsburg slipped closer to the relegation zone after losing 2-1 at home to Bayer Leverkusen. A penalty from Lucas Alario and a fine strike from Julian Brandt gave the visitors a two-goal lead, before Admir Mehmedi replied for Wolfsburg with 11 minutes remaining. Elsewhere Hoffenheim kept up their chase of a Europa League place with a 2-0 win at Augsburg, the goals coming from a pair of former Premier League attackers in Andrej Kramaric and Serge Gnabry, while Hamburg – the only founder members of the Bundesliga never to be relegated but now in severe danger – drew 0-0 at home with 10-man Mainz, who remain a place above their hosts in 16th. While Bayern Munich have the title as good as won, the race for the top four looks set to go down to the wire, with just four points separating Schalke in second and Leipzig in sixth.