Anthony Watson 5 A miserable two weeks, that yellow card in Paris followed by an unlucky part in Ringrose’s try before he was carried off. Jonny May 6 Came more into the game after the break with some straight running into the heart of the Irish defence and scored a well-taken late consolation try. Jonathan Joseph 5 Lasted only 55 minutes and was restricted to half-breaks. A victim again of England’s inability to provide enough quick ball. Ben Te’o 4 England’s midfield is just not working. Worked hard in defence but left it to the last move to have any impact in attack. Elliot Daly 7 He took both his tries well and was only denied a third by Keith Earls’s ankle tap. Easily England’s most dangerous attacker. Owen Farrell 5 His switch to fly-half was a qualified success. Good tactical kicking and made Daly’s first try but off target with conversions in difficult conditions. Richard Wigglesworth 6 The veteran No 9 was picked for his tactical nous and had a decent afternoon in what will almost certainly be his last England appearance. Mako Vunipola 6 Carried the ball strongly in the first half in particular and coped well with the threat of Furlong in the scrums. England’s best forward. Dylan Hartley (capt) 5 Recovered from his calf injury to regain the captaincy. Solid enough before his usual early exit but now time for a change of hooker, and leader. Kyle Sinckler 6 The Harlequin added some extra dynamism in the loose and carried well. He justified his selection ahead of Dan Cole. Maro Itoje 6 Commanding at the lineout and back to something like his best. Looked commanding as a ball-carrier in the latter stages. George Kruis 6 Picked ahead of Joe Launchbury for his lineout work. Played an important role in the set-piece and worked tirelessly. Chris Robshaw 6 Broke Neil Back’s record of 64 Tests on the flank but had little to celebrate. Lots of industry and more comfortable at No 6. James Haskell 6 Picked to help rescue England from more breakdown woe and added some energy to the back row but Sam Underhill must step up in South Africa. Sam Simmonds 5 Those tries in Rome seem like an age ago. He has the pace but not the power to play No 8 against a side as physical as Ireland. REPLACEMENTS Jamie George (for Hartley 57) 6; Joe Marler (for Vunipola 52) 6; Dan Cole (for Sinckler 52) 6; Joe Launchbury (for Kruis 70) 6; Don Armand (for Simmonds 66) 6; Danny Care (for Wigglesworth 60) 6; George Ford (for Joseph 55) 6; Mike Brown (for Watson 33) Impressive in attack and defence 7 Rob Kearney 7 The full-back was one of only two in this squad to have won a previous grand slam and played an important defensive part. Keith Earls 7 His tackle on Watson saved a try when Ireland were under the cosh in the first half and he repeated it on Daly before suffering a late injury. Garry Ringrose 7 Made an outstanding comeback last weekend and his try gave Ireland the perfect start. The centre was always a threat. Bundee Aki 6 Butchered the chance of a first-half try but made up for it with a key part in Ireland’s second. Nasty shoulder charge on Daly. Jacob Stockdale 8 Made Six Nations history with his seventh try. His opportunist score with the last move of the first half set up the victory. Johnny Sexton 7 Refused to leave the field as blood poured from a head wound. Ireland have not taken a backward step since his magical moment in Paris. Conor Murray 7 Put his side beyond reach with a penalty on the hour and showed great composure and control behind a superior pack. Cian Healy 7 He has worked hard to wrestle his place back from Jack McGrath and followed an outstanding display against Scotland with another strong performance. Rory Best (capt) 7 Ireland’s captain kept his head in the maelstrom. He was accurate in the lineout and deserves his place in the history books. Tadhg Furlong 7 The prop was Ireland’s best forward and the other candidate for man-of-the-match. Carried and tackled tirelessly all afternoon. James Ryan 6 A key part of a monumental Irish defensive effort, particularly when they were reduced to 14 men in the first half. Iain Henderson 6 England’s nemesis last year justified his selection ahead of Devin Toner. The Ulsterman was strong in the set-piece and in attack. Peter O’Mahony 7 The Lions captain was shown a yellow card for collapsing a maul in the first half but made up for it when he came back on, particularly in defence. Dan Leavy 7 Yet to lose in any of his nine Tests and has filled a Sean O’Brien-shaped hole in the back row perfectly. A menace all afternoon. CJ Stander 7 He took his try brilliantly and again was a difficult opponent in the breakdown. Consistent throughout the tournament. Sean Cronin (for Best 64) 6; Jack McGrath (for Healy 50) 6; Andrew Porter (for Furlong 64) 6; Devin Toner (for Ryan 67) 6; Jordi Murphy (for O’Mahony 73) 6; Kieran Marmion (for Earls 73) 6; Joey Carbery (for Sexton 66) 7; Jordan Larmour (for Aki 53) 6