On a day with 36 medals up for grabs, Team GB’s Menna Fitzpatrick and Jen Kehoe won silver in the women’s visually impaired giant slalom, finishing behind Slovakia’s Henrieta Farkasova and Natalia Subrtova, who took their fourth gold of the 2018 Winter Paralympics. After the race Fitzpatrick said: “It felt absolutely amazing, you can really feel the acceleration from your skis and your bodies driving you forward. It just doesn’t sink in. When we get to celebrate we’ll have a chance to realise what we’ve done, our families have done all the celebrating for us so far.” The silver was their third medal of the Games, adding to their super combined silver and super-G bronze. Team GB’s Kelly Gallagher and her guide, Gary Smith, narrowly missed out on a medal, finishing fifth. A disappointed Gallagher, a gold medal winner at Sochi 2014, said: “I think there is more in us but I definitely set out with the intentions to work really hard, which I did, and overall it went quite well. It’s hard to want something and for it then not to work out for you but I suppose having that resilience is really what these Games are about.” Brian McKeever, Canada’s most successful Winter Paralympian, added a 12th medal to his haul, winning the men’s visually impaired 1.5km sprint. The USA’s Oksana Masters took gold in the women’s sitting skiing 1.1km sprint. It marked a comeback for her, after she had been forced to pull out halfway through Tuesday’s biathlon event. “I feel like I’m on cloud nine right now,” she told paralympic.org. “This is the most amazing medal of my career. I cannot wait to put it around my mum’s neck. I told her the first gold, it’s hers.” Masters moved to the United States after being adopted from a Ukrainian orphanage. A photo finish was required in both the men’s 1.1km sitting race – with the USA’s Andy Soule edging out Dzmitry Loban of Belarus for gold – and the men’s 1.5km sprint standing. Canada’s Mark Arendz and Finland’s Ilkka Tuomisto could not be split in the latter, and so tied for third place. That race was won by Alexandr Kolyadin to claim Kazakhstan’s first ever Winter Paralympics gold. The ice hockey semi-finals will feature Canada taking on the hosts, South Korea, with the USA facing Italy after the last round of group matches were concluded. In the wheelchair curling, with most nations having played eight of their 11 matches, China, Canada, South Korea and Great Britain are in the top four places, which would see them progress to the semi-finals. The USA lead the Winter Paralympics medal table, with 21 medals including eight golds. The Neutral Paralympic Athletes from Russia are second, with 17 medals including six golds. Slovakia are in third place, also with six golds. Great Britain’s four silvers and one bronze medal places the team 17th in the table. In Australia there has been criticism of the television network Channel Seven for its approach to covering the Games, with former Paralympians complaining at the scheduling. Louise Sauvage, who won two gold medals in Sydney’s Paralympics in 2000 said: “My main problem is that it’s on so late at night, and they show the day before’s coverage. We have come such a long way in terms of public awareness and education about sport for athletes with disabilities. Why are we taking a step back with this very woeful coverage?” Seven has defended its coverage, a nightly one-hour highlights show, which sometimes features events up to 36 hours after they have taken place.