The Kremlin has said it has no information about an incident involving a former Russian spy who was taken ill in Salisbury after exposure to an unknown substance, and chided British media for suggesting that Moscow was involved. Sergei Skripal, 66, was one of four Russians swapped for 10 deep cover “sleeper” agents planted by Moscow in the US. He is critically ill in hospital after being found unconscious on a bench in a shopping centre in the small Wiltshire city. A woman in her 30s who was found alongside Skripal was also taken to hospital in a critical condition. “We don’t possess any information about what could have been the cause [of Skripal’s illness], and what this could be connected to,” said Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin spokesman. He said Russia had not been contacted by Britain, but that it was ready to assist in any investigation. “Moscow is always open to cooperation,” Peskov said, calling the incident “tragic”. Peskov appeared to mock British media suggestions that Skripal could have been poisoned by Russian agents, saying “It didn’t take them long.” He also said was not aware if Skripal was still a Russian citizen. Skripal’s mysterious illness has invited comparisons with the poisoning in London in 2006 of another Russian spy, Alexander Litvinenko, whose death plunged Russian-British relations to a post-cold war low. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, denied any Russian involvement, and refused to extradite the two Russians accused by the British authorities of killing Litvinenko. However, speaking in 2010, Putin, a former KGB officer, said that “traitors always end badly”. “Secret services live by their own laws and these laws are very well known to anyone who works for a secret service,” he said. Some Russians saw the incident involving Skripal as a British attempt to discredit Putin, who is all but certain to win a new six-year term of office in presidential elections later this month. “The Anglo-Saxons have arranged Litvinenko 2.0 ahead of the elections,” Alexander Kots, a journalist for the pro-Kremlin Komsolskaya Pravda newspaper, wrote on Twitter. Argumenti I Fakti, a popular tabloid, said “western propaganda” would exploit Skripal’s illness “to the full” Skripal served in Russia’s GRU military intelligence until 1999, reaching the rank of colonel. He then worked at the Russia foreign ministry’s office in Moscow until 2003, when he went into business. He was arrested in 2006 and charged with passing the identities of Russian agents working undercover in Europe to MI6 in 2006. “You outplayed me,” Skripal reportedly told FSB agents after his arrest. An FSB spokesperson at the time compared Skripal to Col Oleg Penkovsky, who was executed by the Soviet Union in 1963 for supplying the US with information during the Cuban missile crisis. He was jailed for 13 years by a Russian court in August 2006 after being convicted of “high treason in the form of espionage”. Russian prosecutors said he had been paid $100,000 (£72,000) by MI6 for information he had been supplying since 1995, when he was a serving officer. He arrived in the UK as part of a high-profile spy swap in 2010 involving Anna Chapman, a diplomat’s daughter. Andrei Lugovoi, one of the suspects in the poisoning of Litvinenko, said it was unfair for Britain to jump to conclusions on Skripal. ”I don’t rule out that this is another provocation by British intelligence agencies,” Lugovoi told Russia’s pro-government Vzglyad newspaper. “Whatever happens on [British] territory, they start yelling: ‘He was killed, he was hung, he was poisoned!’ and that Russia is to blame for everything. This is to their advantage. “The English suffer from phobias. If something happens to Russians, they immediately seek Russian fingermarks,” he told Interfax.