North Korean leader Kim Jong-un is believed to be in Beijing on an unannounced trip, in what would be his first foreign state visit since taking power in 2011, according to reports. Citing three sources familiar with the visit, Bloomberg said on Monday the North Korean leader was in the Chinese capital. Japanese media had previously reported that a “special train” carrying a high-ranking Korean official had arrived in China on Sunday to discuss ties between the two countries. China’s support of international sanctions against North Korea over its nuclear program has strained relations with its longtime ally. Local media showed footage of a train passing through the Chinese city of Dandong, which borders North Korea. Kyodo news agency said that hotels near the Sino-Korean friendship bridge between Dandong and Sinuiju in North Korea have barred reservations since Sunday, in an apparent effort to prevent guests from seeing the train. A car with a licence plate from the North Korean embassy was seen on Monday near Beijing’s Great Hall of the People, where foreign dignitaries are often hosted, according to the news agency. According to reports, security along Beijing’s Changan Avenue, which runs through the heart of the capital, was tighter than usual on Monday afternoon. Tourists were also cleared out of the nearby Tiananmen Square. Beijing’s railway bureau warned on its blog of multiple train delays. Much of the regime’s domestic legitimacy rests on portraying the country as under constant threat from the US and its regional allies, South Korea and Japan. To support the claim that it is in Washington’s crosshairs, North Korea cites the tens of thousands of US troops lined up along the southern side of the demilitarised zone – the heavily fortified border dividing the Korean peninsula. Faced with what it says are US provocations, North Korea says it has as much right as any other state to develop a nuclear deterrent. North Korea’s leader Kim Jong-un is also aware of the fate of other dictators who lack nuclear weapons. China has welcomed the prospect of a meeting between the US president Donald Trump and Kim. Yet analysts say Beijing, which has long been a broker between North Korea and the international community, may also fear a loss of leverage in the event of US-North Korea rapprochement. Zhao Tong, a North Korea expert at the Carnegie-Tsinghua Centre for Global Policy in Beijing, said: “[They fear] the US would use North Korea … as a strategic balancer or as a hedge against a rising China in the region.” Kim’s father, Kim Jong-il, who refused to travel by plane, visited China several times on a private, armoured train. His visits were confirmed by Chinese and North Korean state media only after he had left the country.