Dozens of homes have been destroyed by an out-of-control blaze near Bega in southeastern New South Wales, with residents in the seaside town of Tathra told it is too late to leave. Twenty-three fire rescue crews are at the scene and building impact assessment teams are reportedly on their way to the area to inspect properties and confirm damage. Power outages as a result of the fire have affected hundreds of homes in Tathra and surrounding areas. The NSW RFS deputy commissioner, Rob Rogers, told the ABC the blaze had “burnt some seven kilometres right into Tathra itself, unfortunately impacting a lot of homes in the area”. “I think it’s been a pretty horrendous time for both firefighters and residents in that township,” he said. “This fire is by no means contained. We have no information at this point about casualties.” On Sunday afternoon the RFS issued an emergency warning after the fire crossed the Bega river in the state’s southeast and headed towards properties around Thompson Drive. The fire – which started in Tarraganga, southwest of Bega – was being fanned by strong and gusty northwesterly winds. But a southerly change was expected to hit the area later in the afternoon, the RFS said. “If you are in Tathra, seek shelter if the fire impacts. It is too late to leave. Protect yourself from the heat of the fire.” A watch and act alert has also been issued for another fire near Kerrisons Lane and Northview Close at Bega. It is burning close to isolated properties, however firefighters have slowed the spread of the blaze. “If the fire reaches your property, protect yourself from the heat of the fire,” the advice says. “If you plan to leave, or you are not prepared, leave early.” A similar alert is in place for a fire near Goulburn, northeast of Canberra. The fire is burning in the area around Tarlo River Road, Carters Close, Towrang Road and Narelle Lane in Greenwich Park. In Victoria, 10 homes have been lost and residents from several towns are sheltering in relief centres as authorities are still battling high winds and summer bushfire conditions. So far 40,000 hectares have been burned out, with no deaths, authorities reported at 2pm. About 22,000 homes are without power due to high winds. The main centre of concern is around Cobden and the area south of Cobden in Victoria’s southwest. A second area of concern is the Terang fire, which has an eastern flank. Roads have been closed and evacuation points have been established. “We have air resources and ground resources on [the fire] and the reason is that it is the most exposed with the wind speed,” Victoria’s emergency management commissioner Craig Lapsley said. “It could then move to impact on other communities. “I would have to say congratulations to our aircraft and the ground crews, because they are holding it reasonably well, and that is not easy when you have 50, 60, 70km/h winds. “There are still emergency warnings out and they are the highest levels of warnings that are issued currently.” But he said Victoria had planned for this late season emergency and had 61 aircraft available to fight the fires. With fires in the South West of the state there are a number of road closures.Please check the @VicRoads website for the latest information and avoid the area where possible. https://t.co/AJ080KRrA8For emergency information visit: https://t.co/cLwumJS5eN pic.twitter.com/IuXKhYIFMN There is also another fire classified emergency at Camperdown that is of concern. Several other fires across the state have been designated as “watch and act”. At the moment 29 aircraft are in operation, and 280 firefighters have been deployed. On Sunday evening, the prime minister, Malcolm Turnbull, said: “Obviously it’s very dynamic situation. There is no reports of casualties but there are thousands of hectares that have been burnt and a very large number of, very large number of stock of sheep and cattle have been destroyed as well. “I want to thank all of the state emergency services, the firefighters, the volunteers who are working tirelessly. I urge everyone to follow the advice and direction of the emergency management authorities.” Total fire bans were issued for more than half of New South Wales, including the Sydney region. Eleven of the state’s 21 regions had severe fire conditions on Sunday, said Rural Fire Service spokesman Greg Allan. A total fire ban has been declared in the entire southeast corner of the state, from the greater Hunter down to the far south coast. In the west, the lower central west plains and eastern Riverina had total fire bans and expected temperatures in the high 30s. The northwestern region that borders Queensland was also under a total fire ban. With Australian Associated Press