Asher’s Africana restaurant, 224 Ealing Rd, Ealing Rd, London HA0 4QL Asher’s is a lovely vegetarian restaurant where the food is cooked mainly by Gujarati housewives. For £4.50 you can get a plate of five puris (unleavened deep-fried breads) and a small bowl of vegetables or dal – the flavours are wonderful. There are lots of Kenyan Gujaratis eating there, a reassuring sign that this is good-value, home-style food.Recommended by: Asma Khan, chef-owner of Darjeeling Express, London W1 Millers Fish & Chips, 55 The Village, Haxby, York, YO32 2JE There is a lot of bad fish and chips around. However, the light bite at Millers in Haxby is exactly the right size, and it’s a proper treat to have perfect fish and chips that you want to bury your face in and weep salty tears of joy. It’s a heady mixture of crispy and fluffy, and fishy and potatoey. Literally, the best way to spend a fiver.Recommended by: Annie Gray, food historian, author of The Greedy Queen Enrique Tomas, 132  Wardour St, London W1F 8ZW Enrique Tomas is a jamón ibérico shop with an outlet in Soho. They do some of the most delicious ham, and you can get the trimmings in a cone for less than buying the whole beautiful slices. It’s the perfect taste of Spain while wandering through Soho.Recommended by: Tom Kerridge, chef-owner of The Hand & Flowers in Marlow and author of Lose Weight for Good La Ruca, 89 Gloucester Rd, Bristol BS7 8AS La Ruca is a proper little grocery shop run by a Chilean couple. It stocks everything from chocolate to washing powder. The little counter at the till is topped up regularly throughout the day with homemade chimichangas, a type of Mexican tortilla wrap. The black bean, cheese and spinach one is a winner. You can’t help but start to munch as soon as you leave the shop.Recommended by: Claire Thomson, food writer and chef, author of The Art of the Larder The Pear Cafe, 2 Upper York St, Bristol, BS2 8QN My favourite place for takeaway in Bristol is the Pear Cafe. They make delicious frittatas that are always vegetarian and that change every day – recently, they had rainbow chard, potato, cheddar and carrot-top pesto. You can get a slice for £2.50 and still have money left for a cup of coffee or tea.Recommended by: Romy Gill, chef-owner of Romy’s Kitchen in Thornbury Chuan Chuan Xiang, 27 Newport Court, London WC2H 7JS This is a little hole-in-the-wall place in Chinatown that just serves skewers. They are £1.30 each, so you can get three for under a fiver, and you get a weird mix of ingredients – tofu skins, pig intestine, konjac, Spam – all boiled in a very delicious salty, spicy broth. My favourites are the broccoli skewers, which are great because they get Szechuan peppercorns stuck in the branches.Recommended by: Tim Anderson, chef-owner of Nanban in Brixton, author of JapanEasy What UK dish costing less than a fiver do you think we should celebrate? Why is it so good, and what makes it worth every penny? Give us a little detail about the place creating and selling it – and share a photograph if you have one – by clicking through to our form. We'll publish a selection of your most interesting submissions from around the UK. Nan’s, 72 Inglefield St, Glasgow G42 7AW I have been going to Nan’s, a wee roll shop on the south side of Glasgow, for 25 years. They use very tasty Morton’s crispy rolls and cook all their own meats, slicing them on to the rolls with lettuce, tomato, cucumber, onion, beetroot and coleslaw – it’s the best salad roll by a mile and costs just £1.20. For an extra £1.10, you get a large homemade soup, not to mention the banter in the shop.Recommended by: Jacqueline O’Donnell, chef-patron of The Sisters in Glasgow Haxby Bakehouse, 8 Ryedale Court, Haxby, York YO32 3SA Philip Clayton at Haxby Bakehouse makes amazing bread and pastries, and savoury things, too. When I pick up orders from him, I eat a whole focaccia on the way home. They have different cheeses on them and vegetables such as asparagus, red onion and cherry tomato – they are almost like pizzas. Very delicious.Recommended by: Tommy Banks, chef-owner of The Black Swan at Oldstead, Yorkshire Kowloon Bakery, 21-22 Gerrard St, London W1D 6JH Kowloon is one of the oldest bakeries in Chinatown. I have been going there since I was at school. You can get two or three really tasty things for under a fiver and they really fill you up. The red bean rice cake is a favourite – I have always loved the smooth red bean paste with the sticky mochi on the outside. The barbecue pork bun for £1.50 is really good, too. At our restaurant in Soho, someone will often go and get six or seven different buns to share around in the kitchen.Recommended by: Shuko Oda, head chef at Koya Bar in London Jumon, Unit 6, McCauley House, Fountain St, Belfastt BT5 1ED Jumon is a new street-food style place serving Korean food. It does lots of little snacks and they are all really good. I had the KWC, which is kimchi with a wonton, pickled carrots, ricotta and black-garlic ketchup. It’s a small dish but I thought it was lovely.Recommended by: Danni Barry, head chef at Clenaghans in Aghalee, Co Antrim Maray, 91 Bold St, Liverpool L1 4HF Right around the corner from my restaurant in Liverpool is this great place. They do small plates and have some really good vegan options, such as these sweet potato wedges. If you get the three-for-£12 deal at lunch, I would also recommend the roasted cauliflower with almonds, pomegranate, tahini, yoghurt, harissa and herbs – it is outstanding.Recommended by: Gary Usher, chef-owner of Wreckfish in Liverpool and the Sticky Walnut in Chester Harry’s Sandwich Bar, 3 St John’s St, Abergavenny NP7 5EG Most Saturday mornings, before taking my son to judo, we go to Harry’s and get what we call a breakfast banjo. It’s a really nice floury bap with grilled bacon and sausage, soft fried egg and mushrooms, plus a bit of brown and red sauce. If the egg yolk pops and drips down your top when you take a bite, you stroke the yolk away with your free hand and it looks like you’re playing the banjo. The guy who runs it, Giuseppe Scarpetta, is a proper chef and he uses really good meat from HJ Edwards, the butchers next door, who also supply my restaurant.Recommended by: Stephen Terry, chef-owner of The Hardwick in Abergavenny Naseeb Takeaway, 115 Ilkeston Rd, Nottingham NG7 3HE Naseeb is an Indian shop in Nottingham that sells beautiful home-style curries. Outside you see all the south-Asian taxi drivers, so you know it’s good. They do the most amazing chickpea curry – really rich, with aromatic spices – and you eat it with a samosa on top. They do a brilliant mint chutney which goes really well with it.Recommended by: Sat Bains, chef-owner of Restaurant Sat Bains in Nottingham Ròst at The Pitt Street Food Yard, 125 Pitt St, Edinburgh EH6 4DE The Pitt is open every Saturday and Sunday for 10 months of the year. When I ate there, I had an amazing pulled pork sandwich from Ròst – the meat was really moist, the seasoning was great, there was a nice apple and celeriac coleslaw in it, and it was very good with a beer. The place itself is really vibrant, with lots of energy, and it’s good to see more of that kind of food in Scotland.Recommended by: Tom Kitchin of The Kitchin in Edinburgh Umut 2000, Crossway, 6 Stoke Newington, London N16 8HX When I go to this Turkish restaurant in Dalston, I always get a plate of their charcoal-grilled onions marinated in pomegranate molasses and turnip juice. Whether you have them with meat or without, they’re just incredible. I love the charred sweetness that comes through – and then you dip your bread in the fresh juice afterwards.Recommended by: Marianna Leivaditaki, head chef at Morito Hackney Road in London Whoosh, 3 Bellhouse Lane, Coleraine BT52 1ED Whoosh is a great place on a side street in Coleraine, just a few miles from my restaurant. It serves fresh, lip-smackingly good Thai street food. It’s open until 5.30pm, so the odd day I get off early I call in on my way home. The tom yum soup is superb, and if you can stretch to £5.50, try the Thai green curry with chicken and steamed jasmine rice. Amazing flavours, amazing value.Recommended by: Donal Doherty, owner of Harry’s Shack in Portstewart Storries Home Bakery, 279 Leith Walk, Edinburgh EH6 8PD We host a lot of international guest chefs at our restaurant and after work they don’t really want to eat fancy food, they want to eat dirty Scottish stuff. Which has the benefit of being cheap. I take them to Storries and get a couple of their traditional pies. The Scotch pie is filled with minced beef and gravy – you’ve got to hold it the right way up or it’s going to drip all over you – and it’s a thing of wonder. The macaroni pie is good too.Recommended by: Ben Reade, chef and co-founder of Edinburgh Food Studio Dog Track, Unit 1, 11b Ormeau Ave, Belfast BT2 8HH Dog Track is a new restaurant in the centre of Belfast that has a sushi-style conveyor belt, only it’s serving tapas. There is lots of stuff for under a fiver. Today, because it’s cold out, I had a beef cheek and horseradish ravioli with tomato and basil ragu, spinach and parmesan. The beef was slow-cooked with a nice generous hit of horseradish. A well-executed dish and really good value.Recommended by: Brian McCann, head chef at Shu in Belfast Falafel Wales, 122 Cowbridge Rd E, Cardiff CF11 9DX If I am working locally and I want something quick and warm, I usually head to Falafel Wales, which is a great Lebanese restaurant in the Canton area of Cardiff. All its food is fantastic, but a staple lunch option for me is the chicken shawarma wrap, a freshly cooked Lebanese flat bread filled with thin slices of amazing chicken, loads of salad, tahini, yoghurt and spicy sauce. An absolute bargain.Recommended by: Cerys Furlong, co-owner of Milkwood in Cardiff Save the Date London, The Bean Shed, St John’s Church, Hoxton, London N1 6NP Save the Date London does an excellent pay-as-you-feel lunch menu at their shed-café in Hoxton. I recommend their shakshuka (eggs poached in a sauce of tomatoes, chillies and onions), which is simply delicious, a great alternative breakfast or lunch. It probably deserves a tenner, but you could get away with paying a fiver if you’re on a tight budget.Recommended by: Zoe Adjonyoh, founder of Zoe’s Ghana Kitchen Wheelers Oyster Bar, 8 High St, Whitstable CT5 1BQ This little oyster parlour has been in Whitstable since the 1850s. It does lovely takeaways including a crab tart – white crab meat and prawns with hollandaise sauce on top, all in a tart shell. It’s beautiful and very rich. They’re not huge but that, with a bit of salad, would make a really satisfying lunch.Recommended by: Stephen Harris, chef-owner at the Sportsman in Seasalter, Kent