Florence Yeoh is a 25-year-old Chinese-Australian with a bob haircut, an overbearing mother, and a buried dream to become a professional watercolourist. The eponymous iPhone game, which can be played with one thumb while swaying on the bus, tells the story of Florence’s budding relationship with Krish Hemrajani, an Indian-Australian with a needlebed of stubble, snug jeans and a buried dream to become a professional cellist. You tap, swipe and rub through six acts that record the quiet blooming of the relationship, from the initial clumsy flirting, the early experiments with vulnerability, the settling rhythms of domesticity, all the way through to the smoking aftermath and beyond. Love is a theme rarely explored in video games, and for practical reasons. Video games are, in essence, Excel spreadsheets rendered with art and music, and therefore most comfortable when dealing with mathematical systems. This is why games excel at ballistics, ball sports and, in the case of SimCity, town planning. Love, however, is not easily systematised. Witness the medium’s past, clumsy attempts to turn relationships into game mechanics. In The Sims, for example, you make someone fall in love with you by tickling them repeatedly. In Harvest Moon, it’s done by presenting them with a freshly laid egg each day. In Fire Emblem, relationships are formed through mere proximity to others on the battlefield. For this reason, Florence shies away from a foundational game system. Instead, this is a kind of interactive graphic novel – drawn with handsome, understated illustrations, presented without text or dialogue – where you must often complete micro-tasks to progress to the next panel. When, for example, Florence crashes her bike after catching her first glimpse of Krish, you must squeeze sliders to refocus her blurred vision. When Krish moves in, you must unpack his belongings, placing his shoes next to hers on the rack, and his pans above the stove. During a holiday trip, you must shake the Polaroid pictures, to capture each memory. The effect is of a love story told via a scroll of loo paper, each new scene revealed as you tug the roll down. The mundane texture of daily life – bedroom-tidying, grocery-buying, tooth-brushing – which rarely, if ever, makes an appearance in a video game, is upset by moments of sizzling drama. After one argument, you must piece together the torn, drifting fragments of a picture of the pair embracing. These literalisms may read clumsily, but in-game they make tangible those rhythms of attraction and rebuff, intimacy and estrangement, touch and separation that play out, at different scales, across every romantic relationship. Beyond the arresting novelty of the game’s theme, style and approach, Florence tells a story that is also of the moment in exploring gender roles within a heteronormative relationship, as they relate to artistic ambition. As in La La Land, this is a story in which a woman stifles her creative yearnings in order to support those of the man with whom she is romantically involved. Florence encourages Krish to enrol in a music course, literally pushing him to the college’s front door. The painting set that he buys her as a thank you, meanwhile, sits idle on her desk, buried under a stack of accounting (Florence’s mother told her daughter when she was a child to set down the paints and focus on more bankable subjects, so shares culpability). The subtle differences in the way in which Florence and Krish support one another’s dreams is telling. It’s a simple story of young love, then, under which deeper themes silently pass, like shadowy whales. Florence’s most immediate delights, however, are found in the execution, which is tender, assured, understated and never trite. Sea of Thieves (Rare; Xbox One/PC)Since its acquisition by Microsoft in 2002, Twycross-based Rare, once Britain’s most celebrated video game developer, has struggled to find its identity. Sea of Thieves is, the studio hopes, the game to recapture its glory days, albeit in a manner that is carefully built for the technologies and playing habits of the moment. Players must cooperate online to crew a pirate galleon on the high seas. The more efficient the teamwork, the higher the chances of survival and triumph when you run into a rival vessel. Roles include steering, hoisting sails, navigation and cannon-manning. Everything has been designed to enable rich, emergent storytelling, the most valuable currency of all in this new era of game-streaming. Dragon Ball FighterZ (Bandai Namco; PS4/Xbox One/PC) In the few weeks since its launch, Dragon Ball FighterZ, a hyperactive fighting game based on the long-running animation series, has cemented a reputation as a serious contender in the nascent world of esports. It is one of the eight confirmed games in the enviable lineup for this year’s Evo championship, scheduled for August in Las Vegas. Unlike Street Fighter et al, the game’s screen-shaking special moves are not triggered by arcade sweeps and jabs of the control sticks, but through straightforward button inputs, shortening the amount of time it takes to sublimate the controls and focus instead on the mind games essential for all combat sports. The labyrinthine presentation aside, this is a slick, delicious new arena for competition.