Snowstorms, unusual for much of Europe at this time of year, have left roads blocked, thousands of drivers stranded and schools shut, with weather agencies predicting the biting cold would continue in parts of the region at least until Thursday evening. The Siberian cold front has been dubbed the “Beast from the East” in Britain, “Siberian bear” by the Dutch, and the “snow cannon” by Swedes. A snowy view of the village of Eze, southern France. Snowfall has caused travel chaos across France with five departments on meteorological orange alerts (signalling dangerous weather). A light dusting of snow covered northern France but up to 20cm has caused chaos in the south-west. St Mark’s Square in Venice. Snowfall has coated Italy’s main cities of Turin, Venice, Milan and Florence, and as far south as Naples. Transport has been affected and so have farmers, who are not generally used to such a late cold spell. A woman shovels snow in Bredstedt, northern Germany. Temperatures are expected to remain below freezing in Germany well into next week as the weather seems to show no signs of changing. Airport security services operate snow ploughs to clear a runway at Geneva airport. Switzerland may be used to its fair share of snow but Geneva airport was forced to close today after the runways became inaccessible. Skiing in Parque de la Ciudadela, Pamplona, northern Spain. The polar front has bombarded Spain with heavy rainstorms and snow. A low of -17ºC was recorded in Cap de Vaquèira, Catalonia. Snow flurries add to the fun on a football pitch at Phoenix Park, Dublin, Republic of Ireland. Met Eireann has issued a nationwide red alert for Storm Emma blizzards due to bring blizzard conditions and drifting snow across the country. Up to 40cm of snow was expected in some places. Snow casting a mantle over the beach at Goring-by-Sea, West Sussex, as Storm Emma, rolling in from the Atlantic, looked set to meet the chilly Russia air from Russia, causing further widespread snowfall and bitter temperatures. The Met Office issued red alerts for blizzards in Wales and south-west England Police push a car on the on the M80, near Haggs, in Glasgow. Right: Andrea Geile skis along Princes Street, Edinburgh.