The Shed, the architecturally ambitious new art space in New York City, has revealed its first group of commissions for the inaugural 2019 season. They include a live production celebrating the influence of African American music conceived by film-maker Steve McQueen and developed by Quincy Jones, as well as a performance piece based on Euripides’ Greek tragedy Helen by the acclaimed poet Anne Carson, starring Ben Whishaw and Renee Fleming. Set to open its doors next spring, the 200,000 sq ft structure, designed by Diller Scofidio + Renfro in collaboration with Rockwell Group, will host, commission and produce the visual and performing arts, conceived of as a multi-disciplinary arts center located on the High Line, on the west side of Manhattan. Among the first seven commissions set to debut in the spring of 2019 are a live performance/exhibition by the painter Gerhard Richter, in collaboration with composer Steve Reich, called Reich Richter Pärt; exhibitions by artists Trisha Donnelly and Agnes Denes; and work from the Shed’s Open Call program, a large-scale commission for young artists living and working in New York City. Emma Enderby, curator at the Shed, said: “Nurturing artists at the start of their careers is as important to the Shed’s mission as presenting new work by established artists; crucially, all Open Call exhibitions and performances will be free and open to the public.” There will also be an original live production co-conceived by Chen Shi-Zheng and Kung Fu Panda screenwriters Jonathan Aibel and Glenn Berger, with songs by Sia and choreography by Akram Khan. The project from 12 Years a Slave director McQueen will be titled Soundtrack of America and will celebrate “the unrivaled impact of African American music on art and popular culture over the past 100 years”. Jones will act as the chief music adviser. The Shed is located right where Chelsea’s High Line meets the sprawling development project known as Hudson Yards, the largest private real estate development in US history. Alex Poots, the former artistic director of the Manchester international festival and the Park Avenue Armory, was announced as the Shed’s artistic director in November 2014. Hans Ulrich Obrist has been announced as senior program adviser, set to work alongside Poots in commissioning new work for the Shed while retaining his position as artistic director of the Serpentine Galleries in London. “The original idea for the Shed was relatively simple: provide a place for artists working in all disciplines to make and present work for audiences from all walks of life,” said Poots. “Our opening programs begin to show how these artists, art forms, and audiences can thrive together under one roof.”