I was a certified sales assistant. I used to work for AT&T. And my wife, she was a securities supervisor for a large company since she was 18. We ended up getting put out of our apartment because they said we were nuisances, because we were putting in manager requests to fix it up. After that, we ended up here. We understand that we’re homeless. But just because we’re homeless doesn’t mean that this isn’t our home. This is the house that we built. And if you consider something your home, you’re going to take pride in it, no matter what it is. We have different tents set up. This is the lounge, a four-man tent, and it has a couch and a table and some pillows and stuff. And this right here is the house. I want you to see how it’s hooked up. We have a chair and a bed. We have electricity in the tents. We get car batteries, and we hook them up. It’s very important to have a fire extinguisher if you’re inside a tent and it’s very important to keep water around. I don’t know if you’ve ever seen a tent fire, but it’s devastating. Once it starts to burn, it literally goes up. And then when it rains – oh my God, we get wet. Unfortunately, the way of using the bathroom around here is urinate in a cup and shit in a bag. That’s the biggest challenge out here, using the bathroom. And the fact that we can’t dispose of it properly is one of our biggest concerns, because it’s disgusting. And then the city does this clean-up and it’s a joke. They’ll pull us out of the tent, and they’ll throw everything away. I’m talking – tarps, tents, clothes – it doesn’t matter. We can’t keep anything. They pull up with a big trash truck, and they devastate us all. Just because me and my wife are homeless, we didn’t forget where we came from. We know that we came from living inside, so we still know how to live like we’re inside, outside. I decided to build a house just to see if I could do it. I didn’t really have any experience. I began by putting pallets and tarps together, and then started cutting pieces of wood to fill in the gaps. I go round the nearby streets with a modified shopping cart and collect useful things to build with. Whatever I find determines what I’ll build and how it will look. For example, I found a table and sawed off the legs and used them to prop up the house. I’ve been homeless and in Seattle since December 2014. I’ve almost always camped within two blocks of the freeway. When nobody’s running around yelling, you can almost imagine that the sound of the passing cars are waves hitting the shore. I’ve been in this spot for about eight months and was the first person here. A lot of other people came here after but most have since been kicked out or moved on, which is nice because I like to be isolated. I’m really proud of everything I’ve learned. The most difficult part was putting in the window and getting the boards around it to all fit properly. Unfortunately, one day I got pissed and broke the window. I’ve replaced it with something smaller but there’s a five-inch gap on one side now. I clean out the area around me quite a bit to make sure there’s no food garbage attracting rats. My husband, who I don’t live with, slept here a couple of times. My bed’s hardly big enough for two people, but we did it, all cuddled up. He did help me with the building once but I accidentally hit his finger with a hammer, so I don’t let anyone help me any more. I know it’s inevitable that my home’s going to be torn down. The police who patrol the area have given me compliments on the house and admired it; they’ve said I can stay until spring. I was born May 23, 1957, right here in Oakland. At Kaiser hospital. Went to high school here, graduated class of ’75, and I love this city. I have been dealing with homelessness, with myself, on and off since 1991. Not just in Oakland, in other cities too. Atlanta, Georgia, Mississippi. So, I know what it’s like. And growing up I was a Boy Scout, from Cub Scout on up! I been camping, and I know what you need for camping. Now I do a course for others on how to winterize first yourself, then your tent. I look at that, and I built that. Sometimes I ask myself, how did I get away with that? I keep everything clean on the outside so I am not breaking any codes. It ain’t rain-tight, though. I gotta work on it. The first big storm this year, this side fell. But I look at it this way – He has enabled me to do this work. I was ordained and licensed [to be a pastor] in 1993. The minister that ordained me told me: “You can minister to people that a lot of other pastors can’t because you have experienced things in your life – drug addiction, bad marriage, street abuse.” Being home is being somewhere you feel safe. Home does not mean being in a building. Forget about the house. A house? I will get there when I get there. But for now, I am home. Interviews have been edited and condensed for clarity.