Nothing became Glasgow more on International Women’s Day last week than the unveiling of a statue of Mary Barbour in Govan. To call this a mere statue is like saying Lionel Messi is a decent inside forward. It depicts Barbour, one of her arms aloft, leading a group of women into battle with the spiv landlords who were trying to put them and their families on to the streets. There are so many reasons why this is one of Scotland’s most important monuments of recent years. In 1915, Barbour led her army of women and children in a struggle against the greed and viciousness of Glasgow landlords who sought to exploit the absence of husbands and partners fighting in the First World War. The city had experienced an influx of men from other parts of the UK eager for well-paid jobs in the heavy industries required to maintain the war effort. Some landlords viewed this as an opportunity to raise rents for the purpose of evicting wives and families to make way for these workers. The city-wide rent strike that followed eventually forced the government to provide the protections that form the foundation of modern tenants’ agreements. The action in Glasgow inspired similar uprisings in other parts of the UK and across the Atlantic in New York and showed that the agents of freewheeling capitalism could be defeated. I first wrote about Barbour five years ago in support of a permanent memorial to her. Before then, I knew next to nothing of her life and achievements. I certainly didn’t know that in Glasgow there was not even a handful of statues of women among the hundreds of men, including many whose heroism went no further than being agents of a tyrannical empire. I suspect too that many of those who gathered at Govan Cross last Thursday to honour Barbour and her army had known little of her deeds until the Remember Mary Barbour Association had got into its stride. This is hardly surprising. The deeds of Scotland’s working-class heroes have largely been written out of the approved histories of the nation that our children are permitted to read. Until very recently, a Scottish child could travel into adulthood unhindered by an ounce of knowledge about the story of Scotland and certainly about any of the women who have helped shape our destiny. The remarkable Barbour prevailed at a time when the idea of women in politics or in any role that raised their profile was simply unacceptable. She went on to be elected as a councillor for Glasgow in 1920 and was appointed the first female bailie of the City of Glasgow in 1924. Together with her success in facing down the massed ranks of capitalism and the government that it had in its pockets, these make her one of the most significant figures in modern Scottish history. “Mary Barbour’s campaign in facing down exploitative private landlords during the First World War was one of the landmark movements in Scottish working-class history. Discuss.” This will not be a question appearing on the higher history paper of any Scottish pupil soon. Just over a century later and on the same day that Barbour was being honoured in Glasgow, another troublesome woman from the west of Scotland was having her say in London. Mhairi Black, the youngest MP in more than 350 years, stood up in the House of Commons to describe the incessant slew of abuse she receives daily on social media. These were primitive attacks carrying a degree of malevolence and violent intent that chilled you. Not a single aspect of Black’s person or her physical appearance was left untouched by this sickness. High-profile men also come under attack from the anonymous warriors of social media but rarely is there any degree of violent intent. They are rarely mocked for their appearance and there is seldom a sexual edge to this. The experiences of Black mirror those endured by many young women in Scottish journalism. There are several positive effects of the rise of new media across the UK. It has allowed some compelling and eloquent voices to be heard that would have struggled to make it past the old boys’ network that once controlled entry into the hallowed editorial rooms of British newspapers. Among them has been a group of female commentators who have talked freely about issues such as violence against women, the gender pay gap and female sexual health. In response, they have endured torrents of violent abuse. There are good reasons why this ought to concern the rest of us. For hundreds of years, very bright and very able working-class children have been denied the opportunity to fulfil their potential by an embedded system of reward and patronage administered by the UK elite. We will never know the cost to Britain of having thousands of its brightest and best denied the chance to improve the country by virtue of having been born in the wrong sort of community. Similarly, we’ll never know how many gifted and able women have been prevented from sharing their gifts by a patriarchy that often discriminated in favour of incompetent men. Some women are now breaking free of these bonds but they are discovering that the methods being used to silence them are primitive ones from a darker age. • Kevin McKenna is an Observer columnist