What were you hoping for?I’d never been on a blind date before, so I was enthusiastic but had no idea what to expect. First impressions?We rode up in the elevator together without realising, which was a nice ice-breaker when we eventually did meet. What did you talk about?A lot of things, from work to places we’ve been and want to go. Any awkward moments?Not at all. Good table manners?Yes. Best thing about Ross?He was really easy to talk to. Would you introduce him to your friends?Maybe. Describe Ross in three wordsExtroverted, easy-going and fun. What do you think he made of you?Probably very talkative. Did you go on somewhere?Just to a pub up the street. And… did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?We probably would have stayed out a bit longer if it hadn’t been a Tuesday. Marks out of 10?7. Would you meet again?Sure; as what remains to be seen. What were you hoping for?A fun night out with someone easy to get on with. First impressions?OMG! It’s the guy from the lift! What did you talk about?His tattoos, my lack of tattoos, and my weird knowledge of pop music and Mean Girls. Any awkward moments?Sharing the lift, then doing laps past each other trying to find the restaurant. Good table manners?Really good. He’s a sharer, which is always a plus. Best thing about Oliver?He’s really easy to get on with, and full of conversation. Would you introduce him to your friends?Sure. Describe Oliver in three wordsCool, confident, chatty. What do you think he made of you?Talkative and indecisive about ordering food. Did you go on somewhere?We went out for a few drinks. It was a good idea at the time. And… did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?His decision to order raw fish as a main. Marks out of 10?7. Would you meet again?I’m always up for drinks as friends. • Oliver and Ross ate at W London. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com