One of Donald Trump’s lawyers discussed the possibility of presidential pardons for two former aides as the special counsel Robert Mueller built cases against them in his investigation into Russian election meddling, the New York Times reported on Wednesday. Michael Flynn, Trump’s first national security adviser, eventually made a deal with Mueller, pleading guilty to lying to the FBI in exchange for co-operation. Trump’s former campaign chair, Paul Manafort, maintains his innocence on charges including money laundering and tax and bank fraud. Two other Trump advisers, the foreign policy aide George Stephanopoulos and Manafort’s deputy, Rick Gates, have entered plea deals. The Times report said the discussion of pardons by John Dowd, who resigned as head of Trump’s legal team last week, could raise questions regarding potential obstruction of justice. Dowd discussed the potential pardons with lawyers representing Flynn and Manafort, the newspaper said, adding that there was no evidence he had done so with Trump. The White House denied the report. At the daily briefing, the White House press secretary Sarah Sanders repeatedly referred to a statement from Trump’s lawyer Ty Cobb, who insisted there had been no discussion of pardons. “I have only been asked about pardons by the press and have routinely responded on the record that no pardons are under discussion or under consideration at the White House,” Cobb told the Times. Dowd denied that discussions about pardons occurred, telling the Times: “There were no discussions. Period. As far as I know, no discussions.” The newspaper also said Trump had asked aides about the extent of his pardoning power. Dowd resigned shortly after calling for the Mueller investigation to be shut down and having to clarify that he was not speaking for the president. Sanders said she was not “aware of any specific actions” Dowd may have taken that may have displeased the president. Trump has struggled to appoint new lawyers to his team dealing with the Mueller inquiry. It has been reported that Mueller, who has also indicted 13 Russian nationals, is concentrating on whether Trump has attempted to obstruct justice. Mueller was appointed after Trump fired James Comey as director of the FBI, a move the president told NBC was made in part because of “this Russia thing”. Mueller is also reported to be interested in the president’s role in drafting a misleading statement about a meeting between aides including Donald Trump Jr, Trump’s son-in-law Jared Kushner and Manafort and Russians promising compromising information on Hillary Clinton at Trump Tower in June 2016. On Wednesday afternoon George Conway, the husband of Trump’s aide Kellyanne Conway who was considered to be solicitor general, said of the Times story: “This is flabbergasting.”