Labour backbenchers have urged Jeremy Corbyn to suspend his sacked disciplinary chief Christine Shawcroft from the party after she opposed the suspension from the Labour party of a Holocaust denier. Almost 40 MPs and peers – including a handful of frontbenchers – wrote to the Labour leader demanding that Shawcroft should also be removed from the party’s ruling national executive committee. The group, led by Mitcham and Morden MP Siobhan McDonagh, said they were “deeply concerned” that Shawcroft, a key Corbyn ally, remained a member of the party’s ruling committee, the NEC. The letter added: “It is utterly wrong that somebody who defends a Labour candidate who has been suspended for Holocaust denial should be a member of Labour’s governing body.” Urging Corbyn to suspend her membership, the letter added: “You pledged this week to be an ally in the fight against antisemitism. This action would represent an initial step in honouring that commitment.” The letter added that Shawcroft’s continued presence on the NEC was “deeply offensive” to the Jewish community as well as Labour members and politicians who had fought against antisemitism. The letter was signed by key Jewish Labour backbenchers including Luciana Berger, Margaret Hodge and Ruth Smeeth, as well as some MPs and peers who are generally regarded as hostile to Corbyn. Shadow schools minister Mike Kane, shadow Treasury minister Jonathan Reynolds and Lord Hunt, a shadow health minister, all signed the letter. It is the first time since the general election that Corbyn has faced an internal party rebellion, although individual peers and MPs have spoken out about antisemitism within the Labour movement. Shawcroft was forced to resign as chair of the party’s disputes panel after the emergence of emails from her that questioned the suspension of Alan Bull, a Labour council candidate from Peterborough who had posted antisemitic material on Facebook. While Shawcroft remains a member of the NEC, however, she will still be entitled to advise on disciplinary hearings. Bull’s offensive Facebook posts have been deleted since he was selected last July. Corbyn emailed the party’s 550,000 members, pledging zero tolerance for antisemitism. “Prejudice against, and harassment of, Jewish people have no place whatsoever in our party,” he said. On Wednesday night Shawcroft said she was “wrong and misguided” to have sent an email calling for Bull’s suspension to be lifted, as she had not been aware of all the information in the case. Bull was accused of sharing on Facebook an article headlined “International Red Cross report confirms the Holocaust of 6m Jews is a hoax”, illustrated with a photograph of the gates of the Auschwitz concentration camp.