Liam Gallagher has compared his brother Noel, and Noel’s wife Sara MacDonald, to the serial killers Fred and Rosemary West in an extraordinary – even by his standards – Twitter rant. Liam blamed MacDonald, Noel’s second wife, who he married in 2011, for breaking up Oasis, writing: “She’s the reason Oasis is no longer have to put it out there she’s dark ... We were about to go on tour to USA she robbed noels passport fucked with his head for a Wk he come crying at my door she’s proper dark.” He then added: “Him and her are like Fred and Mary west wishing people get aids and drop dead”. The Wests committed eight murders together, and others individually, across two decades. The “drop dead” comment is a reaction to an alleged comment by MacDonald, who, according to a report in the Sun, wrote on Instagram that she hoped Liam would “have dropped dead by the time my kids are on social media”. She was apparently angered by comments Liam made in a recent Guardian interview, when he stated, about Noel and his daughter Anais, “I don’t give a fuck if his missus gets a bit of shit on Twitter, or his fucking kid – welcome to my fucking world.” This particular war of words – one of many ongoing spats between the brothers – stems from last year, when Noel complained of “ugly” comments on social media about him and his family. “My wife has shown me things that people have written about her and it’s disgraceful. My daughter has shown me things people have written about her in regards to Oasis. That’s disgraceful … It only heightens my resolve that I’ll never walk the stage with that band again.” After lambasting Noel and McDonald, Liam briefly turned his attentions to Paul Weller. “Wellers full of shit as well porcelain mod father can’t wait to bump him”, he wrote. Weller had previously described the lyrics on Liam’s debut solo album As You Were as “pony” and “sub-standard”, while he praised Noel’s solo work this week: “I don’t really need to talk about what a great songwriter he is, because everyone knows that. But, for me, he’s got better.”