We have come a long way since the first Women’s Day in 1911 demanded the right to vote and hold public office, and it’s been a long time since we’ve seen such a public debate about the rights of women and workplace equality. The world is not yet post-#MeToo or #TimesUp, but the strength of these movements doesn’t look like abating. This extraordinary movement is both necessary and overdue, forcing difficult conversations about the chasm between theories of legally mandated equality and the practical, lived experience of women. But we also cannot forget the privilege of the predominantly white women from developed countries speaking out. Despite the gender pay gap, the disparity in political and board-level representation and horrific rates of gender-based violence, we are starting to see a growing awareness of these issues. The backlash against sexual misconduct has been swift and ruthless, and the public outrage about pay disparities is increasing. There is an emerging acknowledgement that behaviour is enabled by social structures, and they themselves must be the target of change. But we cannot let progress for some come at the cost of continued exploitation, disempowerment or inequality for others. Oscar-winning actor Octavia Spencer recently told the Hollywood Foreign Press Association’s “Women Breaking Barriers” panel at the Sundance Film Festival that women of colour can be overlooked even as white women move – if at a glacial pace – towards pay parity. The Hidden Figures star Spencer recounted a conversation with her friend and The Help co-star Jessica Chastain about pay inequality, in which Spencer pointed out the colour pay gap. For every 77 cents a white woman makes a white man may earn a dollar, but an African American woman will earn 64 cents and a Hispanic woman 56. So for an upcoming movie starring both women, Chastain tied Spencer’s pay to hers, increasing Spencer’s pay fivefold. It was a money-where-her-mouth-is-moment – a profoundly tangible act, where anger and frustration triumphed in action instead of fading away into our common humiliation and impotency. It’s also a salient lesson. We all have the power to bring others with us on the path to social progress and equality. We all have the power to leave no woman – black or white – behind. Away from the glamour of Hollywood, or the relative progress of a developed country, the challenges facing women in the developing world are still overwhelming. Women make up roughly 43% of agricultural workers and produce 60-80% of the world’s food supply, yet make up only 10-20% of landowners in developing countries. According to the Food and Agriculture Organisation of the United Nations (FAO), farms operated by women are smaller than those of men, with a significant gap in pay, and women are more likely than men to hold low-wage, part-time, and seasonal employment. Inequality in land ownership has broad ramifications for women farmers in developing countries and their families. Land ownership is often a requisite for membership of non-Fairtrade producer organisations, excluding women from decision-making bodies. If men are making the decisions, the needs of women can be overlooked – at best – or wilfully ignored. Social norms often demand women’s unpaid labour in the home, limiting active participation in the workforce or farmers’ groups. Women who do try to participate can be excluded because traditional attitudes don’t recognise the leadership abilities of women or encourage developing their skills. It’s an unacceptable imbalance that Fairtrade has been working to address for nearly three decades, by incorporating gender equality into its programs in developing countries. Members of Fairtrade producer organisations cannot discriminate on the basis of gender or marital status, they cannot implement discriminatory laws, nor can they force pregnancy tests on prospective workers. Abusive, exploitative, or sexually intimidating behaviour is not tolerated, and maternity leave or social security benefits must be provided to women according to local laws and collective bargaining agreements. We have, unfortunately, seen the fallibility of such commitments in our own laws, which aren’t always enough to ensure equality in developed countries. So Fairtrade also requires that organisations identify disadvantaged, vulnerable or minority groups to protect their rights and proactively improve their economic and social standing. A producer organisation that doesn’t support equality cannot be Fairtrade certified. And that’s where we can all take a leaf out of Jessica Chastain’s book. Women who work as farmers or producers in developing countries will not benefit from black couture frocks at the Golden Globes or examinations of the pay gap in developed countries. They will not benefit from social media storms about the role of the feminist movement or definition of consent, no matter how seismic their importance. But we can still make a tangible difference; we can still have our money-where-our-mouths-are moments. By purchasing Fairtrade products we can tie our disposable income to the income and well-being of women in developing countries, and make sure that gender equality isn’t just the privilege of the few, but a truly global evolution that benefits all women, everywhere.