1) Formula One 2018 is go, go, go – starting with Sunday’s Australian Grand Prix. Since moving to Melbourne Park, the race has become a regular curtain-raiser, but it used to end the season when held on the streets of Adelaide. Here’s a potted history of the race, and Ralf Schumacher taking off on the first lap in 2002. The 1991 edition was the shortest race in F1 history, abandoned after 24 wild and wacky minutes in a torrential downpour: 2) The NCAA Division One men’s basketball tournament, aka March Madness, always provides drama, but this year has been exceptional. The University of Maryland Baltimore County pulled off perhaps the biggest ever upset, knocking off overall No1 seed Virginia to bust everyone’s bracket. Nevada came from 22 points down to beat Cincinnati, Jordan Poole’s bench-clearing buzzer-beater saw Michigan past Houston, and Loyola-Chicago stunned Miami at the last – with help from a 98-year-old nun. 3) Beware the Beast! The Milwaukee Brewers recreate a favourite scene from the 1993 baseball-based classic, The Sandlot: 4) Ronnie O’Sullivan provides a colourful update from his morning run. 5) Here’s a novel way to score a penalty (and humiliate the goalkeeper). 6) The best goals from around Europe – Mauro Icardi’s backheel brilliance, near-post acrobatics from Michy Batshuayi, Chievo’s Roberto Inglese picks out the top corner – and Sandhausen’s Manuel Stiefler scores with a flying scorpion kick: 1) Tiger Woods rediscovers some of his old mojo by draining a 71ft monster at the Arnold Palmer Invitational: 2) Gianluigi Buffon is still doing the business at 40. Here are his finest saves from the world’s finest players, starting with Zinedine Zidane. 3) Kevin Eriksson’s outrageous move at the first corner snatches the lead at World Rallycross Championship in Germany: 4) Diego Maradona: poetry in motion … to music. 5) Advertorial it may be, but the Graeme Obree story is very interesting. Spotters’ badges: BlackCaeser, whobroughtoranges, Voodoo22, mrwicksy Do subscribe, if you fancy Do subscribe, if you fancy