Always suffused with conjecture and supposition, Formula One’s phoney war will end with the firing of engines in earnest at the Australian Grand Prix next Sunday. Expectations are it will herald another battle between Lewis Hamilton and Sebastian Vettel. Daniel Ricciardo, however, has other ideas – this is a fight the local boy desperately wants to join. The Australian has a point to prove and a combative hunger coupled with confidence he is reaching his peak. If Red Bull can give him the competitive car he desires, Ricciardo will be gunning for both world champions. Hamilton and Vettel are the headline acts after their close scrap last season and both look to be in shape to repeat the struggle. Mercedes are ominously strong and Ferrari have carried their well-balanced car into 2018. But Red Bull, out of contention last season, have taken a major step. Testing suggested they may even have the edge on the Scuderia and Ricciardo is looking to enter a title contest for the first time. Given the chance to do so, the decisive and sometimes breathtaking overtaker is unequivocal his approach on track will stand him in good stead. “In the end you have to just pull the trigger,” he says. “Trust the car, trust the brakes, just go. It is a calculated but fearless approach – I am going to try and if it doesn’t work, it doesn’t work. I will be happier if I crash by trying than not trying and running around behind the same guy for 70 laps.” In the end you have to just pull the trigger. Trust the car, trust the brakes, just go It is an attitude Ricciardo has displayed before, proving he has no fear of Hamilton or Vettel. His attempted pass on the German at Mexico in 2016 was extraordinary and he was relentless in not giving up when the two fought at China last year. He was ruthless passing Hamilton at Hungary in 2014. Another world champion, Fernando Alonso, fell to his decisive style in the same race. Last season at Baku, a gutsy and audacious late-braking manoeuvre on the Williams of Lance Stroll and Felipe Massa and the Renault of Nico Hülkenberg saw him move up three places and was named overtake of the year. It was matched, however, by a similar lunge on the anchors from eight-tenths back at Monza to claim Kimi Räikkönen’s scalp at turn one. That he has the chops is not in doubt and he has consequently proved to be one of the most entertaining drivers. Yet Ricciardo has yet to enjoy a shot at the title. Now 28, he joined Red Bull in 2014, the start of the turbo-hybrid era and Mercedes dominance. With their Renault engine lacking the power of the Mercedes, Red Bull have been unable to put themselves in contention. Halo cockpit protection device It has divided opinion but the safety benefits are clear. The better it is incorporated into the livery, the better it looks. New rubber role Pirelli's seven slick compounds increase in-race strategy options and decrease one-stop races. Engine pressure With 21 races and only three engines to use, one fewer than last year, reliability is vital. Clearer penalties Any driver penalised 15 places or more will start from the back. Drivers who do so will be placed at the back in the order penalties were incurred. Returning races There is a French GP, at Paul Ricard in June, a decade after the last race at Magny-Cours. Germany, too, is back, at Hockenheim in July. It does not sit well with Ricciardo. The image may be that of the beaming Aussie but behind the grin there is steel, driven by ambition. “I still want to fight for that title,” he says. “Wanting it is one thing but just being in the fight is the minimum I would ask.” The team principal, Christian Horner, recognises that desire and that his driver is ready. “He is in that period of his career where he is in the purple sector,” Horner said. “Hopefully we can provide the car to realise his potential.” Now in his eighth season in F1, Ricciardo, too, believes his time has come. “I am in a window now where I still feel young enough to have the fearless approach, but old enough in terms of experience so that over a championship if I had the car, I could win when I could and take points when I could. In a fight I believe I have the tools to win. I believe I can get it done with the right material.” Should Red Bull deliver, he will also have to contend with the formidable talent of his team-mate Max Verstappen, who will offer as stern a challenge as Hamilton and Vettel. Horner says they have a genuine friendship but Ricciardo knows he can give no quarter to the young Dutchman. After Verstappen put him out in Budapest last year he was furious. “I wanted to wait until Max came round so I could give him the bird,” he says. “I wanted to do more. I wanted to throw my helmet at him.” It is indicative of a side of Ricciardo overshadowed by the boyish enthusiasm on show when drinking champagne from his boot on the podium. But he believes there is no sense he can be a pushover and that his contemporaries recognise this. “The reality is it was always in me,” he says. “The intensity and the fight I have shown was always in me.” When the new season begins, nothing would be better than if Melbourne raises the curtain on a three-team title fight. Hamilton, Vettel and Verstappen would revel in it and Ricciardo, who has been waiting some time for his chance to pull the trigger in that battle, has all three in his sights. “I know what I can do in the car,” he says, still beaming with optimism. “And even if there is a 10% possibility then I am going to do it.”