Italy’s footballers will not play in Russia this summer but for the man in charge of their national team, visits to the Etihad Stadium and Wembley represent the next best thing. Speaking at the start of this international break, Luigi Di Biagio likened the Azzurri’s friendlies against Argentina and England to a “mini-World Cup”. He was clutching at straws, yet few would fault him for doing so. As the caretaker manager of a football team still recovering from their first failure to qualify for the real tournament in six decades, Di Biagio needed, at a minimum, to bring a little fresh optimism to the role. Even after a 2-0 defeat against Argentina at the Etihad on Friday, he continued to see his glass half full. Di Biagio insisted Italy were unfortunate not to have taken the lead and pointed out that he had given several players their international debuts. “This is the start of a new era,” he asserted. The heir apparent to Gigi Buffon for Italy, and already closing in on a century of Serie A appearances for Milan. Impressive reflexes but at 6ft 5ins does sometimes struggle to get down to shots from close quarters. Son of the former Italy international Enrico, who has the potential to far exceed his father’s 17 caps. Dismissed as too slender in his younger years but has thrived since moving out wide. Starts regularly on either flank for Fiorentina. A pure poacher who has had the fortune to be coached by both Pippo Inzaghi and Vincenzo Montella already in his career, and who shares their knack for arriving in the right places at the right times. Milan’s top scorer this season. Followed manager Eusebio Di Francesco from Sassuolo to Roma in the summer and has taken the step up in stride. Box-to-box type with impressive vision who likes a simple pass in behind the defence but also boasts a powerful shot of his own. Is it truly, though? Or is this nothing more than an awkward interlude? Di Biagio’s role has not been confirmed beyond these two games, with the Italian Football Federation openly courting more high-profile individuals. Any lasting impact of these friendlies was most likely to be felt by the interim manager himself. Promoted into this role after a combined seven years coaching the under-20s and then under-21s – whom he steered to the European Championship semi-finals last year – Di Biagio has been granted the briefest of windows to prove himself in his first coaching role with a senior team. His desire to grasp that opportunity was apparent from his team selection against Argentina. If his experience with the youth teams left him well-positioned to introduce fresh faces, then in practice Di Biagio still kept faith with much of the old guard: 18 of the players called up to his first squad had featured in the two-leg defeat against Sweden. Debuts were granted to Federico Chiesa and Patrick Cutrone, along with second caps for Bryan Cristante and Lorenzo Pellegrini, but only the first of those made it into the starting XI. Meanwhile, Di Biagio called Gigi Buffon out of international retirement. He spoke about the positive influence such a player could have on a young team but also acknowledged that he wanted to field his strongest side possible. Perhaps we will see a more experimental lineup against England. Despite warm reviews from within the football federation, it was always a long shot that Di Biagio would make this job his own. The likes of Carlo Ancelotti, Roberto Mancini, Claudio Ranieri and, reportedly, Antonio Conte are being sounded out for the role. Whoever it is, the need for rejuvenation will remain. Buffon’s return will be short-lived, with a friendly against the Netherlands in Turin this June expected to serve as his farewell party. At the other end of the pitch, a jolt is required to restore attacking potency to a side who have scored only three goals in the past seven games. Italy can boast potential in abundance up front but that is not the same thing as proven talent. Chiesa, son of the much-loved Parma and Sampdoria forward Enrico, is a versatile and technically gifted player who has started 26 Serie A games for Fiorentina this season despite only turning 20 in October. But he is not yet a prolific scorer and still has other flaws to his game, including a tendency to dribble with his head down. Cutrone, three months younger, has likewise outstripped expectations by earning a regular spot in Milan’s first XI. His self‑belief and knack for finding space in crowded penalty areas were in evidence even during that brief cameo against Argentina. Yet he struggles to hold the ball up and, as such, can go missing in games – as he did in the first leg of Milan’s Europa League defeat against Arsenal. Such imperfections are natural in young players. The key for Italy will be to find a coaching staff that can highlight the strengths and minimise the flaws of this next generation. There is certainly plenty to work with. Beyond those already mentioned, we should not forget that Gianluigi Donnarumma has already won four caps in goal at 19 years old. Daniele Rugani is maturing into a more consistent centre‑back at Juventus, where he will be joined this summer by the impressive Mattia Caldara from Atalanta. Both players are 23, as is Alessio Romagnoli, a regular for three seasons at Milan in the same position. Whether Di Biagio gets to play a further role in their development remains to be seen. Although his prospects of retaining the top job look slim, it has been mooted that he could instead become part of his successor’s coaching staff. Alessandro Costacurta, the man who has the job of finding Italy’s next full-time manager, has promised a decision by 20 May. For now, the Azzurri have the final game of a very mini-World Cup to attend to.