Roger Federer lost his second consecutive match and his world No 1 ranking on Saturday night as the big-serving Australian Thanasi Kokkinakis, a qualifier ranked 175th, sprung a huge shock by beating him 3-6, 6-3, 7-6 (4) at the Miami Open. Federer then announced he will be skipping the whole of the clay-court season. The 36-year-old had been the oldest male No 1 ever, but will lose that spot to Rafael Nadal when the new rankings come out on 2 April. “I deserve it after this match,” Federer said. “That’s how I feel.” Kokkinakis is the lowest-ranked man to beat a No 1 player since the then No 178, Francisco Clavet, upset Lleyton Hewitt in 2003. That match also took place at Key Biscayne. Federer now has a losing streak after a career-best 17-0 start to the year, having lost to Juan Martín del Potro in the Indian Wells final last Sunday – a match that also came down to a winner-take-all tiebreaker. When asked if the losses had anything in common, Federer answered: “Yes, 7-6 in the third. Other than that, not much.” He confirmed he will not be playing to reclaim the No 1 spot any time soon, missing the clay season for the second year in a row, including the French Open. “I decided not to play the clay season … I am trying to figure things out now, I have some time. I’m a positive thinker, every match is another opportunity. You take a break, get away from it all, and get back to practice court and work.” Kokkinakis, 21, has long been regarded as a promising talent thanks to a thunderous serve and forehand, but has been plagued by injuries. The match was his first against Federer, although they have practised together. “I’ve always liked his game,” Federer said. “I’m happy for him that on the big stage he was able to show it. Every time I had chances, something bad happened. Wrong decision-making by me, good decision-making by him. It’s disappointing.” Federer’s defeat leaves both No 1 players out of the tournament. Simona Halep lost hours earlier to Agnieszka Radwanska 3-6, 6-2, 6-3.