Reading too much into the results of Sunday’s opening grand prix in Australia could be a dangerous game. Albert Park is not typical of the 21 tracks Formula One will visit this season and the race is something of an outlier but it can be safely divined that Melbourne heralds a season that already looks like it will belong to one man. At the peak of his powers, motivated, focused and in a car that has been honed into a devastating tool, Lewis Hamilton stands astride the sport as the driver to beat. Everyone wants a close fight but on the eve of the season he and Mercedes appear unstoppable. Hamilton takes to the grid as a four-time world champion and the title holder. A fifth would equal Juan Manuel Fangio and put him behind only Michael Schumacher’s seven. Last year’s championship was his most challenging, most satisfying and has defined the Briton who is looking imperious. The 33-year-old’s contract with Mercedes concludes at the end of this season and, although he is expected to sign a new two-year deal shortly, he often fields questions about his potential retirement. At the end of 2016, beaten to the title in an acrimonious fight with Nico Rosberg, these held more weight – his pleasure in driving seemed diminished. Unfortunately for his rivals that is a far cry from the man behind the wheel here. Rosberg’s departure and the arrival of Valtteri Bottas immediately improved the atmosphere at Mercedes and the challenge they overcame last season has proved inspiring. Facing a resurgent Ferrari in the hands of Sebastian Vettel, Mercedes had a car that was hard to drive and Hamilton had to rise to it while maintaining his composure in a battle with the German who, in many ways, had the superior ride. Vettel led from the off but Hamilton stayed with him, wrestling four wins in the opening 11 races from what Mercedes called their “diva”. He finally took the lead at round 13 at Monza and has said that the races between Spa and Mexico, where he took the title, were the best he has delivered. The fight with Vettel, a triumph through adversity, has reinvigorated him. “It’s quite simple. I want to be better than I was last year and last year was the best year I had performance-wise,” he says. He has described his relationship with the team as constantly growing and the Mercedes executive director, Toto Wolff, believes it is exceptional. “This is something that doesn’t happen often with professional sportspeople because they are very self-focused,” he says. “They need to be. It is unusual that he has become a team member. You don’t see that in many of the top drivers. “He has proven as a four-time world champion – the best of this day and age – that you can be successful and be a team player and not completely selfish and opportunist.” Wolff joined Mercedes in 2013, the same year Hamilton moved to the team from McLaren. He believes Hamilton has developed in a way that is ominous for his rivals. “I have seen an exceptional sportsman become an exceptional personality, through all the ups and downs he had,” he says. Indeed, the trials have informed the ambition Hamilton brings to the grid in 2018. “Success is a lousy teacher and the difficult moments made him mature as a person outside the car to cope with the bad days. It made him very strong and perform the way he did,” Wolff says. Last season, the team derived huge satisfaction from taking the drivers’ and constructors’ championships for a fourth successive time and, remarkably, after a major regulation change. Should they do so again it will equal the record Ferrari achieved with Schumacher. Every indication is that they have the tools to do so. The Mercedes technical director, James Allison, has said this year’s evolution would blow away the diva of 2017 and both drivers are confident they no longer have to drive around its foibles. Hamilton has never chased records but a fifth championship has chimed with him. “I saw something about potentially being up there with Fangio, that is quite an exciting prospect.” After which only Schumacher remains, a target he has stressed that he has never considered. Hamilton is 29 wins and three titles behind the German, yet such is his form that should this season conclude with a fifth title, Schumacher looks catchable. It will not be a motivation for Hamilton and for this campaign he clearly currently has no shortage of appetite, will and commitment. “I feel like I’m in the best shape I’ve been.” His words are a stern warning for the opposition, among whom Vettel remains the leading contender. A fifth title is also at stake for the German – who won four consecutively from 2010 – and he and Ferrari will be looking to eliminate the driver errors and reliability failures that cost them last year. Ferrari had a strong car, well-balanced through the corners on the low speed circuits but have opted to develop it to a greater extent than Mercedes. Their new high-rake design has a longer wheel base – as with the Mercedes – with the intent to improve performance at the high-speed tracks where Hamilton’s team had the upper hand. They have more work to do but for the moment the two drivers were exchanging mutual appreciation this week. “To be the best, you have to go up against the best,” said Hamilton. “It’s been a great experience to be able to race against Sebastian, he’s got the four world titles, the most of any other driver at the time, and this is an exciting year for Formula One fans.” Vettel concurred. “It becomes something special to win against the best. I’m searching for the ultimate satisfaction, to win with Ferrari, which is the greatest team in history, the greatest team in the paddock. That’s my ultimate target now, to win with Ferrari and win against the best and arguably Lewis is one of them.” Vettel has no shortage of ambition and will not shy from a fight; whether the Scuderia can deliver him the ride to do so has yet to be seen but at this stage it seems that Mercedes have stolen a march. Red Bull, too, will want to play their part and Max Verstappen’s form at the close of 2017 was a reminder of his exceptional talent. If they have the performance the Dutchman will challenge the old guard – he is not intimidated by either world champion and supremely confident. The car looks to be strong but will again be limited by the Renault engine’s relative lack of power. This will be alleviated in races where the weather comes into play – Verstappen is as accomplished as Hamilton in the wet – and rain was expected during qualifying and the race at Albert Park. Red Bull may join the title fight but most likely only when Renault switch their focus from reliability to performance, which is expected after the opening sequence of fly-away races.