Now is the moment for the year’s first sweet leeks and spring onions. Spring onions cook so quickly that, often, if I want something on the table quickly with the depth that only an allium can bring, I’ll use them instead of regular yellow onions of onions . I also like to char them whole, chop them through a salsa verde and Mexican tomato salsa, and roast them whole in a tray of roasted roots. Leeks are different; I love to cook them slowly with a little oil or butter and a pinch of salt to add natural sweetness this way and an almost buttery texture to dishes. So, this week’s recipes are based on I give you two tricksI use all the time in the kitchen: one to bring out the sweetness of leeks, the other to take the sting out of spring onions’ tails. If you’ve not heard it before, agrodolce is the Italian way of saying ‘sweet and sour’. Sweet from the buttery, slow-cooked leeks and raisins, and sour from the vinegar, resulting in a balanced, simple dish that tastes more than a sum of its parts. I like to pile these on to hot toast or stir them though pasta; you could also pile them on top of mash or polenta. Cook 10 minPrep 10 minServes 4 For the leeksExtra virgin olive oil4 medium leeks, trimmed, washed, halved and cut into 3cm lengths¼ tsp dried chilli flakes2 tbsp raisins1 tbsp pine nuts, toastedSalt and black pepper 1 ½ tbsp red wine vinegar1 small handful basil leaves To serveCrostini, toastedGoat’s cheese, ricotta or goat’s curd Drizzle some oil generously into a medium frying pan. Add the leeks and the chilli, and cook for 10 minutes, until soft and sweet. Add the raisins and pine nuts, season, with salt and pepper cook for another minute then add the vinegar. Toss everything in the pan, tear in the basil, and cook for few minutes more. Add a good drizzle of olive oil, take off the heat, taste and adjust the seasoning accordingly. To serve with crostini (as pictured), toast the bread (I do this on a griddle pan for extra charred flavour), top with soft goat’s cheese, ricotta or goat’s curd, then pile the warm leeks on top. If you want to serve the leeks with pasta, cook 400g spaghetti according to packet instructions, taking care that it is al dente, then add to the pan of leeks with a little of the cooking water (just drag the pasta from your pan with tongs and this will happen naturally). Toss well, adding pecorino and parmesan, if you like. Serve more cheese at the table, so people can help themselves. It is almost salad season. I have four or five green salads I make on rotation, and this is one of them. I am not a fan of raw onions of any sort, so when I want the flavour of spring onions without the punch, I use the trick below and soak them in iced water for about 10 minutes, which also crisps them up. Prep up to 1 hrCook 5 minServes 2-4 For the salad 1 bunch spring onions4 little gem lettuces, washed4 radishes1 small bunch mint, leaves picked1 small bunch coriander, leaves pickedSalt and black pepper2 tbsp toasted sesame seeds For the dressing3 tbsp white miso1 unwaxed lemon, juice and zest2 tbsp extra virgin olive oilSalt Cut the spring onions into thin slices and put them in a small bowl filled with iced water. Leave to soak, crisp and mellow for at least 10 minutes and up to an hour. Prepare the little gems by snapping off and discarding any wilting leaves and cutting the rest into thin wedges through the root. Use a mandoline or a knife to slice the radishes thinly. Now make the dressing: mix the miso with the lemon zest and juice and the olive oil. Add a pinch of salt, then taste and balance, adding more miso, lemon, oil and salt until the dressing tastes right, remembering that it will taste less punchy once it hits the leaves. Drain and pat dry the spring onions and put most of them in a serving bowl with the lettuce, radishes and most of the herbs. Drizzle with the dressing, toss, then finish by sprinkling with the rest of the spring onions, herbs and the sesame seeds.