Mike Huckabee, the former governor of Arkansas who twice ran for the Republican presidential nomination, has resigned from the board of the Country Music Association Foundation one day after joining it, thanks to vociferous protests against his appointment. The foundation is the philanthropic arm of the Country Music Association, a trade organisation that promotes country music with many projects including the CMA awards, the most prestigious awards ceremony for the genre. Huckabee was hired alongside country star Chris Young, with the CMA stating: “As we continue to advance social change, it’s incredibly important to continue expanding our executive board of directors with dynamic leaders.” Huckabee’s appointment was met with protests, including from businessman Jason Owen, who manages some of the biggest names in country music including Little Big Town, Kacey Musgraves and Faith Hill and described the appointment as “shameful”. Owen, who is gay, said that “Huckabee speaks of the sort of things that would suggest my family is morally beneath his, and uses language that has a profoundly negative impact upon young people all across this country. Not to mention how harmful and damaging his deep involvement with the NRA is.” He said that “with a heavy heart” his companies would “no longer support the CMA Foundation”. Huckabee is an opponent of gay marriage, calling it “Biblical disobedience” that is “outside of nature”, that would “criminalise Christianity”. He is also long-time supporter of the National Rifle Association – he once bought his wife a handgun for a birthday present while at an NRA event as a speaker, and suggested that the Holocaust occurred because Jews had been disarmed: “They had no ability or capacity to resist – the result was the beginning of their captivity, the end of their freedom and the ultimate murder of six million innocent people.” In the wake of the protests, Huckabee stood down from the role, saying he had become an “unnecessary distraction and deterrent to the core mission of the foundation”. On Twitter, he described the protesters as “bullies”, while in a longer written statement he complained of “irrational vitriol” and “intolerant and vicious statements”, adding: “I hope that the music and entertainment industry will become more tolerant and inclusive and recognise that a true love for kids having access to the arts is more important than a dislike for someone or a group of people because of who they are or what they believe.” The most high-profile moment of Huckabee’s political career was in the 2008 presidential election campaign, where he finished third behind John McCain and Mitt Romney for the Republican party nomination. He ran again in 2016, but withdrew early. He now hosts a talk show on Christian TV network TBN, while his daughter Sarah Huckabee Sanders is press secretary in the White House under Donald Trump. Huckabee lists “bass guitarist” in his biography on Twitter, and formed a classic rock band, Capitol Offense, in 1996 when governor of Arkansas, alongside members of his staff. He also once played with right-wing rocker Ted Nugent, and spoke of his passion for music education in his resignation letter. He also has strong opinions on pop music, describing Beyoncé’s lyrics as “obnoxious and toxic mental poison” in his book God, Guns, Grits and Gravy.