Born in Los Angeles, Patrice Khan-Cullors, 34, became an activist at 16. In 2012, she gained a religion and philosophy degree, toured her first performance art piece, Stained: An Intimate Portrayal Of State Violence, and founded Dignity And Power Now. In 2013, she co-founded Black Lives Matter. Her memoir, When They Call You A Terrorist, was published earlier this year. She is married to Janaya Khan, the co-founder of Black Lives Matter Canada, and lives in Los Angeles. When were you happiest?In elementary school. I loved learning. What is your greatest fear?That my child will die due to police violence. What is your earliest memory?At my mom’s house with my uncle, giggling and laughing with him. Which living person do you most admire, and why?My mother, because she is vivacious, amazing, brilliant, giving, strong and powerful. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?How long it takes me to tell people if I don’t like how they’re treating me. What is the trait you most deplore in others?I don’t like how cruel humans can be. What is your most treasured possession?My child. Shine is two next month. What makes you unhappy?The prison industrial complex. What do you most dislike about your appearance?I don’t dislike my appearance at all. What is your favourite word?Freedom. Which book changed your life?The Giver, by Lois Lowry. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?In sixth grade, one of my classmates called me the N-word. What is top of your bucket list?South Africa. I’d visit Nelson Mandela’s home. What or who is the greatest love of your life?The movement. What does love feel like?Pride, joy and freedom, but also hard, a struggle and work. Which living person do you most despise?That’s easy – 45, President Donald Trump. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party?The cast of Black Panther. If you could edit your past, what would you change?My mentally ill brother going to juvenile hall when he was 14. It led to his incarceration from 14 to almost 40. If you could go back in time, where would you go?To when Huey P Newton started the Black Panther party. What has been your closest brush with the law?I have been arrested several times protesting. What keeps you awake at night?This administration. What song would you like played at your funeral?A Donny Hathaway song called Be Real Black For Me. How would you like to be remembered?For the service I gave to the black folk. Tell us a secret I am scared every day.