 Daniels: It started off … all about him just talking about himself. And he’s like … “Have you seen my new magazine?” … And so I was like, “Does this … does this normally work for you?” And he looked very taken … taken back, like, he didn’t really understand what I was saying. Like, I was … does, just, you know, talking about yourself normally work?” And I was like, “Someone should take that magazine and spank you with it.”  Daniels: You know, I was in [the restroom] for a little bit and came out and he was sitting, you know, on the edge of the bed when I walked out, perched … I realized exactly what I’d gotten myself into. And I was like, “Ugh, here we go.” [laugh] And I just felt like maybe [laugh] it was sort of … I had it coming for making a bad decision for going to someone’s room alone and I just heard the voice in my head, “well, you put yourself in a bad situation and bad things happen, so you deserve this.” Cooper: And you had sex with him. Daniels: Yes.  Cooper: Did you want to have sex with him? Daniels: No. But I didn’t … I didn’t say no. I’m not a victim, I’m not — Cooper: It was entirely consensual. Daniels: Oh, yes, yes.  Daniels: I was in a parking lot, going to a fitness class with my infant daughter. Taking, you know, the seats facing backwards in the backseat, diaper bag, you know, gettin’ all the stuff out. And a guy walked up on me and said to me, “Leave Trump alone. Forget the story.” And then he leaned around and looked at my daughter and said, “That’s a beautiful little girl. It’d be a shame if something happened to her mom.” And then he was gone. Cooper: You took it as a direct threat? Daniels: Absolutely. Daniels: I was rattled. I remember going into the workout class. And my hands are shaking so much, I was afraid I was gonna … drop her.  Cooper: Did you go to the police? Daniels: No. Cooper: Why? Daniels: Because I was scared.  Daniels: I believe, without a shadow of a doubt, in my heart – and some people argue that I don’t have one of those – but whatever, that I was doing the right thing. I turned down a large payday multiple times because, one, I didn’t wanna kiss and tell and be labeled all the things that I’m being labeled now. I didn’t wanna take away from the, legitimate and legal I’d like to point out, career that I’ve worked very hard to establish. And most importantly, I did not want my family and my child exposed to all the things that she’s being exposed to right now. Because everything that I was afraid of coming out has come out anyway, and guess what? I don’t have a million dollars [laugh]. You didn’t even buy me breakfast.  Cooper: So you signed and released … a statement that said, “I am not denying this affair because I was paid in hush money, I’m denying it because it never happened.” That’s a lie? Daniels: Yes. Cooper: If it was untruthful, why did you sign it? Daniels: Because they made it sound like I had no choice. Cooper: I mean, no one was putting a gun to your head? Daniels: Not physical violence, no. Cooper: You thought that there would be some sort of legal repercussion if you didn’t sign it? Daniels: Correct. As a matter of fact, the exact sentence used was, “They can make your life hell in many different ways.” Cooper: They being … Daniels: I’m not exactly sure who they were. I believe it to be Michael Cohen.