Eden Hazard has said he will not think about signing a contract extension with Chelsea until the World Cup has finished. Hazard, who is contracted until 2020, indicated that he did not expect a swift resolution over his future when asked about it before Belgium’s friendly against Saudi Arabia on Tuesday night. Chelsea have no intention of losing the forward but there have been suggestions that he wants to see whether Real Madrid will prioritise his signing this summer. He may also want clarity on whether Chelsea have qualified for the Champions League. “Look, I’m going to finish the season first, then play the World Cup and then I’ll leave on holiday,” Hazard said. “We’ll see what happens next. I haven’t thought about it yet; I have another two years’ contract with Chelsea. I am very happy. I just think about the end of the season and the World Cup.” Chelsea have made an underwhelming defence of their Premier League title and Hazard did not hide his frustration when Antonio Conte used him as a false No 9 in the meek defeat by Manchester City this month. But he answered diplomatically when asked on Monday where he preferred to play. “I just want to be on the pitch,” Hazard said. “No 9 or No 10. I can play left-back if the manager wants me to, no problem.” Hazard was bullish when his thoughts turned to Belgium’s prospects in Russia. “Four years ago it was the first World Cup for most of the players. Now we have experience. We know what to do to be ready. We have one target, which is to reach the final.” Belgium are England’s final opponents in Group G but their talented group of players have still not fulfilled their potential in a major tournament. They were disappointing at the last World Cup and at Euro 2016, exiting both in the last eight. “We are preparing for a World Cup,” Roberto Martínez, Belgium’s coach, said. “World Cups don’t respect generations. They respect talent. We don’t look any further than working very hard and finding the best combination. We are a team that have the mentality to want to be as good as we can.” Martínez, the former Everton and Wigan Athletic manager, said Tuesday night’s game would help his team develop greater cohesion. “I don’t think tomorrow is about making a statement,” the Spaniard said. “We are not working now to make statements. Making statements in March is a bit of a risk. We are looking to see what player can be useful to the team. “In terms of positions we are clear on what the squad needs. To play seven games you have to prepare for that, so the balance of the squad is clear. There are some who can play different positions so that may affect it a little bit. They have an advantage but they need to end the season well.” Martínez has been criticised in Belgium for using Atlético Madrid’s Yannick Carrasco at left wing-back. He suggested that he might stiffen his team’s defensive resolve by using Tottenham’s Jan Vertonghen in that role instead of Carrasco against Saudi Arabia. “He did that very well with Spurs against Real Madrid at the Bernabéu. He is a versatile player.” Martinez anticipates a difficult test against Saudi Arabia, who drew 1-1 with Ukraine last Friday. They are managed by Antonio Pizzi, who led Chile to Copa América glory in 2016, and face Russia in the World Cup’s opening game. “I have been very impressed with Saudi Arabia,” Martínez said. “Antonio Pizzi knows exactly what he wants. He made Chile champions of a very difficult competition and this is a dynamic group of players. They are not going to sit back. They will push us really hard and try to win the ball.”