Known for the popular Miss Ruben’s canteen in Melbourne, chef Amanda Ruben creates banquets of food for everyone to share. In her words, “It’s no coincidence that a cookbook of mine is called Feasting. I don’t know any other way to cook or eat.” serves 6-8 This is a foolproof dish for even the most nervous cooks and makes for a wonderful dinner when you just want to put something in the oven and forget about it – all the preparation is done the day before. You should end up with meat that is tasty, succulent and tender. Cut through the richness of the lamb by serving it with some Chargrilled broccolini with green tahini (page 175). Ras el hanout is a North African spice mix. 2.5kg lamb shoulder, semi-boned2 tbsp sea salt60ml (¼ cup) extra-virgin olive oil3 medium carrots, cut in half crossways1 fennel bulb, quartered1 garlic bulb, halved1 red onion, peeled and cut in half lengthways1 preserved lemon, halved135g honey500ml (2 cups) chicken stockChargrilled broccolini with green tahini, to serve Ras el hanout60g (½ cup) cumin seeds20g (¼ cup) coriander seeds1 tbsp black peppercorns1 tbsp chilli flakes5 tbsp smoked paprika2 tbsp ground cinnamon½ tsp ground allspicepinch of freshly grated nutmeg To make the ras el hanout, toast the cumin and coriander seeds in a frying pan over medium heat until fragrant. Using a spice grinder or mortar and pestle, grind them finely, then grind the black peppercorns. Mix the ground spices with the remaining ingredients in a small bowl. Place the lamb shoulder in a large roasting tin, at least 5 cm deep. Rub the salt and oil over the lamb and massage in 50 g (½ cup) of the ras el hanout. Distribute the vegetables, garlic, onion and preserved lemon under and around the meat. Cover and refrigerate overnight. Remove the meat from the fridge at least 1 hour before you want to cook it (roughly 12 hours before you want to eat it). Preheat the oven to 200C. Smear the meat with half the honey, reserving the rest. Add the stock to the roasting tray and seal with a double layer of foil. Roast the shoulder in the oven for 20 minutes, then reduce the temperature to 100C and slow-roast for a further 10–12 hours, until the meat is falling off the bone. Remove the lamb from the oven and leave to cool a little before straining the pan juices into a saucepan. Reserve the roasted vegetables to serve with the lamb or discard. Once the pan juices have cooled, skim off any fat from the surface and place the saucepan over medium heat. Add the remaining honey and boil for about 10–15 minutes, or until slightly reduced. Pour the jus over the lamb and return the tray to the oven uncovered for 15 minutes, until a slight crust forms and the lamb is warm. Remove it from the oven and allow it to cool slightly. Pile the roasted vegetables, if using, onto a serving platter and place the lamb on top. Drizzle with the sauce and serve with the chargrilled broccolini. serves 6-8 Figs are believed to have originated in the Middle East and have a strong presence in the Bible, beginning in the garden of Eden. In late summer and early autumn, take advantage of their sweet flavour and luxurious texture by showcasing them in this rustic crostata. It’s best served warm, straight from the oven. 240g plain flour, plus extra for dusting80g caster sugarpinch of salt120g cold butter, cubed2 egg yolks90g semolina8 fresh figs, sliced in half lengthways1 egg, beaten, for glazingicing sugar, for dusting (optional) Rosemary custard750 ml milk2 rosemary sprigs3 egg yolks70g caster sugar2 tbsp cornflour Place the flour, sugar, salt and butter in a food processor and pulse until the mixture resembles coarse crumbs. Add the egg yolks and 2 tablespoons cold water, and blitz again until the dough comes together. Tip the dough out onto a floured surface and shape into a ball then flatten slightly. Wrap in plastic wrap and rest in the refrigerator for 30 minutes. Preheat the oven to 200C. Roll out the dough into a large circle with a diameter of 30 cm. Line a baking tray with baking paper and sprinkle one-third of the semolina on top. Place the dough on top of the semolina and sprinkle the remaining semolina on top of the dough. Arrange the figs on top of the pastry in an inner circle with a diameter of about 20 cm. You should be left with a 10 cm ring of pastry around the fruit. Fold up the edges of the pastry over the fruit. Glaze the pastry flap with the beaten egg and place in the oven to bake for 50 minutes. While the crostata is baking, make the rosemary custard. Pour the milk into a large saucepan over medium–low heat, add the rosemary sprigs and warm through to infuse for 5–10 minutes. In a bowl, vigorously whisk the egg yolks with the sugar and cornflour to form a paste. When the milk is warm, remove the rosemary and pour 250 ml of the warm milk into the egg mixture. Gently combine, then pour the mixture back into the saucepan with remaining milk. Stir continuously over low heat until the custard thickens. Remove the crostata from the oven. Dust with icing sugar, if using, and serve with the rosemary custard on the side.