Hello, I’m Warren Murray and welcome to a compact briefing for the Good Friday bank holiday. Yulia Skripal is out of critical condition, Salisbury hospital has announced. Her condition is now listed as stable. “She has responded well to treatment but continues to receive expert clinical care 24 hours a day,” said Christine Blanshard, medical director at the hospital. Sergei Skripal, Yulia’s father, remains in critical but stable condition after both were poisoned with a nerve agent. Russia has begun a diplomatic retaliation by expelling foreign diplomats. Among the first to go are 60 from the US, which this week ordered the same number of Russians to leave. More than 25 countries around the world have expelled Russian diplomats in solidarity with Britain over the Salisbury attack. Shawcroft row – Labour backbenchers have urged Jeremy Corbyn to suspend Christine Shawcroft from the party. Shawcroft was forced to resign as disciplinary chief after it was revealed she questioned the suspension of another member who spread Holocaust denial. A letter to Jeremy Corbyn citing “deep concern” that she remains on the remains on the party’s national executive was signed by key Jewish Labour backbenchers, as well as some MPs and peers who are generally regarded as hostile to Corbyn. May’s Brexit roadshow – After leaving the EU Britain will retain “vast sums of money” that would otherwise go to Brussels, Theresa May has declared. But the PM refused to repeat Boris Johnson’s claim of a “Brexit dividend”. Nine senior Tory peers have put their name to substantial cross-party amendments to the EU withdrawal bill. They want parliament to vote on staying in a customs union, the ability to avert “crashing out” if the final Brexit deal is voted down, and the power to remove the fixed exit date. The parliamentary “revolt” against May’s bill is expected to take place after Easter. Egypt’s one-man poll – Abdel Fatah al-Sisi has kept his grip on Egypt’s presidency, in a predictable landslide that was guaranteed by all the serious competition being either locked up or otherwise prevented from standing for election. Opposition groups had called for a boycott of this week’s vote, which they labelled a facade. There were no presidential debates and Sisi himself did not appear at any official campaign events. As army chief, Sisi ousted Egypt’s first freely elected president, the Islamist Mohamed Morsi, after mass street protests in 2013, then began his first term as president in 2014. Sarkozy sent to trial – Nicolas Sarkozy is to face trial for alleged corruption and influence-peddling. France’s ex-president is accused of trying to bribe a senior judge who was investigating the funding of Sarkozy’s 2007 presidential campaign. Their phone call was wiretapped by police. Sarkozy has strenuously denied all accusations against him, which also include hiding election campaign expenses and taking illegal donations from Muammar Gaddafi. Raw Bacon – Francis Bacon called Andy Warhol’s works “very bad” and dismissed a Jasper Johns painting as “ridiculous … ”. The criticisms by the Anglo-Irish master are revealed in previously unheard tapes released to the Guardian. Bacon allowed his longtime neighbour and friend, Barry Joule, to make the recordings on condition they not be made public until 12 years after his death. Bacon died in 1992 while Johns is now 87. Individual paintings by each of them have sold for more than $100m. In 1999, Bill Clinton gave a former defence secretary a mission: to bargain a halt to North Korea’s nuclear ambitions. “Looking back on Bill Perry’s mission today,” writes Julian Borger, “the question is whether the experiment failed, or whether it was closed down for political reasons before it had a chance to succeed.” “In the eyes of hawks like Donald Trump’s new national security adviser, John Bolton, the whole exercise was delusional and doomed to failure. (Bolton prides himself on having helped take a “hammer” to Perry’s experiment.) For Perry, most members of his diplomatic team, and many other observers, the flight to Pyongyang and the exchanges that followed in the next 18 months represent one of the great might-have-beens of diplomatic history, which – had it been allowed to reach its conclusion – could have set North Korea and the wider region on a much less dangerous path.” England’s batting shortcomings were again exposed on the opening day of the second Test against New Zealand after the tourists’ top order failed to fire in Christchurch. In the Australian ball tampering scandal, Steve Smith has been badly let down by those around him, including David Warner, but he can recover from his mistake and still become a great leader, writes Geoff Lemon. To football, and a win at Chelsea on Sunday would go a long way to shutting the Champions League door on London’s hitherto top club as Tottenham’s quiet evolution under Mauricio Pochettino nears an endgame. The highly anticipated rematch between Canelo Álvarez and Gennady Golovkin is in jeopardy after the Nevada Athletic Commission filed a formal anti-doping complaint against Álvarez. And Jordan Spieth’s best opening round of the year arrived at an opportune time as the 2015 Masters champion hit a 68 at the Houston Open a week before his competitive return to Augusta National. A tearful Steve Smith takes the front page pic slot in the Guardian, though it leads on the hostile takeover of GKN, and the Telegraph, which splashes with the parole of “sixty-three violent criminals” on similar grounds to John Worboys, the black cab rapist. The Mail hits out at the GKN takeover as “an abuse of capitalism”. The Times says a third of public consultations by ministers come to nothing, wasting tens of millions of pounds. “Poison spy daughter talks” says the Mirror, talking about Yulia Skripal’s recovery progress. “We’ll fight each other on the beaches” says the Sun, about a brawl by squaddies during a stopover on Cape Verde. The Express seems not to like it that a teacher won a £250,000 payout after falling off a school desk. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. For more news: www.theguardian.com