Harry Herbert said on Monday that his decision to part from Al Shaqab was a natural consequence of the expansion of his own business and was unconnected to the news in January that some trainers were having trouble getting their bills paid by the Qatari operation. Herbert was appointed racing adviser to Sheikh Joaan at the end of 2013, a position he will quit at the end of next month. “My attention needs to be focused on the future growth plans that I have for my own business,” Herbert said, in reference to Highclere Thoroughbred Racing, which he set up in the early 90s. Highclere is expanding into Australia and is now buying yearlings there in addition to importing established racehorses from Europe. “Four years of doing both was hard work,” added Herbert, who noted also that Al Shaqab’s focus continues to move away from England and towards France, where its European racing office is based. While it still has 50 horses in training in Britain, only a dozen of those are two-year-olds, an indication that the total number is likely to taper away over time. Herbert spoke of the pride he took in the achievements of Al Shaqab horses here, which included a treble at Royal Ascot in 2014 and a 2,000 Guineas triumph for Galileo Gold in 2016. However, he must have privately despaired over the middle-management failures, over which he had no control, that led to Al Shaqab owing a sum thought to be more than £1m to various trainers and service providers, some of whom were kept waiting half a year to be paid. It is believed that funds have since started to flow more reliably and one of Al Shaqab’s trainers said yesterday that he had “no complaints” on that score. However, the Racing Post reported that Herbert had at one stage paid some of Al Shaqab’s bills from his own funds in order to help some of those who had been kept waiting. Meanwhile, it was announced that the last day of this jumps season will also be the last day in the racing career of Cue Card, who will have his final outing in Sandown’s Oaksey Chase. “We just thought it would suit him because it tends to be a small field for that race,” said his owner, Jean Bishop. All four previous runnings of the Oaksey Chase have been won by the now-retired Menorah, who raced against Cue Card several times, including when they were first and second in the Bula Hurdle of 2010.