Californian actor Bryan Cranston, 62, is best known for his Emmy-winning portrayal of Breaking Bad’s antihero Walter White. His film roles include Trumbo, for which he was Oscar-nominated. He’s currently starring in Network at the National Theatre and the new Wes Anderson animation, Isle of Dogs. You’re playing news anchor Howard Beale in the stage production of Network. How’s it going?Really well. It’s about to finish but I’ve enjoyed my time in London. The play is very prescient about fake news and how we’re in trouble if television falls into the wrong hands. It’s amazing how 42 years ago, [screenwriter] Paddy Chayefsky was able to see into the future. Are you thinking about the likes of Fox News?Yeah. When I was growing up, we believed that what we saw on TV was the truth. The news was simply a man, in most cases, telling you what happened today. Now it’s so opinionated, it’s difficult to decipher what’s news and what’s part of an agenda. You talk to younger people and they say “Oh, I get all my news on Twitter or Facebook”. Really? Wow. This is the world we’re living in and how the Russians were able to influence large swaths of America. That’s what the play’s all about. In my final speech, I say: “The thing we must be most afraid of is the destructive power of absolute beliefs.” It’s crazy. The staging includes a bustling studio and onstage restaurant. Has it been distracting?Surprisingly not. It’s been interesting to integrate the audience. There’s the occasional noise but whenever you’re on stage, you hear people coughing or whispering. You just have to divert your attention away. How did you land the part in Isle of Dogs?Honestly, when my agent called and said the first three words, I knew my answer. Those three words were “Wes Anderson wants…” I said yes before he’d finished the sentence. But he could have wanted anything…“Wes Anderson wants you to wash his dishes. Mow his lawn. Shovel his… sidewalk.” Still yes! Your character, Chief, leads the outcast dogs. How did you bring him to life? Wes showed me an early drawing and Chief really was a mutt. I relate to that. It’s what I am. I’m not a pedigree of any kind either. It’s said dogs and their owners grow to look alike. Do you look like Chief? In a way. We’re both rugged, haggard and weathered. We’ve seen better days and aren’t going to win any beauty contests. Chief gets a bath eventually, though. I can scrub up quite well too. He has a romance with showdog Nutmeg, played by Scarlett Johansson. Were you aiming for a Bogart and Bacall vibe?Yes. It works in animation. No live-action film would ever couple me with Scarlett Johansson. But here the plight of the characters and our vocal qualities seemed to be in line. Our exchanges were done remotely. In fact, I still haven’t met Scarlett. I guess this will break the ice when we do. We’re like Lady and the Tramp. What was it like leading the wolf pack?I spent a few days in a room with Wes and most of the other pack dogs: Bill Murray, Bob Balaban and Edward Norton. Usually you do voice work alone, so it was interesting to see the pack dynamics in action. I’d glance over and Wes would have his eyes closed, listening to our voices and imagining the visuals. Did you act like the alpha dog in the studio?The first thing I did was walk up to my microphone, lift my leg and mark my territory. Trouble was, then I had to live with the smell of the mic. Are you a dog lover yourself?Very much. I don’t have one right now. Our beloved Sugar passed two years ago. She was a rescue dog from an LA pound and we had her for 16 years. Dogs are just the surface of this film, though. Its deeper levels look into greed, fear-mongering, the segregation of immigrants and how we treat others. The anti-dog hysteria and deportation seem politically timely…They do. Audiences anywhere will be able to extract meaning, depending on what’s happening in their own country. Children save the day in the film. Could that be the case in the real world too – say, with the US gun-control debate?It will take resistance, fight and struggle. But without that, we wouldn’t have a country at all. Revolutions have to take place to topple regimes. Resistance is a force for change. I certainly hope change is coming in America. When you presented an award at last month’s Baftas, you pretended to be a dog. Was that fun?Yeah, I like to take chances. Awards shows can get rather dry, so it’s nice to rib people a little. I heard them mention dogs in my introduction, so thought I’d play the obedient pet. Besides, it’s not often you get patted on the head by Joanna Lumley. Was it powerful to see the black dress code for Time’s Up?Very. What’s happening is really beneficial. The pillars of misogyny are falling. The oppressive behaviour of rich white men has got to stop. People are nervous that it will stop workplace romances and so on, but men just need to read signals, see boundaries and show respect. Breaking Bad is a beautiful thing with a beginning, middle and an end. Revisiting it would diminish the experience What are the differences between working in the US and UK?What I love about British audiences is their deep respect for the theatre. It’s embedded in your DNA. And you don’t feel obliged to stand and give an ovation, like in the States. You have to earn it here and that’s what a performer wants. It’s the best compliment. It’s great to be in a country that not only appreciates the arts but where the government supports them too. In the US, it’s the first thing to get cut. Do you miss Walter White? Would you ever play him again?I really don’t. I loved that time and miss the people. I stay in touch with the cast and see the crew now and then. But [creator] Vince Gilligan crafted a beautiful thing with a beginning, middle and an end. Revisiting it would diminish the experience. Having said that, would I entertain being on [spin-off series] Better Call Saul? Yes. It’s a fresh story, tonally different and I love it. Breaking Bad had a huge cultural impact. How does that feel?It’s strange because that feels separate to what we did in the New Mexico desert for six years. If things become a classic, that’s for society to determine. Breaking Bad certainly seems to have created a groundswell but I assure you that it has nothing to do with us. We just told the story the best we could. Was it transformative for your career?Without question and I’m eternally grateful. I just responded to the writing. It’s what I tell young actors: take every job when you’re coming up, so you learn your craft and meet more people, but at a certain point, learn to say no and wait for good work. Good work always starts with the writing. What’s next in the pipeline?I’ve created a show for Amazon called The Dangerous Book for Boys, which comes out next week and I’m very excited about it. It’s a true family experience, filled with love, pathos and adventure. I’m focusing on that and the final week of Network, then we’ll see. Isle of Dogs is out in the UK on Friday