Private companies managing asylum accommodation in the UK are facing urgent calls to protect LGBTI individuals who say they are being physically, verbally and sexually assaulted in shared homes. Hundreds of LGBTI people from countries including Pakistan, Bangladesh and Nigeria claim asylum in the UK each year. The Home Office provides single-sex accommodation via companies including G4S and Serco, but some individuals say they face physical and sexual assaults similar to that which caused them to flee their countries. Among the attacks on asylum seekers are reports that one intersex person was woken in the night by housemates and their friends demanding to see their genitals, while another transgender asylum seeker said her housemate exposed his genitals while yelling homophobic abuse at her. One transgender person says she was raped in her asylum accommodation. In some cases, the asylum seekers say they reported the incidents to the Home Office and the companies contracted to provide housing to asylum seekers, but no action was taken. As a result they were forced to choose between living with their attacker or becoming homeless. “Housing people with others who may be homophobic, biphobic or transphobic while they are in the asylum process is a systematic failure of the system,” said Leila Zadeh, the chief executive of the UK Lesbian & Gay Immigration Group. “It puts people at risk of abuse and violence tantamount to hate crime often reminiscent of the persecution that they are trying to escape.” The Guardian spoke with LGBTI asylum seekers and refugees who had experienced abuse while living in accommodation provided by the Home Office. Others said that even though they had not encountered abuse, the reaction from housemates when they learned of their sexuality was so hostile that they lived in fear of being attacked. Zadeh said shared accommodation with strangers on a no-choice basis was “wholly unsuitable for LGBTQI people seeking asylum”. Paul Dillane, the executive director of rights group Kaleidescope Trust, said he had heard “very serious complaints” from LGBTI people over recent years. They included the case of a gay man who was forced to sleep on the kitchen floor because he was receiving homophobic abuse from his roommate, which was not addressed by the housing contractor despite the man raising the issue with them three times. Sebastian Rocca, the founder and chief executive of the rights group Micro Rainbow International, said he knew a transgender person who said she was raped in her house, although she did not report it to the police or the housing company. Rocca said asylum seekers were often too fearful to report abuse to the police or the Home Office. “They all think if I go to the police they will think I’m trouble and it will look bad for my case,” he said. Even when asylum seekers do report the incidents to the housing provider and the Home Office, they are not always dealt with effectively. “Based on my experience over the course of many years, it seems to me that private contractors do not have sufficient policies in place or training for their staff so that they’re equipped to deal with these issues,” said Dillane. Kate Hendickson, a transgender asylum seeker from Trinidad, captured her housemate on camera yelling homophobic abuse and exposing his genitals to her. Despite showing this video to a housing officer from G4S, which manages her accommodation, she was told nothing would be done as it was the first complaint against this resident. “I feel I was swept under the carpet,” said Hendickson. John Whitwam, a G4S managing director, said: “The footage shown to us [by the Guardian] was extremely concerning and we are contacting the service users involved. We have raised an incident report with the Home Office and we are in urgent discussions around the options for relocation.” A Home Office spokesperson said: “The Home Office and our accommodation providers take complaints extremely seriously and have robust procedures in place to inspect, investigate and resolve any complaints raised , where specific information is provided.”