People with autism have a word for those who don’t have it: neurotypical. You might think this reverse labelling unhelpful, but it is an effective way to shift perspective – to counter the sense of superiority that comes of thinking yourself normal, and to be obliged to own a term that seems reductive and exclusionary. While the label “neurotypical” doesn’t begin to address the many and varied things that are wrong with me, it is still nice to have a diagnosis. Are You Autistic? (Channel 4) sought to overturn preconceptions about the condition (not illness). Autism manifests itself across a spectrum, but that spectrum is not a straight line – there are any number of interconnected traits leading to varying degrees of difficulty with social interaction, organisation and sensory perception. Those with autism are not just a load of awkward people with a “superpower that they bring out at parties”. Ably and amiably presented by trainee human rights lawyer Georgia Harper and artist Sam Ahern, both of whom are autistic, and deploying Anna Richardson as a sort of neurotypical ambassador, the programme was underpinned by a new online study. The question in the title hinted at the programme’s main proposition – backed up by the study – that autism is a vastly under-diagnosed condition. Until recently, it was thought the prevalence of autism was four times higher among men than women, but it now seems autistic women are just better at camouflaging it. And while the diagnosis of children has improved, it is likely that there is a “lost generation” of adults who don’t know they are autistic. The programme held out the possibility of a diagnosis for two people – JP and Jo, both in their 30s – who have long suspected they are somewhere on the spectrum. While this would not seem obvious to anyone meeting either of them for the first time, certain traits emerged in interviews and testing. JP is hypersensitive to noise – he and Jo outperformed neurotypicals in a ridiculously difficult hearing test – and they each struggled when presented with staged scenarios in which actors said things they didn’t mean. Neither seemed to have much sense of the psychological gears grinding away in the heads of others. Then again, you could blame the acting. Are You Autistic? constituted a fairly basic primer, but it was undoubtedly one the public sorely needs. Even if it sought to cater for an audience with zero knowledge or experience of autism – including people who might have it and don’t know it – the programme probably told most viewers something they didn’t already know. Particularly fascinating was the extent to which “social masking” may be behind the under-diagnosis of women with autism. Because women are better trained to fake sociability – laughing at jokes they don’t find funny, making an effort with eye contact, rehearsing social interaction ahead of time – the condition can be missed. In one, admittedly anecdotal, experiment a group of young autistic women went speed-dating with neurotypical men, none of whom noticed anything. Of course, this may have something to do with the average twentysomething neurotypical male’s ability to talk about himself endlessly. More poignant, was the revelation of the struggle this social masking involves. Several of the women said they would probably later have a meltdown in a darkened room as a result of the stress brought about by the experiment. Jo and JP were finally sent for diagnostic interviews with the autism expert Dr Simon Baron-Cohen – “as much as a neurotypical can be an expert on autism,” said Harper. The “reveal” of the diagnosis was kept off camera. Only afterwards did we discover that JP was indeed autistic, and Jo was diagnosed with Asperger’s syndrome. Both seemed immensely relieved; it was especially important to JP, whose nine-year-old son is also autistic. The programme’s online questionnaire – the largest study of its kind – found 87,000 people out of 750,000 participants reached or passed the diagnostic cutoff for autism. If nothing else, this is well above the accepted statistic that autism affects 1% of the UK population. Above all, Are You Autistic? was a plea for understanding. Actually, it was more than that: with its upfront, playful and sometimes spiky approach, it amounted to a persuasive insistence on understanding. Neurotypicals, wake up.