“Grape or grain, but never the twain,” goes the old saying, but brewers no longer seem to care. In a craft-beer world where no ingredient is off the menu – even really disgusting ones such as beard yeast or peanut butter – grapes have become an increasingly common addition to the brewing process. It’s not new – Cantillon, a Belgian producer of lambic ales, has been using grapes since the 1970s – but it is more popular than ever. And it is not just grapes: brewers use wine barrels, too. Andrew Nielsen, an Aussie who makes wine in Burgundy under the name Le Grappin, has developed a sideline in supplying used wine barrels to UK breweries, where they are used to age beer. The trend is strongest where craft beer and wine rub up against each other: California, Australia, New Zealand and Italy. Then there’s Alsace, where beer and wine have long eyed each other warily, but where breweries La Perle and Bendorf (both based in Strasbourg) are using the region’s grapes in their beer. The owner of the latter, Benjamin Pastwa, even began his working life in wine. It’s not uncommon; many highly respected brewers began as winemakers, such as Vinnie Cilurzo at Russian River in northern California or Ashley Huntington at Two Metre Tall in Tasmania. The results can be mixed, but it’s clear why brewers do it. “It’s a nice way to add another thread of flavour and layer of complexity,” says Yeastie Boys’ Stu McKinley about Pullyu, a beer that includes candi sugar made using white wine. Here are four vine-reliant beers to seek out, from the UK and further afield:   A blend of wood-aged beer (some of it in chardonnay barrels) and lambic ale imported from Belgium. Refined and delicious. Cantillon Vigneronne (6%) Made every October with Italian grapes, this is probably the best-known beer/wine hybrid of them all. Grapes are macerated in aged lambic beer for two months before bottling. The result has undeniable white-wine character alongside plenty of earthy acidity. Wild Beer Squashed Grape (5%) Produced using pinot noir grapes grown near the Somerset brewery and conditioned in a large wooden vat previously used for red wine, this is dry, tart and funky. Yeastie Boys Pullyu (7%) A white ale, this uses a candi sugar made from white wine; the result is delicate and subtly spicy.