Name Coffee. Appearance: Brown. Tasting notes: Nutty and rich, with a subtle bitterness. Sounds just like me. You’re hardly rich. My bitterness isn’t very subtle either. But look, can we skip all the usual nonsense? I think I know what coffee is. I do drink it several times a day. Ah well, in that case I have vital news regarding your health. Go on then. I can’t prove that drinking coffee won’t add a further 0.001% to your lifetime risk of cancer. Don’t feel too bad about it. I can’t find my keys two mornings out of three. Yes, but you’re not fighting an eight-year lawsuit in the California courts about your keys. No, I’m not. Whereas Starbucks and a bunch of other coffee companies are being sued over their failure to warn consumers about the risks of acrylamide. Acrylamide! I’m terrified already of whatever that is! From now on I’ll only drink coffee made from organic, hand-roasted, lengthily described beans. Feel free, but it won’t make much difference. Acrylamide isn’t an additive. It forms naturally during the roasting process. You’ll also get it from browned toast, roast potatoes and various other things. Oh. It’s known to cause cancer in laboratory animals, and it is presumed to do the same to people, who are advised not to brown their food too much, and not to keep potatoes in the fridge. I’ll see to it immediately. And now Elihu Berle, a superior court judge in Los Angeles, has ruled that Starbucks and the others have not proved that the acrylamide in their coffee would cause fewer than one excess case of cancer per 100,000 people. Nor that any other health benefits outweighed this risk. I thought coffee was good for you? Oh, sure. There’s lots of evidence to suggest that. Eh? A group of researchers at the University of São Paolo recently found that regularly drinking at least three cups a day reduces the hardening of your coronary arteries. Great! Other research suggests coffee might protect against diabetes, Parkinson’s and hypertension. Although it is often quite messy research. And the São Paolo team don’t advise drinking more than three cups a day. Look, just tell me one thing: is my coffee habit good for me or bad for me? Yes, it probably is. Do say: “Coffee-drinking is associated with a higher incidence of pretentious conversation.” Don’t say: “Those who abstain from coffee experience a higher risk of not getting much done.”