Homes have been evacuated following reports of an explosion in north-east London, the Metropolitan police have said. Emergency services responded to the explosion, in Romford, which was not being treated as terror-related. A Twitter account listed on the police.uk website as being updated by the local force said the incident was a domestic gas explosion linked to a faulty fridge, adding that there had been no injuries. However, a spokeswoman for the London fire brigade said the cause of the explosion was still being investigated by a team on the scene. Harold Hill incident was a domestic gas explosion linked to a faulty fridge. No injuries, limited damage. @LFBHavering dealing @BBCNews Police, the fire brigade and the ambulance service all attended the scene of the incident, which was reported shortly before 1.30pm on Sunday. Roads in the area were closed and a cordon put in place around the affected building, which is on a parade of shops on Farnham Road, in the Harold Hill area. Havering police tweeted that pedestrians and motorists should avoid the area. Officers along with other emergency services are currently on scene in Farnham Road #HaroldHill, following reports of an explosion. Cause n/k but not currently being treated as terror-related. We await updates re any injuries. Pedestrians & motorists advised to avoid the area. A local resident, who asked to remain anonymous, told Essex Live that there was a “loud explosion which shook the flat” and glass from the building was thrown across the road. Firefighters were on the scene within 10 minutes, the neighbour said. “A police van turned up soon after and then one fire engine. I know there are more police vans around to block off the roads. “They cordoned off from behind the shop it was only the road directly behind it. I live opposite and we were told to stay in but people that lived above the shops were told to evacuate.” Co-op area manager Michael Roast said the Romford branch of the chain had been forced to close by the explosion and added that staff on the premises had been evacuated safely. Apologies to all our customers in Romford Harold Hill we have had to close our coop store on police advice due to an explosion. All colleagues have been evacuated safely. Great work by the store team. pic.twitter.com/5CHth1DqFP