Hundreds of people who visited the pub and the restaurant in Salisbury where the Russian spy Sergei Skripal may have been poisoned have been told to wash their clothes and possessions. The announcement from Public Health England is aimed at as many as 500 customers who ate at Zizzi restaurant or were in the Mill pub last Sunday and Monday. The public health notice says although the risk is very low, repeated contact with clothing or items exposed to the nerve agent could be a danger. Dr Jenny Harries, PHE’s regional director for the south of England, told a press conference on Sunday: “We have learnt that there has been a limited contamination in both the Mill pub and in Zizzi restaurant in Salisbury. Police have confirmed that Skripal and his daughter were in Salisbury city centre by 1.30pm. It is not known if they walked from his home or whether they drove or were driven in. Skripal and his daughter strolled around Salisbury and visited the Zizzi restaurant on Castle Street and the nearby Mill pub. They are believed to have been in Zizzi for about 40 minutes from 2.30pm. A CCTV camera at Snap Fitness in Market Walk captured two people initially thought to be Skripal and his daughter. The woman appeared to be carrying a red handbag. Later it became clear the pair were probably not the Russian and his daughter. Police have been keen to speak to the couple. The same camera caught personal trainer Freya Church. She turned left out of the gym and in front of her saw Skripal and the woman on a bench at the Maltings shopping centre. She said the woman had passed out and the man was behaving strangely. Church walked on. Footage that emerged on Friday from a local business showed that people were still strolling casually through Market Walk. A member of the public dialled 999. The Friday footage shows an emergency vehicle racing through the pedestrianised arcade shortly after 4.15pm. A paramedic also ran through. Police and paramedics worked on the couple at the scene for almost an hour in ordinary uniforms. The woman was airlifted to hospital; Skripal was taken by road. Images taken by a passerby show that officers were still clearly unaware of the severity of the situation. They did not have specialist protective clothing and members of the public also strolled nearby. Police told Salisbury Journal they were investigating a possible drug-related incident. At about this time officers identified Skripal and his daughter and by Sunday evening they were at his home – in normal uniform or street clothes. At some point DS Nick Bailey, now seriously ill in hospital, visited the Skripal house, but it is not known where he was contaminated. Officers donned protective suits to examine the bench and surrounding areas. Officers were hosing themselves down. It was not until the next day that  a major incident was declared. “The immediate risk to the general public on the evidence we have remains low … The news today doesn’t alter the general risk at all.” Harries said exposure could have a heightened quick effect, but there was also a risk of low repetitive exposure, which was why PHE issued the advice, which she described as “highly precautionary”. Asked about the delay in issuing the notice, Harries insisted it had been done in a timely fashion when the contamination was known about. “We work with our colleagues here on a continuous risk assessment basis,” she said. “When we get new information, we continuously risk assess groups of people who may have become exposed, from the evidence we have in front of us. “As new evidence becomes available, we act on that immediately. “Most people who will have been at the pub will have washed the clothes they were in. The immediate risk – we’re not anticipating, on our current evidence, seeing new patients coming forward.” Cara Charles-Barks, the chief executive of Salisbury NHS foundation trust, told the assembled journalists that Skripal and his daughter Yulia remain in a critical but stable condition. DS Nick Bailey, who was taken ill after attending the scene of the crime, is in a serious but stable condition, she said. Kier Pritchard of Wiltshire police said Bailey was talking and engaging. The PHE statement said: “While there is no immediate health risk to anyone who may have been in either of these locations, it is possible, but unlikely, that any of the substance which has come into contact with clothing or belongings could still be present in minute amounts and therefore contaminate your skin. Over time, repeated skin contact with contaminated items may pose a small risk to health.” It recommends reducing the risks in several ways. “Wash the clothing that you were wearing in an ordinary machine using your regular detergent at the temperature recommended for the clothing “Any items which cannot be washed, and which would normally be dry cleaned, should be put in two plastic bags tied at the top and stored safely in your own home. “Wipe personal items such as phones, handbags and other electronic items with cleansing or baby wipes and dispose of the wipes in the bin (ordinary domestic waste disposal).“Other items such as jewellery and spectacles which cannot go in the washing machine or be cleaned with cleansing or baby wipes should be hand washed with warm water and detergent and then rinsed with clean, cold water.” Skripal and his daughter ate in the restaurant hours before they were found unconscious last Sunday. On Monday, Wiltshire police said the restaurant, on Castle Street, had been closed as a precaution, and it remains cordoned off. The home secretary, Amber Rudd, has said police have identified more than 240 witnesses and 200 pieces of evidence. The Ministry of Defence said armed forces personnel would return to Salisbury to assist for a third day on Sunday.