José Mourinho praised his team’s intensity in recovering from two goals down against Crystal Palace but conceded their late victory was a “fantastic comeback with mistakes”. The United manager was in magnanimous mood after Nemanja Matic’s strike from 30 yards secured a 3-2 win at Selhurst Park. As well as celebrating his players, he was full of praise for Palace and Roy Hodgson, something that came as scant consolation to his counterpart. “It was a fantastic comebacks but with mistakes,” Mourinho said. “We started bad once more. Not pressing the ball, not pressing the opposition and giving them too much space. Then they scored the goal. In the second half we conceded again, a goal to show kids in academies around the country that top teams can concede silly goals. “But after that the attitude was fantastic, and the intensity, the quality, the dynamic. You need luck to win in the last minute but I say we deserved it because our domination in the last half hour was huge. I have to recognise Palace did very well. Roy was aggressive, very clever. He tried to bring the emotion of the game to his team. Congratulations to them. It’s very hard for them to go home without a single point because they gave absolutely everything but don’t get to go home with a single point.” For Hodgson the only emotion that he felt after the game, he said, was “sadness”. “I saw a group of players give their all for the club against a team who on paper are bigger than us. I can’t criticise any player or any person for the effort they made or their discipline tactically,” he said. “If Matic doesn’t score a worldie I’d have been sitting here saying what a good performance, what a good point. But any analysis builds backwards from the result.” Hodgson looked like all the emotion had drained from him after this match but now must raise his team again for a visit to Chelsea. “The next game is just as difficult playing the reigning champions and the 11 who played today are the 11 I have fit,” he said. “I don’t need convincing that this team has qualities and enormous fighting spirit. Perhaps some of these fortunate moments will fall our way as the season goes on. But whether you’re in relegation or just out of it the focus is on the same: getting points.”