Napoli ceded control of the Serie A title race to reigning champions Juventus after failing to beat Inter at San Siro. Maurizio Sarri’s Azzurri led the table by a point on Sunday morning but were deposed when Juve defeated Udinese 2-0 in the afternoon. Three points from their evening trip to Milan would have restored Napoli’s status as front-runners for the Scudetto, which they have not won since 1990, but Inter held firm to force a goalless draw. Following Juve’s dramatic Wembley comeback against Tottenham in the Champions League, spirits were still high and Paulo Dybala opened the scoring against Udinese with his free-kick in the 20th minute. Gonzalo Higuain missed a 38th-minute penalty that had been won by Dybala but the latter cheered up his fellow Argentinian by sweeping in his assist for a second goal shortly after the break. Fiorentina paid emotional tributes to their captain Davide Astori before and during their 1-0 win over Benevento at Stadio Artemio Franchi. The Florence side were playing their first game since Astori died suddenly in his sleep at the team hotel last week. Fans unveiled banners in Astori’s honour and players warmed up in shirts bearing his name and number, while the match was halted in the 13th minute for a sustained round of applause. Paris Saint-Germain bounced back from their Champions League defeat by Real Madrid by trouncing Ligue 1’s bottom side, Metz, 5-0. The last-16 exit has led to speculation about Unai Emery’s future but they continued their march towards another domestic title. Christopher Nkunku made it three goals in two games with a double while Thomas Meunier, Kylian Mbappé and Thiago Silva also found the net. PSG had to wait less than five minutes for the opening goal, Meunier finding the bottom corner after Mbappé’s shot was blocked. Nkunku then struck twice in nine minutes and Mbappé made it four before half-time, with Thiago heading in a late fifth to complete a resounding win that restored PSG’s 14-point lead at the top. Metz are now eight points adrift at the bottom after Lille secured a morale-boosting point with a 1-1 draw against Montpellier. Nicolas Pépé put Lille ahead in the 41st minute but Jérôme Roussillon equalised after 64 minutes. Robert Lewandowski hit a hat-trick as Bayern Munich restored their 20-point lead at the top of the Bundesliga with a comfortable 6-0 victory over Hamburg. In Hamburg’s last three league visits to the Allianz Arena Bernd Hollerbach’s side had shipped 21 goals and Franck Ribéry set up another difficult afternoon with a tap-in on eight minutes. Lewandowski hit a quickfire double to put the hosts 3-0 up inside 18 minutes before Arjen Robben curled in a shot after the restart. A stunning solo goal from Ribéry moved Bayern 5-0 clear before Lewandowski blazed over a late penalty, only for the Poland international to slot home a second spot-kick in the 90th minute to seal his treble and landmark 100th Bundesliga goal for the Bavarian club. Hamburg, who have competed in every season of the Bundesliga, remain seven points from a safe position after Wolfsburg fell to a 3-0 defeat at Hoffenheim. Goals by Nico Schulz, Serge Gnabry and an own goal from Josuha Guilavogui helped Hoffenheim seal all three points.