The European Union has responded to Donald Trump’s threat of a trade war by warning that it will retaliate with tariffs on a range of US imports including peanut butter, cranberries and orange juice. Reacting to the threat from the US president of 25% tariffs on steel imports and 10% on aluminium, European commissioner for trade Cecilia Malmström said on Wednesday the EU was finalising its own list of American exports that could face sanctions, including steel, industrial and agricultural products. However, Malmström also said the EU still hoped to avoid a full blown trade war, despite the escalating rhetoric between the US and its main global trading partners in recent days. “A trade war has no winners and if it does not happen for the better, then we can work with our American friends and other allies on the core issue of this problem, overcapacity,” she told reporters at a press conference in Brussels. “But if it does happen we will have to take measures to protect European jobs.” Malmström, a veteran of trade talks with the US, said she was eager to avoid an escalation in the war of words between Washington and Brussels over tariffs, saying: “We do not want this to go out of proportion.” But she said the EU needs to have “rebalancing” measures ready, to safeguard the EU economy and protect jobs. “We cannot just stay silent when such a major measure could be taken to the EU economy,” she said. She said a provisional list of US products that could face EU tariffs is being drawn up and will be published after consultation with member states. “Certain types of bourbon are on the list, as are other items such peanut butter, cranberries, orange juice,” she added. “Very soon that list will be public, so you will be able to plan your whisky drinking.” Donald Tusk, the president of the European council, also weighed in urging “politicians on both sides of the Atlantic to act responsibly”. EU leaders would discuss the trade dispute during a summit at the end of March in Brussels where a “proportionate response” would be discussed. “We should have a clear objective in mind: to keep world trade alive,” Tusk said. Trump announced last week in a tweet that he intended to use his powers to impose tariffs on steel and aluminium, honouring a campaign pledge to support domestic smoke stack industries. He later went further by saying this could be extended to European cars following threats from EU officials of counter-measures against US imports such as Harley-Davidson motorbikes, Levi’s jeans and Kentucky bourbon whiskey. Prime minister Theresa May told Trump in a phone conversation that she was concerned about the plan to increase tariffs, saying there were other ways of coping with an over-supply of cheap raw materials entering the US. Trump’s move triggered the resignation of his chief economic adviser Gary Cohn, a former Goldman Sachs banker who supports free trade, late on Tuesday. Following Cohn’s decision to become the latest White House aide to quit, the president earned a rebuke from Paul Ryan, the Republican leader in the House of Representatives, who said he was “extremely worried” about the plan. The threat of trade barriers prompted a sell-off on the Dow Jones Industrial index, which is down almost 2,000 points since January from a record high of 26,616. Investors sold heavily again on Wednesday following Malmström’s statement, with the Dow Jones index down about 300 point and just over 1% by 6pm (GMT). The dollar fell against the yen and euro as foreign exchange traders calculated that US firms would be hit by the extra cost of raw materials, while the pound also fell amid concerns that Britain’s open economy would be badly hit in a trade war. But Trump won plaudits from unlikely quarters in Congress and among trade unions. Senator Bob Casey of Pennsylvania, a Democrat who has called for Trump to resign, said in a tweet: “I urge the administration to follow through and to take aggressive measures to ensure our workers can compete on a level playing field.” US Steel, backed by the United Steelworkers’ union, said it would reopen a mothballed facility in Granite City, Illinois, which it said had closed following “unending waves of unfairly traded steel products that have flooded US markets”.