When Russell Norman put together a proposal to write a cookbook about Venice – his favourite city, one he’s visited more than 100 times, and the inspiration for his popular Polpo restaurants – his first thought was: no one’s going to fall for this. Why? “Because it sounded like I wanted to go on a jolly for 14 months,” he laughs when we meet for tea in Soho, just around the corner from the original Polpo on Beak Street. “I wanted to discover the true culinary heart of Venice over four seasons. The only way I could do that, I said in the proposal, was by living there, as a Venetian, for at least a year and writing the book in real time.” The publisher thought it sounded like a great idea. Norman’s wife Jules was less convinced. “I hadn’t discussed it with her,” he says, frowning. “It caused a bit of tension, quite understandably. The way I got round that – not that I completely got round it – was to come back home every week or 10 days and then fly my family out there on school holidays and half-terms.” Approval granted, he rented a small apartment in the relatively untouristy Castello neighbourhood – in the same building where he’d stayed on his first visit to Venice in 1986 – and set about observing his neighbours. Not satisfied with jotting down a few classic recipes, Norman wanted to go to the market every morning like Mrs Povinelli next door, then build the day’s cooking and eating around its various delights – moeche crabs in March, castraure artichokes in late April, radicchio in October. This did involve some rather stalkerish behaviour, but he says the neighbours welcomed his interest in the contents of their shopping trolleys, often inviting him into their homes to watch them cook bovoletti snails, or risi e bisi on the Feast of St Mark. Spending time with locals also heightened Norman’s sense of the pressures Venice faces from tourism. “There’s no getting away from the fact that it’s a tourist destination,” he says. “But sustainable tourism is very different to the more damaging type”, which Norman associates with Airbnb and daytrippers on “the huge cruise ships that come down the Giudecca canal blotting out the sun”. The book, he hopes, advocates for a more sensitive approach to the city. Norman estimates a third of the recipes came from his neighbours, a third from friendly restaurateurs, and a third from his own experiments in his tiny kitchen in Castello – though he’s quick to point out that many of his eureka moments turned out to be slight variations on dishes that some other lagoon-dweller came up with 500 years ago. As for his Venice obsession, 14 months of recipe hunting hasn’t cured it: he already has his next trip planned and booked. Much has been written about umami, that mysterious fifth flavour which sits alongside the more familiar sweet, sour, bitter and salty. It’s not as easy to define as the famous four, but most of us can identify it when we taste it. It contributes unctuousness, roundness and mouthfeel when it is present and usually makes you want to eat more. Parmesan cheese is one of its best-known exponents, so its ubiquity in Italian cooking is unsurprising; it makes just about everything taste better. What is unusual is to see parmesan as a main ingredient. This risotto requires really excellent quality aged cheese, so do buy the best you can afford. Serves 4chicken stock 1.5 litres butter 75g white onion 1 large, very finely chopped flaky sea saltcarnaroli rice 350g dry vermouth a small glass parmesan 150g, excellent quality, aged, finely grated Heat the stock in a large pan at the back of the stove and keep it simmering, ladle at the ready. Melt half the butter in a large, heavy-bottomed pan over a medium heat and add the onion with a few pinches of salt. Sauté until glossy and translucent, turning frequently with a wooden spoon, then add the rice. Make sure each grain is coated and the onion and rice are fully incorporated. Now, pour in the vermouth, enjoy the pungent cloud of boozy steam, and when the liquid has almost all evaporated, add one ladle of stock and stir. Repeat this for 15 minutes, carefully adding the stock a small ladleful at a time, never allowing the rice to fully dry out but not waterlogging it either. When the rice is almost done, but still has a bit of bite (test a grain between your front teeth), add a final splash of stock, the remaining butter, and turn up the heat. Stir vigorously for 30 seconds and remove from the stove. Add most of the parmesan, stir once or twice, and cover. Rest for a full minute before serving on warm plates. Scatter over the remaining parmesan and garnish with a twist of black pepper. Frittata is rarely eaten hot, and it is only by leaving it to cool or eating it cold from the fridge the following day that you get to appreciate the gently firm but yielding texture which is such an important aspect of the dish. This one with prawns and dill is perfect for lunch on a sunny day. For 4extra virgin olive oilonion 1 small, peeled and sliced prawns 120g small, cooked and peeledflaky sea saltwhole milkeggs 4 medium, beatendill a small handful freshly ground black pepper Heat a glug of olive oil in a smallish non-stick frying pan (all-metal, no plastic handles for this recipe please) over a low heat. Sauté the onion for 8 minutes, until soft and translucent. Add the prawns with a good pinch of salt and stir a few times to coat them in the oil and incorporate with the onions. Put a splash of milk in with the beaten eggs and pour everything into the pan. Stir in the dill. Preheat the grill. Leave the pan on a low heat for about 10 minutes, until the frittata is mostly solid, but the top surface is still a little liquid and pale. Put the pan under the grill until the top is golden brown. Remove carefully using oven gloves – the handle may be very hot – and allow to cool. Turn on to a plate and serve warm, in quarters, with a twist of black pepper and a crunchy salad, or put it into the fridge to serve cold the next day with a pinch of flaky sea salt. As a seafaring nation, 13th-century Venice had to devise ways of feeding its sailors often several days or weeks after they had set sail. The technique of preserving lightly fried sardines in vinegar with the addition of sautéed onion and dried fruit and nuts is a wonderful example of necessity as the mother of invention. In one neat package, most of the essential food groups are covered, including, crucially for sailors, onions: high in vitamin C and perfect for keeping scurvy at bay. The dish is extremely tasty and it is still made exactly the same way today. Most fish can be prepared in this style, from sardines to mackerel, prawns to the slip soles here. The dish tastes better after a few days and is always eaten at room temperature. Serves 4, as a starterslip sole fillets 8 small, skinned ‘00’ flour 200g extra virgin olive oilflaky sea saltwhite onions 4 large, sliced raisins a small handful pine nuts a small handful caster sugar 50g white wine vinegar a glass white wine a glass freshly ground black pepper Make sure the slip soles are cleaned and dried, dredge them in flour, then lay them in a very large frying pan in which you have heated 2cm of olive oil over a high flame. Fry for 2 minutes or so, turning them once or twice, until they are nicely golden brown. Rest the fried soles on kitchen paper and sprinkle generously with salt while they are hot. Using the same pan, turn the heat down to low to medium, add a splash more olive oil if necessary, and gently sauté the onions for 15 minutes, until translucent and soft but without browning them at all. Add the raisins, pine nuts and sugar and stir a few times. Now pour in the vinegar and the white wine, and turn the heat up to allow the mixture to bubble for a few minutes. When the onions look glossy and yield when pressed with a wooden spoon, remove from the heat and allow to cool a little. Lay 4 of the soles in the bottom of a large, pretty serving dish (preferably one for which you have a lid). Pour over just under half the onion mixture, to cover the fish. Now lay the last 4 soles on top and finish by pouring over and layering the remaining onion mix so that the fish are fully covered. Add a twist of black pepper, put the lid on, and leave in the fridge for 24 to 48 hours. Make sure you remove the dish from the fridge half an hour before you are ready to serve. Traditionally eaten with a slice of grilled polenta. My favourite way to start making this spring classic is to put a small table and a chair on the balcony overlooking the washing lines along the street, and sit in the sun to pod all the peas and shell all the broad beans. I always try very hard not to eat all the peas raw, straight from the pod, and will often buy more than I need to compensate for my lack of willpower.If you see baby spring leeks at the greengrocer, buy a couple of those, too, wash and slice them and put them into the pan with the onion. This is delicious on a hot day served at room temperature, perhaps as an accompaniment to a simply grilled fillet of sea bream. Serves 4baby artichokes 8, trimmed of hard outer leaves and woody stalkfresh baby broad beans 1kg in their pods, to yield 250g beanschard 300g, chopped roughly extra virgin olive oilgood butter a large knob white onion 1 large, peeled and finely choppedchicken stock 350ml fresh peas 1kg in their pods, podded to yield 500g peasprosciutto 6 thick slices, cut into ribbons mint leaves a large handful, picked and washed flaky sea saltfreshly ground black pepper hat it offers little resistance – and drain. When they have cooled, peel off and discard any hard outer leaves that remain. Trim and peel the stem if still woody, until you reach the tender flesh. Cut each artichoke into quarters and set aside. In a fresh pan of salted boiling water, blanch the broad beans for 2 minutes and remove with a slotted spoon. Now add the chard for a minute or two until it starts to wilt. Drain and set aside. Heat 2 tablespoons of olive oil with the butter in a very large saucepan. Soften the onion for 10 minutes, then add the stock and the peas. Bring to the boil very briefly, then add the prosciutto and reduce to a simmer. Let it all bubble gently for 10 minutes. Add the chard, artichokes and broad beans and simmer again for 8 to 10 minutes. Roughly chop the mint and stir in with a good pinch of salt and a twist of pepper. Taste and adjust the seasoning if necessary, then add a good glug of olive oil, stir a few times and serve on warmed plates with a hunk of crusty bread. My favourite cake shop is Rizzardini near Campo San Polo, run by Paolo and his daughter Marta. The pastries are super, but I tend to go for the little cakes. They have an almond slice I particularly like. Here’s my rather more homely version, perfect with a milky coffee as a morning treat. Serves 8butter for greasingeggs 4 medium caster sugar 150g ground almonds 160g potato flour 40g lemon juice and zest of 1 amaretto 25ml sliced almonds a large handful Grease a 20cm springform cake tin with butter and preheat the oven to 180C/gas mark 4. Separate the eggs, placing the yolks in a very large mixing bowl and the whites in a medium bowl. Add the caster sugar to the yolks and beat until pale and smooth. Now gradually incorporate the ground almonds and flour, the lemon zest, lemon juice and amaretto, beating to create a thick, consistent mixture. Take the bowl of egg whites and whisk them enthusiastically into stiff, fluffy peaks. Now, carefully fold them into the almond mixture and incorporate well. Transfer the mixture into the greased cake tin, evenly scatter the sliced almonds, and place in the oven for 40 to 45 minutes. Test for doneness by pushing a steel skewer into the centre of the cake – it should come out dry. Allow the cake to cool for 10 minutes, then transfer to a wire cake rack. Serve warm with a handful of fresh raspberries as a dessert or with an espresso for a mid-morning indulgence. OFM Venice by Russell Norman (Fig Tree, £26). To order a copy for £22, go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846.