Kagiso Rabada ripped through Australia, stoking the animosity between the teams on the way as South Africa bowled out the tourists out for 243 on day one of the second Test on Friday. Rabada took five wickets in 18 balls in a blistering spell just before and after tea at Port Elizabeth, sending the Australians slumping from 161 for three. They were saved from a worse fate when Tim Paine made 36 and put on 61 with Australia’s last two batsmen. Rabada took three of his wickets in an over and removed Australian batsmen with the last ball before tea and first ball after it to suddenly turn the tide in the home team’s favour. The quick bowler may also have added to the ill-feeling between the teams, which came to a head with a confrontation last weekend between Australia’s David Warner and South Africa’s Quinton de Kock on a staircase near the dressing rooms in the first test at Durban. After dismissing Steve Smith on Friday in Port Elizabeth, Rabada appeared to intentionally bump into the Australia captain with his shoulder during his follow-through. The incident has the potential to be punished with a ban for Rabada, possibly for the rest of the series. South Africa were 39 for one after batting through 12 overs at the end of the day, losing first-Test century-maker Aiden Markram for 11. Rabada, following up on his bowling heroics, helped South Africa to the close with 17 not out as nightwatchman. Warner, under scrutiny following the incident with De Kock in the first game, made 63 at the top of the order only for Australia to slip up badly in the second session, when they lost five wickets for 72 having been 98-1 at lunch. Bancroft fell on the brink of the interval for 38. Usman Khawaja (4), Warner, Smith (25), Shaun Marsh (24) and Mitchell Marsh (4) were out after lunch. Rabada came back after the break to immediately remove Pat Cummins, and followed up with the wicket of Mitchell Starc for figures of five for 96. His fellow pacemen Lungi Ngidi picked up three wickets and Vernon Philander two. The Australia vice-captain Warner was the centre of attention in the series opener in Durban after his ugly confrontation with De Kock. Both players received fines and disciplinary sanctions from the International Cricket Council. Four days on, the fallout from the Warner-de Kock affair continued, with the Cricket Australia chief executive James Sutherland releasing a statement before play reminding the Australian players they needed to behave. The match referee, Jeff Crowe, also called the captains and managers to a meeting on the eve of the second Test in an attempt to calm the situation. Warner’s and de Kock’s confrontation was not the only heated moment in the opening Test, which was characterised by an aggressive fielding display by Australia and verbal exchanges between the teams that carried on off the field.Warner was back in the spotlight straightaway on the first day at St George’s Park, coming through a tricky opening spell when the tourists scored only 18 runs in the first 13 overs after winning the toss and choosing to bat. They picked up after that measured start, with Warner accelerating by hitting nine fours. South Africa made an important breakthrough when Warner was bowled by Ngidi to follow Khawaja back to the dressing rooms after lunch. Smith and Shaun Marsh put on 44 before Rabada’s day-changing spell, when Australia crumbled from 161 for three to 182 for eight. Rabada had Smith and Shaun Marsh out lbw, with both failing with reviews, while Mitchell Marsh was caught behind by de Kock attempting an expansive drive at an inopportune moment just before the tea break. Cummins also edged behind and Starc was clean bowled, with Rabada also aiming a comment at the Australian as he left the field.