Knife-crime injuries are on the rise because people are being stabbed more often. It’s not much of an explanation: any police chief would be ridiculed for it. It certainly doesn’t justify the rise, or point towards possible solutions. It basically restates the issue in a slightly different way. Yet when it comes to gender pay gaps, exposed by new requirements to publish the difference between average male and female hourly rates, employers are giving us just this kind of response. The reason for the hefty divides, they say, is that senior roles are dominated by men. That does not explain the problem; that is the problem. They are not recruiting or promoting women to top jobs, and in many cases are relying on them to do the lowest-paid work. Executives are worrying the numbers look bad. I’m afraid it’s worse than that, chaps: they are bad If employers were in genuine ignorance as to how they treated their workers, these figures were an opportunity to educate themselves. Instead, many seem in denial. Several bleat that they pay men and women the same for equivalent work. This has been the law for almost 50 years, though it’s still not met in full. It’s like expecting praise for paying their tax or filing yearly accounts. In fairness, these firms are doing better than most just by revealing their gaps. Organisations with more than 250 employees must publish the information annually – but two-thirds have yet to do so, with the first deadline less than a fortnight away. They include many FTSE 100 companies. Perhaps they don’t see it as important. Perhaps they hope their results will go unnoticed among all the last-minute filings. Perhaps they don’t plan to file the figures at all. Executives are worrying the numbers look bad. I’m afraid it’s worse than that, chaps: they are bad. And the attempts to account for them are pretty terrible too. Company statements provide compelling evidence of a new law of physics. Call it Eve’s principle: the greater the pay gap, the greater the mental resistance. So the British Heart Foundation, which slightly favours women in median terms, sets out a plan to reduce its mean gap of 7.7%. The University of Cambridge, where the median gap is 15% (still below the national average of 18.1%), says it is not closing the divide fast enough and needs to do more. Now compare with Phase Eight – a womenswear firm, of all things – where the 44 men among its 1,754 employees are so heavily concentrated at the top that the mean gap stands at 64.8%, and median at 54.5%. “While on first glance our published gender pay gap figures suggest the average man has a higher hourly rate of pay than the average female, this is misleading and does not reflect the true story and culture within the Phase Eight business,” says the CEO. The pay gap figures do not suggest this. They prove it – however many times you look. If that doesn’t truly reflect Phase Eight’s culture, maybe it should do more to close the divide. Implicit in explaining away these findings is the idea that this is all society’s fault, as if society is not composed of individuals and institutions making choices every day, and as if wild variations across the same sectors are born of the unique, unshiftable requirements of one particular firm. That surely can’t explain how easyJet and Tui have median gaps of more than 45%, but British Airways only around 10%. Social change will be part of the solution. Supporting fathers better, including through improved paternal leave rights, would allow more women to take a step up in the workplace. But there are plenty of things that companies can do by themselves. And some of them are already doing so. The easyJet and Tui pay gaps exist in large part because almost all their pilots are male. But Tui, where only 5% of pilots are female, makes vague promises of improvements in its statement – while easyJet, which had 4% two years ago, is already on course to a 13% target and aims for 20% by 2020. So implement and promote family-friendly policies. Give managers unconscious bias training. (Phase Eight does, at least, do or promise to do both of these.) Recognise that not every job must be done a certain way just because it always has been: the gap across full-time workers is far smaller than when part-time workers are included. Use blind CVs and balance interview panels. Set clear and fair criteria for success. Reach out to diverse candidates – from across ethnic and class backgrounds too – and promote your industry in schools and communities; BA’s programmes encourage girls to think about training as a pilot or an engineer. Try “reverse mentoring”, as Ernst & Young does, with young women helping to shift bosses’ attitudes. While you’re at it, ask yourself if your top staff should be earning so much and other workers so little. In many cases, the gender pay gap reflects the absurd and unhealthy gulf that has opened up between those at the top and bottom of companies. None of these is a solution in itself; all of them would help. They should not be beyond the wit of all these highly paid executives. But if they prove too challenging, let’s offer some outside help. That means punishing those who fail to comply, and shaming those with the worst records. The equalities watchdog should publish sectoral and regional breakdowns, and ask the worst offenders for clear, enforceable action plans with numerical targets. Some bosses hope these figures are the end of the story. The smart ones understand that they should be the start. Enough excuses. Get working on the solutions. • Tania Branigan is a Guardian leader writer