Is Italy’s failure a one-off or the start of something more long-term? Neil Morris: The wrong coach was hired and everything after that was inevitable. This was about incompetence at the top and that’s where the rebuilding needs to start. Luca Hodges-Ramon: Italy’s failure to qualify represented a nadir in what has been a pretty dismal decade. Barring performances at Euro 2012 and 2016 (the latter was in large part down to the brilliance of Antonio Conte), the era has been one of bad decision-making from the top down, which culminated in the hiring of Giampiero Ventura and the FIGC’s inertia when it was clear Ventura needed firing. Blair Newman: This was a huge shock but, as bad as Italy were, they only lost out in a play-off to an extremely well-organised Sweden side. That defeat was the culmination of something that started while Conte was in charge. He did an excellent job, but he also ignored a huge amount of talent, particularly young and inexperienced players. His tactics at Euro 2016 papered over the cracks in an ageing and poor squad, which made the transition really hard for his successor, Ventura, to manage. Emmet Gates: It’s a one-off. They failed to qualify for Euro 92 and came back to make it to the final of USA 94. Giorgio Chiellini says the art of defending is being ruined. Is this a problem for Italy? Emmet: As Chiellini himself noted, all defenders (and goalkeepers) are now expected to play the ball. When I see Caldara, Rugani, Romagnoli and so on, I don’t see a new Chiellini, a new Claudio Gentile, a new Ciro Ferrara. I see a lot of Alessandro Nestas, which is hardly a bad thing, but every smooth Nesta needs a Chiellini beside him. Neil: This is part of a vicious circle. Because defenders such as Chiellini have perfected their art, others teams have been forced to adapt and play another way. As a result, the game has changed and the art of defending has become more intricate. It is now up to Italian defenders to embrace that challenge – thankfully the younger generation are doing so. Blair: Because of the way tactics have changed, today’s defenders have to be good on the ball, drive forward and pick a pass. It’s surprising to hear Chiellini bemoaning this as he’s proficient in these skills. Young Italian defenders may not have his aggression, but that doesn’t mean Italy is losing its defensive nous. Alessio Romagnoli, Mattia Caldara, Daniele Rugani are all under 24 and they can fill the void when Chiellini and Leonardo Bonucci join Andrea Barzagli in international retirement. Is Italy’s failure to reach the World Cup down to a decline in talent production? Blair: Italy still produces top talent, but it’s irrelevant if their path to the national team is blocked by tacticians with rigid ideas. Hopefully their next manager will be more open-minded. Emmet: Italy has stuttered in producing world-class players, especially in the No10 position. Where is the new Baggio or Totti? The country has some of the highest rising obesity levels in Europe, which suggests younger generations aren’t playing football as much as they did, say, 30 years ago. And the kids who do play are conditioned to get results rather than develop their creativity and innovation. Italy needs to overhaul its footballing ethos. Only in Italy could Rino Gattuso, as hard-working as he was, gain more caps than Roberto Baggio. Neil: There was enough talent to qualify and they may have avoided Spain in the group had they taken their friendly schedule more seriously. There has been a dip in talent but there are reasons to be excited about the next generation coming through. Luca: Italy’s youth teams (and current squad) have promising youngsters breaking through: Gianluigi Donnarumma, Lorenzo Pellegrini, Roberto Gagliardini, Bryan Cristante, Chiesa, Caldara, Rugani, Cutrone, Belotti and plenty of others. But at the same time, Italy’s talent pool has undeniably dwindled since their last Word Cup victory in 2006. Are foreign players in Serie A hampering the development of Italian youngsters? Luca: People looked for an easy explanation when Italy failed to qualify and, mirroring the current socio-political environment in the country, some impulsively decided to blame foreigners for blocking the path of Italian youngsters. There is a debate to be had here but I fear ignorance and intolerance cloud some people’s judgement. Quotas on foreign players is not the answer – although youth academies need much more investment as they are very underfunded when compared, for example, to their Spanish counterparts. Emmet: If they were good enough, they’d play. Italy had a wealth of talent in the 1990s when Serie A housed the world’s greatest players, to such an extent that they left out Gianluca Vialli and Roberto Mancini for USA 94, Baggio and Beppe Signori for Euro 96, Gianfranco Zola and Fabrizio Ravanelli for France 98. Neil: Last year 52% of players in Serie A were foreign. Compare that to 56.1% in Portugal (who won Euro 2016) and 53% in Germany (who won the 2014 World Cup) and you see the argument does not stack up. Foreign players make up 64% of the Premier League yet England qualified easily. Is caretaker boss Luigi Di Biagio the best option going forward? Luca: Carlo Ancelotti would not only bring a wealth of experience and tactical nous, but his quiet leadership style would help restore confidence and nurture Italy’s youngsters. Blair: Di Biagio has experience working with the new generation but I wasn’t hugely convinced by his U21 side. Vincenzo Montella could be a good call. He’s not tied to his systems; he’s not dogmatic; and, as he showed at Milan, he’s willing to give young players a chance. Emmet: Ancelotti. He has won the Champions League more times than any manager alive so has nothing to prove at club level. The international arena would suit him perfectly: he’s a cup specialist who can maximise players for short bursts of excellence and he would command respect from every Italian player, something Ventura did not have as he hadn’t won anything as a manager. Which three players will be integral in leading Italy to Euro 2020? Emmet: Marco Verratti, if he leaves the glass ceiling of PSG and develops his abilities; Belotti, who also needs to move on from Torino to grow; and Lorenzo Insigne. Neil: Jorginho will pull the strings in the midfield for many years to come; Insigne is perhaps Italy’s most creative player; and Caldara will emerge, alongside Rugani, as a crucial part of what should be a new-look defence in 2020. Luca: Jorginho can become Italy’s next great midfield conductor; Insigne is one of the few senior squad members with genuine flair; and Rugani will step into Chiellini’s role. Blair: Jorginho is the beating heart of Napoli’s possession game so must start in the deep-lying midfield role; Verratti needs to step up; and Belotti can lead the line. • This is an article from The Gentleman Ultra• Follow Luca, Blair, Emmet and Neil on Twitter