After the ubiquity of unicorns, and a liking for llamas comes a design trend that is a little more grown-up: boobs. Big or small, pert or pendulous, one or two, a celebration of breasts is taking place across fashion and decor. Urban Outfitters has a selection of boob products, including bed linen, glasses and a phone case. You can buy boob prints, and work out with kettle bells with drawings of breasts on. Feel the need to cling on to a giant inflatable tit in the pool? We have just the thing. Smaller companies and artists are also embracing the bosom trend. Pot Yer Tits Away Luv, which Leeds-based artist Emma Low launched last year, makes custom “tit pots”, to “celebrate real bodies and support body neutrality”, made from clay and based on customers’ breasts. Illustrator, Fotini Tikkou, sells a Titties Tote bag, decorated with line drawings of all sorts and shapes of boob, from the asymmetric to the pointy to the single breast. A company based in San Francisco, Gravel & Gold, has been selling breast-adorned products since 2011, starting with a top, until it realised the print worked on everything from pillows to shower curtains. Crucially, these aren’t images of “perfect”, sexualised breasts. The trend for simple line drawings are humorous and friendly, but reflect the diversity of women’s bodies and the growing body-acceptance movement. They can also be feminist and subversive, in the same way the original boob T-shirt – Vivienne Westwood’s version, featuring a printed pair of breasts – was in 1976. A portion of the sales of Femininitees’ T-shirts, with prints of crosses or nipples on the chest, are donated to the US feminist group, National Organization for Women. In April last year, the model and social media titan Kendall Jenner posted a video of herself on Instagram wearing a white T-shirt with a simple line drawing of a pair of breasts, which people took to represent her support for the Free the Nipple movement, which opposes the censorship of women’s bodies. It came from the British company Never Fully Dressed, which launched the T-shirt to raise money for breast cancer charities (now £5 of the £29 price goes to Mind), originating out of a doodle founder and designer Lucy Anne Tighe had done. It really took off, says spokesperson Jemma Parker, in the last year or so, largely thanks to Jenner and is still one of the company’s bestsellers. What is behind the growing popularity of boob merch? “I think it’s about freedom,” says Parker. “It’s around freedom of speech, where women want to promote [movements] such as Free the Nipple. While it originated as a bit of a gimmick, now it has become a statement. I think it’s saying: ‘We’re proud to be women.’”