The nerve agent attack in Salisbury in March 2018 bought chemical weapons to the UK for the first time. Meanwhile in Syria there have been at least eight documented chemical attacksin the past 12 months and of course, most recently the devastating chemical attack on Douma which killed at least 50 people. As we approach the seventh year of this shockingly violent conflict, this war has become synonymous with two distinct and irrefutable crimes against humanity: the use of chemical weapons and the direct targeting of hospitals and medical personnel. In this period there have been over 100 documented uses of chemical weapons by the regime and Isis. The UN’s inspectors, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW), have been called to investigate some attacks, but the Russians have vetoed their activities 10 times to date. Despite Russia’s best efforts to stall the OPCW and clean up the Douma site the OPCW did get on the ground and confirmed this was a chemical attack. I have also investigated a number of attacks, and published the results of our investigation into the attacks on Kafr Zita and Talemenes in April 2014 in the UK’s Daily Telegraph. This unequivocally showed chlorine was used and the regime was responsible. With the same information, the OPCW agreed with this assertion six months later. This cannot be the best we can do, given the instant real time news available across social media. The remaining rebels and 4 million civilians are now corralled and trapped in Idlib province in north-west Syria, which is likely to be the next blood bath and site for further chemical weapon usage unless the west’s warnings of further strikes are heeded by Assad and Putin. There are also worrying stories of Syrian soldiers using sarin in hand grenades to kill people sheltering in tunnels and bunkers, emboldened no doubt by the lack of response to red lines and chemical weapon usage. This low level use of chemical weapons is something never envisaged, I expect, by Nato or the Australian Defence Force and is now a tactic we must be able to counter. We now know that the attack in Salisbury, the ultra-secret and very deadly nerve agent novichok was used. The two Russian suspects we know are Russian military intelligence officers and they brought the novichok from Russia with them two days before the attack. This was developed in the 70s, 80s and 90s at the central Russian military establishment at Shikhany to over-match Nato chemical defence capabilities and avoid detection. It is thought to be 10 times more toxic than VX and very persistent. Probably less than half an egg cup full of agent transfixed the world for two weeks and greatly increased the tensions between the west and Russia. The OPCW were called in to verify the results and produce a report for the consideration of the UN Security Council, which they now have done to confirm the findings of Porton Down scientists. But even more worrying is if Russia intends to revert to chemical weapons as a weapon of mass destruction, which currently the west cannot match or defend against. What if the Salisbury attack had taken place in a mega city like Sydney? Let’s say for a start the Central Business District is cordoned and unusable for six months. Millions terrified to go into the city and a 35% reduction in business takings, with millions of tourists avoiding visiting. The World Heritage site Stonehenge is a few miles from Salisbury, visited by millions each year, but most have been avoiding Salisbury. For Stonehenge, read the Opera House. Sydney very nearly saw a chemical attack last year when UK and Australian security services interdicted jihadists trying to use hydrogen sulphide as a weapon on crowds and jet aircraft. Al Qaeda’s chemical weapons expert and former Mi6 agent, Aimen Dean, has just released his brilliant biography Nine Lives. He has confided to me that the Sydney device is derived from work he did in the 1990s in Afghanistan, described in the book. Most Nato countries, and Australia, have paid lip service to the chemical threat since the end of the cold war, because they believed it had disappeared and, in military parlance, have taken a “capability holiday” with chemical weapon defence. This no doubt all changed with the Salisbury nerve agent attack. Though Russia continues to deny the use of chemical weapons in Syria, in the face of overwhelming evidence, and has actively prevented the UN investigating such allegations, I do not believe they are directly involved in the use in Syria but must be aware of it. The Syrian jets which dropped the nerve agent on Kan Sheikun on 4 April 2017, took off from a Russian air base. Even the most casual observer would have noticed “be-suited” and gas-masked soldiers loading these bombs. What the UK nerve agent attack confirmed was that Russia had only destroyed its “declared” chemical weapons stockpile by 2017, and not its undeclared stockpile of novichoks. It is not anticipated that Russia has thousands of tonnes of these nerve agents, but the fact it has this most deadly of weapons is of great concern to Nato and Australia, especially as novichoks appear to over-match Australia’s chemical defensive capabilities. In the new cold war with Russia, the Australian defence force must be prepared for chemical weapon usage. All have seen how effective chemical weapons have been in Syria and Iraq, especially in fighting in built up areas. If there is conflict between east and west, we must now assume that chemical weapons will be used. This sadly being the case, quite apart from the very real threat of terrorist use, anywhere anytime, Nato countries and Australia need to re-invest in their chemical defence capabilities and be prepared to fight in this “dirty” environment or we could be quickly rolled over by a concerted attack from the east. The Salisbury attack has been a massive neon advertisement to terror groups of the effectiveness of very small amounts of chemical agents in cities to disrupt and terrorise the population. We must ensure we are up to this emerging challenge to protect the likes of Sydney, Melbourne, London and New York. Hamish de Bretton-Gordon is a chemical weapons expert