The dilemma My partner and I have been together for three years, have a child together and are trying for a second. He was married before he met me and his divorce was nasty and dragged on for years. It wasn’t finalised until just after the birth of our child. I desperately want to be married, but he does not. I have told him it’s not a deal-breaker – and it isn’t. Marriage does not make a family and us not being married doesn’t mean we don’t love each other any less. He has said that marriage is a big deal and I should respect the reality of what he’s been through. I can’t really explain why I want it so badly, but I can’t help it. I’ve always wanted to be married, to be a wife, to wear the dress, etc. It eats me up inside that he gave some other woman this commitment but not me, the mother of his child. I feel I’m being selfish and I probably am, but every time the conversation arises I feel hurt. I love this man and want to spend my life with him. Can I have the happily ever after even if we never get married? Mariella replies You know the answer to that. Marriage is no guarantee of future happiness as any bitter divorcee will attest. Outside your partner’s experience you’ll find plenty more examples of the emptiness of the “till death do us part” promise. Like love itself, our desire to make it official doesn’t stand up to rational scrutiny. I’m sure you know plenty of unmarried couples who negotiate their unrestricted union just fine and plenty of married ones who should be separated for their own safety. That doesn’t mean I don’t have sympathy for your cause. At it’s best, getting hitched is about both of you publicly declaring your commitment to each other and, for some of us, that matters a whole lot more than it probably should. As with religion, an institution like marriage relies on our insecurities for its survival. The fact it’s available as a choice to be made, or a goal to be achieved, has the effect of making us covet marital status. Your partner has experienced the worst of this romantic merry-go-round and its aftermath so it would be rather worrying if he was eager to return to that situation. That doesn’t mean he’s in the right, just that his reaction is understandable. As I’m sure you’ve reminded him, it’s not the institution of marriage that broke up his last relationship but whatever incompatibilities or issues he and his ex failed to resolve. Much as I don’t approve of our blind devotion to a perhaps outmoded way of getting the world to respect our relationship, neither do I believe it has disruptive powers unless we bring them with us. You need a better reason than competing with his ex-wife You have every right to feel undervalued, not by his preference not to marry again at present but by him telling you that it’s because it’s a “big deal”! I’m sure he meant it benignly, but there is something irksome about a partner suggesting that publicly swearing eternal devotion is a bigger hurdle than having a child together. You are jointly responsible for a new life and if that’s not the biggest deal, then he’s got his priorities misplaced. His excuse for not offering you a ceremony, the illusion of security and, more importantly, the rights, inheritance and everything else that come with “tying the knot” (interesting language in that metaphor) is not convincing. What you can do about his intransigence is another matter. Understanding your own motives would be a good place to start. Your reasons for wanting to be married are as irrational as his are for not. I suspect that approaching the topic more logically might give you a better hearing. You need to close that distance between you with some sensible thinking. This isn’t a competition between you and his ex wife – you’ve already won that battle conclusively by becoming a family, so stop comparing your situation to hers. The more you make your heart’s desire sound like a calculated move to gain territory on your opponent, the less appealing it sounds – particularly to someone who has run the gamut of love turned sour. Slipping a ring on a lover’s finger is the easiest expression of devotion to enact; bringing another life into the world and living up to your role as a parent, one of the hardest. If it’s commitment you feel you’re being denied, then look at your child’s face. There’s no greater manifestation of love than choosing to make a baby together. I suspect your problem may just be one of timing. It has only been three years and it sounds like a large part of your time together has been taken up with a bitter divorce battle followed by your pregnancy. That’s quite a lot to be preoccupied with. Why don’t you try to enjoy the fact you’ve found each other and focus on the family you are building. If you genuinely mean it isn’t a deal-breaker, then don’t make it one. Life is long and everything is up for grabs – just not always at the moment we desire it. If confirming responsibilities in the eyes of the law is partly your motivation, there’s always a civil partnership. If it’s white lace you’re chasing (thanks Joni M), then you need a better reason to pursue it than to achieve equal status with his ex-wife. If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1