Two works by Van Dyck, the artist favoured by Charles I for his unfailingly flattering portraits of the short, bandy-legged king, are to be auctioned for the first time in almost a century. The portraits are of the Stuart king’s eldest children, the 11-year-old Prince of Wales, who would become Charles II, and his nine-year-old sister Mary, who would become mother of the future king William III. Estimated to fetch between £2.6m to £3.8m combined, they are among the highlights of Sotheby’s Old Master evening sale in London on 5 December, and are being sold from a private collection. They are among the very last works that Van Dyck painted for his royal patron, and were completed shortly before the artist’s death in December 1641 at the age of 42. It is possible that they are the portraits listed as the Prince and the Princess which were recorded as being among the possessions left in the artist’s studio in Blackfriars, London, on his death. The Portrait of Charles II when Prince of Wales (estimate £2m-£3m) depicts the future monarch standing in armour with the ribbon of the Garter, with his left hand on the hilt of his sword and his right on the head of a stick. The Portrait of Mary, Princess Royal and Princess of Orange (estimate £600,000-£800,000), was painted shortly after her marriage, aged nine, to Prince Willem of Orange. Van Dyck’s royal patron would survive him for just eight years before being executed for treason outside the Banqueting House in Whitehall on 30 January 1649. Alex Bell, co-chairman of Sotheby’s Old Masters department, said: “Van Dyck was responsible for creating enduring images of Charles I and his court, and in these exceptionally well-preserved portraits of his two eldest children we see the artist use his painterly skill to acknowledge both the youth and the status of his royal subjects. “The tumultuous history of the Stuart court has always captured people’s imagination and with the additional interest sparked by the fascinating exhibitions in London this year, it is particularly timely for these royal portraits, which are extremely rare to the market, to come up for sale.”