“Did that woman in the elevator save America?” The question, tweeted on Friday by Democratic political aide Emmy Bengtson, was a reference to a survivor of sexual assault who confronted Republican Senator Jeff Flake in a lift and spoke her truth. It might just possibly have been a turning point on another day of drama and chaos on Capitol Hill. Republicans on the Senate judiciary committee had decided to press ahead with a vote on Brett Kavanaugh, nominated by Donald Trump for the supreme court, after Thursday’s epic hearing over Christine Blasey Ford’s allegations that Kavanaugh sexually assaulted her when they were teenagers. Kavanaugh vehemently denied the accusation. In the morning it emerged that former president George W Bush has been advocating for Kavanaugh with wobbling senators, including Flake, in recent days. Kavanaugh was a former top aide in Bush’s White House. It seemed to have worked. At 9.25am, Flake announced that he would vote to confirm Kavanaugh, virtually guaranteeing that the nomination would advance to the full Senate. Without evidence to corroborate Ford’s story, he explained, “our system of justice affords a presumption of innocence”. Five minutes later, Flake faced the consequences of his decision. On his way to the Senate judiciary committee, he stepped into a lift, only for two survivors of sexual assault to stop the door sliding shut. Ana Maria Archila, 39, warned him: “What you are doing is allowing someone who actually violated a woman to sit on the supreme court.” Maria Gallagher, 23, tearfully challenged the Arizona senator: “I was sexually assaulted and nobody believed me. I didn’t tell anyone, and you’re telling all women that they don’t matter, that they should just stay quiet because if they tell you what happened to them you are going to ignore them.” Trapped in the lift, Flake switched between looking at the women and looking at the floor for nearly two minutes. Gallagher pleaded with him to look her in the eye. “Don’t look away from me,” she said. This visceral moment, captured by TV cameras, appears to have gone some way to pricking Flake’s conscience. At 10am, the meeting of the committee, where Republicans have slim 11-10 majority, got under way. Chairman Chuck Grassley delivered his opening statement, praising Kavanaugh and setting a vote on the nomination at 1.30pm, which was approved by the committee. Several Democrats walked out in protest. Mazie Hirono of Hawaii shouted: “I strongly object! What a railroad job! No, no, NO.” Senators from both sides had their say. Dianne Feinstein, the ranking Democrat, said: “The Republican strategy is no longer ‘attack the victim.’ It is to ignore the victim.” Democrat Patrick Leahy said the committee has lost its independence and become “an arm, and a very weak arm, of the Trump White House.” Republican John Kennedy complained: “In my opinion, this has been an intergalactic freak show. As far as I’m concerned, Congress has hit rock bottom and started to dig.” At 12.17pm, Flake left the room. He was followed by Chris Coons, who shares his concern for the reputation of the Senate, and other Democrats. There were talks behind the scenes. 1.30pm came and went. Something strange was happening. Flake’s seat was still empty. Senator Lindsey Graham was seen shaking his head. Confusion reigned. Finally, at 1.51pm, Flake returned and Grassley gave him the floor. Flake stunned the room by saying that he would only support Kavanaugh if there was a delay of up to a week for a further FBI investigation into Ford’s allegations. “This country’s being ripped apart here... and we’ve got to make sure to do due diligence,” Flake said. “But I think we can have a short pause and make sure the FBI can investigate.” As senators tried to work out the implications, Grassley held the committee vote, which passed along party lines. Republican leaders had resisted such an investigation for nearly two weeks but with Senator Lisa Murkowski endorsing Flake’s view, the party had little choice. At 3:35pm, majority whip John Cornyn announced there will be a supplemental FBI investigation lasting no more than a week. To some observers it was a temporary reprieve after another toxic week that threatens the independence of the supreme court. Michael Beschloss, a presidential historian, told the MSNBC channel: “Jeff Flake could be saving this country from the abyss.” The senator had offered a precious moment of civility and bipartisanship – but only after one of the most important elevator pitches in memory.