Welcome, once again, to the summer of Jos. At five minutes past two, with the skies still bruised and grey, Jos Buttler produced one of those extraordinary shots, where suddenly the basic rules of batting seem to turn a little goofy and sozzled. It came at just the right time too. England had crawled and then cantered their way to 317 for nine in the first innings of this final Test, driven there by Buttler’s resistance alongside Stuart Broad, who batted with tenacity and skill in the morning, only briefly switching into doomed drunken-scarecrow mode just before lunch. Buttler was on 74 and starting to rev through the low gears as Jasprit Bumrah ran in to bowl from the Vauxhall end. As Bumrah’s arm came over Buttler slid his front foot to one side like a man cocking a revolver, waited an extra beat and then whipped his hands through the line of the ball in an exhilarating arc, sending it over long-on with such air the crowd had time to cheer the ball on the way up, on the way down and then to its final landing spot by the OCS stairwell. There was time for another top-edged hook into the crowd before Buttler was last man out. An expertly compiled 89 off 133 balls was enough to drive England into the box seat. And beyond that to confirm the ongoing Buttler Supremacy, six months from Mumbai to Kennington during which he has become English cricket’s biggest global white-ball star; and right now the Test team’s most effective batsman. The numbers are clear on this. If Buttler’s selection looked like a gamble back in May, even an outrage to some given his lack of county cricket, Ed Smith and the selectors are entirely vindicated by the results. Buttler walked off on Saturday with 438 runs in the series. He is averaging 49, almost double every other member of England’s top six. Only Virat Kohli has a better record on either side. Add in Buttler’s returns against Pakistan and this summer he has 599 Test runs at 55 with a strike rate of 65. Buttler also turned 28 on Saturday, still the same disarmingly personable England cricketer, with that quiet, unflustered manner and a look in his eyes that from a distance seems to hit the precise Venn diagram intersection between baby koala bear and serial killer. But Buttler has found something else this summer, surprising perhaps even himself with his hunger for Test-match batting. His adaptability has been most striking, the ability to hit the right tempo, change elements of his stance and his shot selection over by over. Through the morning, Buttler had batted with real caution as the ball wobbled about. It took him 13 overs to get one out the middle to the boundary, Ravindra Jadeja greeted with a spank through backwards point. Sharma was swat-driven past extra cover, the ball skimming across the wicket ends at ankle-snapping speed. Buttler must be horrible to field to there. He hits the ball with such a forceful bottom hand, putting so much spin and fade on it you can probably hear it hissing on its way past. Buttler came walking out on to off-stump to Ishant Sharma and was almost cut in half as the ball was jagged back in response. But the next one was on the same line and Buttler stayed in his crease to rasp it past square-leg. This was Buttler at his best, reading the signs, the tides and the ticks of the bowler, adopting that power-hitting mode he used opening in the IPL where he shifts his front leg out of the way with menacing intent but can still defend or nudge the ball from that position. His fifty came up off 84 balls, with 72% of his runs scored on the offside, 20 of them via that potent low-elbowed cover drive. It was a superbly compact Test innings, periods of calm interspersed with moments of precision brutality from those fast-twitch wrists. At the other end Broad played some astonishing shots of his own, best of all a beautiful back-foot ease down the ground off Mohammed Shami. As lunch approached he became wildly aggressive, producing one glorious flailing scythe over the slips, body falling the other way like a like a dying tree, feet splayed, bat carving the air. You cannot teach that. Broad was well caught by KL Rahul at long-on. Buttler followed soon after, granted an ovation by the crowd. There will be some who see a failure in the fact a player of this sui generis class with the bat has played 24 Test matches aged 28, compared to 232 career T20s from Chittagong to Sydney to Somerset. But this would also be to misread the processes that have led to late‑Buttler. This is a man finding a new way, surfing the currents, finding the best fit for the new forms and his own outrageous talents. And Buttler does seem to have found that balance in his own game to take it apart, bolt pieces on, then pare it back from format to format. The role model here is AB de Villiers, who averaged 35 after his first 34 games in Test cricket, but who ramped that up to 58 in his last 80 as his all-format game bloomed. Buttler may not be there yet. But his obvious hunger, the basic pleasure in trying to master the longest form is a source of hope in more ways than one.