Midway through an hour-long conversation touching on Rihanna, the mainstreaming of queer identity and Madonna, Chris, AKA the artist formerly known as Christine and the Queens (and born Héloïse Letissier) stops suddenly. “What does ‘wanky’ mean, precisely?” she queries, a raised eyebrow brushing her newly cropped fringe. After asking for advice on how best to describe her multiple “characters”, as she calls them, I had dismissed my suggestions as too “wanky”, too earnest. And so here we are: one of the most rule-breaking pop stars of the last five years is rolling “wanky” around her mouth like a chewy sweet. “I’ve learned a new word!” she says, beaming. Chris is in London on a whistle-stop visit ahead of the release of her self-produced, Michael and Janet Jackson-inspired second album, also called Chris. It is the funkier follow-up to 2016’s Chaleur Humaine, an album of bilingual chamber pop that originally entered the UK chart at No 132, but finished the year – thanks in part to a joyous, Brexit vote-cleansing Glastonbury performance – as the biggest-selling debut. She apologises for being glued to her phone; there is a video edit that needs approving and she has to be the one to do it. “It’s good but it’s constant,” she says of her hectic schedule. Today’s look – loose suit jacket, pinstriped red-and-white shirt – is very much the uniform of someone who means business. So who is Chris? In the video for first single Girlfriend, she’s the star of a West Side Story fantasy, pulsating to a swaggering, G-funk-inspired sex jam, all flexing muscles and bare midriffs. On the throbbing album track Damn (What Must a Woman Do), she implores her lover to get on with it. “It’s a song addressing pure horniness and I notice people are uncomfortable with that, so that’s a good sign. So many songs are about being horny as a man,” she says, her voice’s constant, elegant rhythm speeding up slightly. It’s educational, too, with a quick Google translate from Spanish to English confirming that the chorus lyric “para follarse” does indeed mean “to fuck”. There’s sadness – second single Doesn’t Matter touches on suicide – but it is encapsulated in a framework that’s sweatier, brasher, more conventionally “masculine”. “In France, since I cut my hair they hear the ambivalence [in my lyrics] way more,” she explains. “I’m playing around with the male gaze and confusing heterosexual dudes who say stuff [about how I look] like: ‘I’m excited ... but I’m angry!’ I love the scam of a macho man. I wrote this record because I wanted to address the taboo of a woman being blunt and forward.” We talk about that career-launching Glastonbury performance in 2016, and how the odds were stacked against her. “It was a weird atmosphere; it was the morning after the Brexit vote, people were in a state of unfolding,” she says. “Everyone was vulnerable and, of course, it was raining. Those elements, when it can be a bit complicated, kind of wake me up in a weird way. I enjoyed every drip of it. It was really tasty.” Her debut’s intoxicating mix of vulnerability and isolation coalesced with joyful performances that sampled Chaka Khan and channelled Michael Jackson, right down to the white tube socks and black loafers. Something about hearing a woman who identifies as pansexual (being attracted to people regardless of their sex or gender identity) shouting “This is a free zone!” onstage at Glastonbury also chimed with new discussions happening around identity and gender fluidity. She quickly caught the attention of new music’s gatekeepers, performing with Elton John in London and being spanked onstage in Paris by Madonna. The fashion industry came calling (she was on the FROW at Jean Paul Gaultier’s 2016 show), as did a long list of potential collaborators. With Chaleur Humaine first being released in her native France in 2014, and with more tours being booked in Japan and Australia, she put a stop to the campaign at the end of 2016. “I didn’t want to burn out on the first [album],” she says. “Sometimes it feels in today’s society ... ” She pauses, rolls her eyes and mockingly repeats “in today’s society” in a voice I like to think she now knows to be the very essence of “wanky”. “Sometimes it feels in today’s society, the idea of someone new arriving is delicious, but then someone staying around to say more is like: ‘Nah’. So I was a bit: ‘I hope I get to hang around.’” She returned to Paris where she slept for a month. She describes entering a strange state of PTSD, of memories flooding back. “I had flashes of Elton John, like ‘Woah!’” she laughs. Fame and success, she says, gave her more creative confidence but it made the emotions she’d been singing about – sadness, depression, frustration – more “incandescent”. It also brought loneliness. “It’s weird because I always felt lonely,” she says with a shrug, “so in a way when the loneliness of fame arrived it was a bit sad but I was ready.” That’s not to say that she was always alone. Performing every night transformed her body into a lithe, athletic machine, and with that her self-confidence grew. There was, she says, a lot of sex. “Before Christine and the Queens I was a bit self-conscious; it was hard for me to have love [affairs]. But I became more confident to try things. I took the adrenaline of the stage into my love life.” “A bit self-conscious” feels like an understatement when it comes to describing the pre-fame Héloïse Letissier’s backstory. Born in Nantes to academic parents, she battled social awkwardness by retreating into literature. At 17, she fell in love with a woman and styled herself like Marie Antoinette, all puffy skirts and caked-on makeup. Her early 20s brought with it both an expulsion from a theatre school and a catastrophic breakup. She fled to London where she was rescued by a troupe of no-nonsense drag queens at Soho’s now-closed Madame Jojo’s nightclub. Slowly, they helped to rebuild her. “Christine” was born and, via EPs, multiple tour support slots (she supported Marina and the Diamonds and Lykke Li) and hard graft, she morphed into a pop star. The less contrary route for album number two would have been to carry on where she left off, making supple pop soap operas in the vein of Chaleur Humaine. Or to go the full-on pop route and draft in additional producers. In fact, she had early sessions with both Mark Ronson and Damon Albarn. Of Ronson she says: “We realised how different the recording process was for both of us, but he was very nice.” And Albarn? She’s silent for the first time. “It didn’t really work out,” she says eventually. He can be quite tricky can’t he, I say. “Yes,” is the quick reply before a dramatic slurp from an empty mug suggests it’s time to move on. She also had her own dalliance with writing songs for others. “I tried ... I tried ... to write for Rihanna,” she stutters. There’s a yelp and then she’s under the table, flushed with embarrassment. “I sent [her management] something and it was rejected,” she says as she slowly inflates back up from her semi-prostrate position. “It was just my take on Rihanna.” What did they say? “I didn’t receive any clear feedback, it was just, ‘Thank you’.” She roars with laughter. “‘Thank you for trying girl, see you soon, bye!’” Confident in her decision to go it alone, she cut her hair short and started again as Chris. “I wanted to risk it all,” she says, smiling. “I didn’t want to preserve things. The nickname emerged out of striking out the rest of [the name]. It was a way to be really sincere again. Of reaffirming freedom.” Chris often talks via the prism of story-telling; albums are chapters, there are multiple characters and, endearingly, she’ll often move in closer to whisper dramatic asides, like a theatre actor breaking the fourth wall. This performative nature has lead to confusion as to who the real Héloïse is. “There can be a weird conversation around sincerity when it’s being used via a character,” she admits. “It’s always odd to me when people say: ‘Where does Héloïse finish and Chris start?’ It’s the same thing. I’m just putting a theatrical form to my expression.” Most recently, she has been obsessing over Madonna, specifically her testy, Erotica-era interviews. “She’s so good at being playful. My problem is I’m too open and I feel invested, so I can’t have fun with [interviews].” She admits that the promotional tour for this album has been hard, not least in France. “Sometimes I feel like I’m educating people,” she says, anger bubbling up for the first time. “I realise that by addressing female desires I’m getting really strong reactions. But it’s not my job to diffuse that.” Her sexuality has also caused controversy, with some French articles changing her pansexuality to bisexuality. “At one point, they told me I’d invented [pansexuality]! I was like: ‘It’s actually on Wikipedia.’” She looks exasperated. “For some people, it’s impossible to escape binaries. Pansexuality [is] impossible to simplify and I think people hate me in France for that.” She is cautious about the dialogue around queer identity, too. “If the dominant society uses it to sell shit then we have lost the meaning of it – ‘Ten queer artists to watch out for!’ How can you simplify it like that? Queer is about intense questioning that can’t be made nice and glossy.” Another recent controversy at home centred around Girlfriend utilising generic royalty-free loops from recording software Logic Pro. The kerfuffle lead to accusations Chris was an “imposter”. “I had to explain to a French journalist how sampling worked. I’m not even joking. It’s funny because, on the first record, no one acknowledged the production, and then with the second one it only became a thing once people are saying it’s a scam. I was rolling my eyes so much this summer that I was aching.” On cue, she rolls them again, as though working on pure muscle memory. This same summer, Chris turned 30. It marked the end of a turbulent decade of heartbreaking lows and skyscraping highs. “I can’t wait to grow even older,” she says. “I don’t remember my 20s as a good place. I want to grow old in this industry.” She brings up Madonna’s recent 60th and the ridiculous controversy surrounding the star refusing to grow old gracefully, whatever that means. “Madonna is doing what she always did, which is being in control,” she says. Also, people in their 60s have sex; get over it. “Jeez, I hope so!” she laughs. “I just discovered it, I can’t stop yet.” Chris is out now on Because