Like finding the right word, or remembering a name that’s been on the tip of your tongue all afternoon, learning a good cooking trick or tip can be an a-ha moment so satisfying that you say it out loud. Learning to check cakes for doneness with a strand of spaghetti, for example, was, and years later still is, a proper a-ha! As are pressing an unpeeled clove of garlic with the heel of my hand so it splits and the skin comes away, rolling a lemon back and forth on the table so it gets juicy, tucking cold butter in a back pocket, or leaving a tapped hard-boiled egg in cold water for 30 seconds so the cracked shell comes away like a cloak. Even though these tricks are now common – banal, even, when there are YouTube videos documenting them, it doesn’t take away from the fact these are daily a-has as satisfying as getting 12 across or remembering who played that character in The Long Good Friday. It’s a similar feeling when you discover that something you have previously done one way can be done in a quicker, easier way. With the rice-stuffed tomatoes I wrote about last year, for example – a summer standard on home tables and bakery counters in Rome – it turns out the rice doesn’t need to be pre-boiled, and instead can simply be mixed with olive oil, the pulp excavated from the tomatoes and some seasoning, then rested, before being spooned into the tomato shells. I have now done this dozens of times, but I still always think a-ha! as the rice cooks and swells (ideally, so much it dislodges the tomato lid). It is the same a-ha! when I make Claudia Roden’s stuffed courgettes from her book of Middle Eastern food, a fitting book to celebrate this week, I think, because it has been transporting me for decades now – and also because it was the Arabs who introduced rice to Sicily, Italy and, ultimately, the rest of Europe. A new revelation last week was discovering that, if you can’t find or don’t have an apple corer, you can hollow out a courgette by trimming the stem end, sticking a skewer to nearly the end, then swirling it – like you do when trying to get a beach umbrella into the sand – until you have a nice hole, into which you can insert a slim serrated knife, which you then use to twist out the pulp. Herbs in cooking are like accents in words: they can change a dish completely. In Rome, the stuffed meat courgettes I buy from Sartor butchers on Testaccio market are sold to be simmered with tomato and the peppery and familiar fragrance of basil. A similar Sicilian recipe suggests tomato with oregano, which conjures up a Sicilian hillside – wild and musty. The mint, mixed with lemon and garlic, is unmistakably Middle Eastern. Like fresh air, somehow. The cooking provides a bit of sauce, so serve both courgettes and sauce warm rather than hot, with bread. And now I remember – it was Helen Mirren in The Long Good Friday. Prep 40 minCook 1 hrServes 4 8 medium courgettesSalt and black pepper200g minced beef or lamb75g rice1 tomato, peeled and diced2 tbsp parsley, chopped1 pinch allspiceOlive oil or butter2 tomatoes, sliced1 tbsp tomato puree2 garlic cloves, crushed to a pulp with a little salt1 small bunch mint, choppedJuice of 1 lemon Wash the courgettes, then sprinkle with salt and leave for half an hour to soften them. Make the stuffing by mixing the beef/lamb, rice, diced tomato, parsley, allspice and a good pinch each of salt and black pepper. Trim the stem end of each courgette, then, using a narrow apple corer or slim serrated knife, scoop out the pulp without breaking the skin. Fill two-thirds of each hollow with stuffing (this leaves space for the rice to expand). Cover the base of a large pan with some olive oil or dot with butter, make a layer of sliced tomato, then lay the courgettes on top. Dissolve the tomato puree in 250ml warm water, then pour this over the courgettes. Cover the pan, bring to a gentle boil, then reduce to a simmer for an hour, until the courgettes are very soft. In the last minutes of cooking, crush the garlic with a little salt, add the mint leaves, then add to the pan along with the lemon juice. Set aside to cool a little before serving warm or at room temperature.