A few years ago, I interviewed Primal Scream and received a crash course in full-blown musical obsession. It culminated in a moment where frontman Bobby Gillespie took a deep gulp of air and hurtled through the tracklisting of the Rolling Stones’ Sticky Fingers LP, pointing out every influence, lyrical steal, arrangement and piece of trivia that went with it, while I sat there trying to find space in my brain to take it all in. I mention this because food author Niki Segnit seems to be the Gillespie’s culinary equivalent. Get her started on the humble flatbread and she will soon start explaining the way it links up with other breads – the Sri Lankan pol roti, say, or Irish soda bread – and before you know it, we are off. Did you know that Irish soda bread is basically the same thing as a scone, and also the cobbler topping of a pie or a stew? And that a few tweaks somewhere along the way can turn this into pizza dough? Or that pizza dough cooked in a slightly different way will make bagels? And actually, if you change the flour for that original flatbread, then you can make Japanese buckwheat noodles – just boil them in green tea and serve with sesame seeds and soy. By this point, Segnit will have gathered so much speed that she can’t stop: she will tumble through matzo crackers and oatcakes and croissants, explaining how each one links to the other on what she calls the “bread continuum”, until your brain will feel like it has absorbed its annual intake of food knowledge in the space of five minutes. It is particularly hard to take in because Segnit is delivering this monologue while simultaneously attempting to teach me to make bread for the first time (the flat, uninspiring piece of cardboard that emerged from my oven a year ago masquerading as a naan doesn’t count). Bread is simple, she explains from her homely London kitchen: almost all recipes call for roughly the same formula of 250g flour and 150ml liquid (water, buttermilk etc). You might need to add some fat, and you can play around with the flavours until your heart’s content, but 250g/150ml is the golden rule you need in order to conquer most bread. And so, we start making flatbreads while Segnit rattles off the connections between hot cross bun dough and brioche and rum baba batter and German stollen until I can’t remember what it is we are actually making in the first place. But who cares when you can look at food from such a fresh angle? “If you join everything up it makes things so much simpler and within your ability, because each thing is only a little bit different to something you’ve done before,” she reasons. That is the point of her new book, Lateral Cooking, the product of her obsessive nature. It is the follow-up to 2010’s hugely successful The Flavour Thesaurus, Segnit’s exhaustive guide to which flavours work best with others. That book aimed to teach people like me – less a cook, more a robot who can follow instructions to the milligram, but panics whenever I am in a supermarket without wifi – how to freestyle with flavour. Segnit studied thousands of recipes during the research, repeating them with tiny tweaks, in order to be sure she could vouch for each flavour pairing. Somewhere along the way, something magical happened – she started to notice the links not just between flavours, but between certain dishes, too. Many of our favourite meals seemed to be little more than a couple of adjustments away from another. It was as if she had stared at so many recipes for so long that the great secrets they held began to reveal themselves. And so, Lateral Cooking was born. To illustrate her point, Segnit mentions a nicely produced book she owns that contains multiple recipes for bread. Each one contains different herbs, flours and loaf styles, but the fundamentals are essentially the same. “But never are they kind enough to let you know this,” she laughs, “because if they did, it wouldn’t be a book, it’d be a pamphlet.” Segnit’s book is about highlighting such links, but it is about other things, too: repeating recipes until they are drilled into your head; being unafraid to make mistakes; recognising that there is no “correct” way; accepting that each dish allows a certain amount of leeway; getting a sense for how things look and feel. This latter point becomes apparent when we move onto pizza dough while our flatbreads rest. Instead of relying on scales or measuring cups, Segnit encourages me to knead away while adding flour or water until the dough feels soft and silky. When it feels perfect, we put it aside to prove. It is not just bread that Lateral Cooking deals with. There are chapters for custards, stews, nuts, sauces, chocolates, pastry and more. The research process alone sounds epic. She made so many creme caramels for the custard continuum she took to leaving them in other children’s buggies at nursery (“I became very popular for a while”). While researching the pastry continuum, she found herself studying YouTube clips of Hungarian grandmothers making strudel in tiny dark kitchens: “They’d spread out their pastry until it was hanging off the sides of the tables. Then they’d walk around it like Steve Davis at the snooker table,” she says. I am not quite at that level, yet. But our flatbread dough rolls out nice and easily. A quick fry on both sides, a brush of butter, a sprinkle of salt and – ta da – we have a tasty tool to shovel up hummus. It certainly beats supermarket pitta bread. Were we to make it again, we could knead some cumin or nigella seeds into the dough, or add some shredded carrot or spinach. Instead, Segnit suggests we make pol roti – a Sri Lankan flatbread that can be served as a side with curries and dahl (and, apparently, makes part of a nice South Asian cream tea if you add sugar). All we do is take the same flatbread recipe, then replace half the flour with shredded coconut, splash in some oil instead of butter and reduce the amount of water to take into account the moisture from the coconut. The results are delicious – and so simple that I still manage to make it while Segnit tries her best to put me off by whizzing through the batter continuum, from yorkshire puddings and (add yeast, swap the salt for sugar) blinis to griddled pancakes and (use cold water, just a yolk and 50% cornflour) tempura batter. Segnit says it was surprising to realise that some things did not sit within the area of cookery you might expect. Choux pastry, for instance, did not end up on her pastry continuum – instead, she felt that it sat more comfortably alongside cornbreads, polenta and gnocchi. What she is especially excited about is professional chefs studying her continuums and trying to make new meals from the gaps between each point. “What would happen if you toasted semolina – as in the Turksish pudding irmik halva – and used that for a gnocchi alla romana?” she wonders. My pizza dough is done but still needs time to prove, so I part ways with my tutor and head home to cook it later on. When I do, it proves to be another triumph. I top them with chilli and chorizo for the adults, and broccoli and sweetcorn for my two-year-old daughter and her dinner date (I have never seen them both hoover up veg so willingly). But I would be lying if I said that, while I was making them, I didn’t think about maybe baking a loaf with the dough instead. Or perhaps adding a bit more oil to make focaccia? Or how about folding it around a rolled out slab of butter and having a go at croissants? Or I could cut them into rings and … •Lateral Cooking by Niki Segnit is published 20 September (Bloomsbury)