Jeremy Corbyn has said he will work to avoid the “national disaster” of a no-deal Brexit as he travelled to Brussels for meetings at the request of the EU’s chief negotiator, Michel Barnier, and Martin Selmayr, the most senior official in charge of dealing with a cliff-edge Brexit. With alarm bells ringing in Brussels over the now likely rejection by parliament of any deal brought back by Theresa May, Corbyn said he would seek to assuage fears that the prospect of the UK crashing out of the bloc had increased as a result of Labour’s tough stance. The Labour leader, who set a high bar for his support for a Brexit deal in his leader’s speech on Wednesday, at his party’s conference, had initially planned a low-key visit to Brussels to attend the naming of a square in the Belgian capital in honour of the murdered Labour MP Jo Cox. It is understood, however, that the EU’s most senior officials were anxious to hold hear directly from Corbyn about his party’s plans, and invited him in for a session of talks. Corbyn is to meet Selmayr, the secretary-general of the European commission, who is in charge of no-deal planning, for an hour before an additional hour of discussions with Barnier. It is understood a series of other meetings with key officials are in the diary. Ahead of his meetings, Corbyn said in a statement: ”With just weeks of negotiating time left, it’s clear that UK-EU Brexit talks are in a perilous state. “Time is running out and companies are losing patience with the absence of any clarity from the government. “Crashing out of Europe with no deal risks being a national disaster. That is why I’m meeting EU officials today, and I will be urging them to do all they can to avoid a ‘no-deal’ outcome, which would be so damaging to jobs and living standards in both the UK and EU countries.” In his party conference speech in Liverpool, Corbyn said Labour MPs would vote against her Chequers plan unless she was willing to accept his proposal to keep Britain in a customs union and protect consumer standards and workers’ rights after Brexit. While seemingly offering the prime minister a way to get a deal through parliament, in reality the Labour party has set six effectively insurmountable tests for their support, including that any deal delivers the “exact same benefits” as the current arrangement. On Wednesday night, the former home secretary, Amber Rudd, further highlighted the parliamentary difficulties facing the prime minister should she actually strike a deal with Brussels. Rudd said that there were enough rebels in the Tory ranks to ensure that the Canada-style free trade deal being pushed by Brexiters, including the former foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, would also be killed by parliament. She said: “I’ve talked to a number of colleagues, and I think conservatively there are about 40 of us who would not support a Canada-style deal … I think a ‘people’s vote’ could be the result of an impasse.” The Guardian revealed on Wednesday that the EU is intensifying its no-deal preparations over increased concerns over the ratification of a deal. EU leaders have also insisted on their right to go over the head of the European commission and strike mini-deals with the UK in the event of a no-deal scenario in order to mitigate the worst effects of a cliff-edge Brexit, including the grounding of flights and blockage of haulage routes. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here
and listen https://flex.acast.com/audio.guim.co.uk/2018/09/26-51111-gdn.pol.180926.podcast.mp3