I am not a churchgoer – my visits falling very much into hatch, match and dispatch – yet I find a peep through an open church door irresistible. The most memorable was one into the now deconsecrated St Mary’s in Knightwick, Worcestershire, where, aged 12, I spotted the windowsills and altar festooned with jam-jars of spiky dahlias and pots of greengage jam. There were plums and pumpkins in glowing ochre, too, and vast green and white marrows from villagers’ gardens and allotments. A scene of humble abundance. I am not averse to finding the occasional marrow in the vegetable rack. I suspect I buy them out of nostalgia rather than any thought of good eating. The vast green zeppelin then sits around until guilt finally gets the better of me and I take the knife to it. I have a soft spot for the blandness of a marrow hidden under a blanket of decent cheese sauce. A good enough supper if you can remember to add cloves, onion and bay to the sauce as well as a snowy mountain of grated pecorino. I sometimes peel them and cut the flesh into small cubes, cooking them in a shallow pan on the hob with chubby, fennel-seed sausages from the deli. As the sausages burnish in the heat, they offer up a sticky, deeply savoury goo in which to cook the marrow. You can stuff them, of course, but I am sure that has become the norm only because of the useful vessel that appears as you scoop out the seeds and fibres from its core. An edible crock that begs to be filled with seasoned rice and seeds or minced meat and yet neither really does anything for this particular squash at all. Better, I think, is to fry or grill slices of the flesh and toss them in a lemon and thyme-spiked marinade or coat them in gossamer batter and fry tempura style. With a ponzu dipping sauce at their side you have something approaching a feast. The arrival of the marrow also marks, like that of spying the first crate of damsons, a turn in the season. They herald not just harvest festival but the start of chutney-making and the first gusts of autumn leaves. A taste of pleasures to come. One of those useful dishes that can be served hot or cold, but I find most pleasing when eaten warm, when the marrow has had time to sit with the thyme and fennel seeds. Serves 4marrow 1 kgfennel seeds 1 tsplemon thymewhite vermouth 50mlolive oil 50mllemon juice of halfricotta 150gfennel fronds a small handful Bruise the fennel seeds with a pestle and mortar then tip them into a shallow serving dish. Pull the leaves from the lemon thyme, crush them lightly in your hand and add to the fennel seeds. Stir in the vermouth, oil and lemon juice. Warm a griddle pan over a moderate to high heat. Slice the marrow into 2cm thick discs then remove the central fibres and seeds from each ( a cookie cutter will work well for this). Place the pieces of marrow on the hot griddle and leave for 3-4 minutes until lightly coloured then turn and repeat on the other side. Lift the marrow from the griddle as they are ready, place them in the fennel and lemon marinade, turning them over to evenly coat with the dressing. Season the ricotta with black pepper. Chop enough fennel fronds to give a couple of tablespoons then fold into the ricotta. Place generous spoons of ricotta among the marrow, finish with a few whole fronds and serve. It is worth taking your time over this, leaving the onions to cook over a moderate heat until they are soft enough to crush between finger and thumb and the sausages should be a deep, burnished brown before they are removed from the pan. There is no sauce here, just a sticky coating of juices from the pan. A simple recipe, but not one to be hurried. Serves 4marrow 1 kgonions 2, mediumrosemary leaves 3 tbspolive oil 5 tbspsausages 6, plump and coarse-textured Remove the skin of the marrow with a vegetable peeler and discard. Halve the marrow lengthways and scrape out the fibrous seedy core with a spoon. Cut the marrow into approximately 3cm cubes. Peel and roughly chop the onions, then finely chop the rosemary. Warm a couple of tablespoons of the olive oil in a large, shallow pan then add the onions. Let them soften over a moderate heat, stirring regularly, until translucent and pale gold, then remove them with a draining spoon and set aside. Place the sausages in the pan and let them brown in the oil and juices left by the onions, turning them occasionally so they brown evenly. Remove from the pan and set aside. Pour the remaining olive oil in the pan, introduce the cubes of marrow and the chopped rosemary and let them colour evenly, moving them around the pan as necessary. They are ready when translucent and pale gold. Return the onions to the pan. Slice each sausage into 3 or 4 short pieces and combine with the onions and marrow. When all is hot, golden and coated with sticky pan juices, serve. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater