Alisson Little to do until beaten by Meunier and no chance with the second. Kept things simple. 7 Trent Alexander-Arnold Excellent as usual when going forward, did well when keeping an eye on Neymar. 8 Joe Gomez Solid in centre of defence, not unduly stretched by Cavani 7 Virgil van Dijk Forced early save from Areola, booked for clumsy challenge on Mbappé. 7 Andrew Robertson Superb cross for opening goal, some strong runs down the left. Beaten on occasion by Mbappé. 8 Georginio Wijnaldum Useful defensive screen with Henderson, got forward at times and won penalty. 7 Jordan Henderson Took charge of midfield, restraining his instincts to help when doubling up on Neymar. 7 James Milner Always available, confident penalty, let Neymar know he was around early in the game. 9 Mohamed Salah Still nothing like the hammer of last season. Gave the ball away for PSG’s equaliser. 6 Daniel Sturridge Neither as inventive nor as industrious as Firmino but no arguing with the quality of his finish. 8 Sadio Mané Powerful running and impressive trickery with the ball at his feet, not enough end result. 7 Subs Firmino (for Sturridge 72) 8, Shaqiri (for Salah 85) 6, Fabinho (for Mané 90) n/a Alphonse Areola No chance with either of Liverpool’s first-half goals, painful brush with Sturridge in second. 7 Thomas Meunier Had his hands full with Sadio Mané and Andy Robertson, but still managed to score a fine goal. 7 Thiago Silva Was dealing with crosses quite well until Robertson’s whipped ball found Sturridge. 6 Presnel Kimpembe Possibly out of position for first goal, and lost Sturridge on a couple of other occasions too. 6 Juan Bernat Could have no arguments over penalty awarded for trip on Georginio Wijnaldum. 6 Adrien Rabiot Has knack of looking elegant in midfield without actually doing much. Lost ball a few times. 7 Marquinhos Tidy on the ball, had to keep dropping back to help his central defenders. 6 Ángel Di María Had to drop deep and failed to beat Liverpool’s press. Crossed for Meunier goal. 7 Kylian Mbappé A quiet match for World Cup winner redeemed by late goal. Decisive when he needed to be. 7 Neymar Went a little quiet after heavy challenge from Milner. A couple of promising runs but not a force. 7 Edinson Cavani Constantly running into Van Dijk or Gomez and frustration showed  at the end. 6 Subs Eric Choupo-Moting (for Di María 80) 5; Julian Draxler (for Cavani 80) 5