Oh babygirl. Where do I even start? Last week we received a text we knew deep down was coming but hoped never would. You told us you had just days left. That you had lots of death admin to do. That you needed more time. We all did, Rach. Diagnosed with breast cancer just two months apart, we formed our online friendship pretty sharpish, supporting one another through treatments, scans and surgeries. Streams of comments filled with words of encouragement and our own similar struggles. In December 2017 we took our fledgling friendship over to email when you submitted a piece to my online cancer community GIRLvsCANCER called “The Fear”. You described your recurrence as “the cancer equivalent of being seated next to the dull bloke at dinner”. An example of the dry humour I’d come to absolutely adore. It was during these email exchanges that you floated the idea of a “cool cancer blogging girls” podcast to me. Having shared our cancer anecdotes so publicly online, it was becoming apparent that there was a real shift in how those affected by the disease were supporting each other. We were dissatisfied by the materials provided by clinicians. They were stuffy, cold and aimed at older people. And so thousands of fierce females like us were creating our own source of strength – each other (because nobody gets you like the cancer community). We got busy plotting our episode topics, excitedly brainstorming our ideal guests and before you could say “scanxiety” there we were with the wonderful Deborah James in a BBC 5 Live studio recording You, Me and the Big C, a cancer podcast. The podcast has covered everything – practical advice on treatments, pain management and finance. My faves to record with you were on the subject matter that folk wouldn’t expect to find on a cancer podcast. Subjects like body image or playing the cancer card in “The Positives” episode. Our aim was to discuss the nuances of a cancer diagnosis in an accessible, almost animated way. We often joked that we chatted about cancer like it was an episode of EastEnders. But that was the entire point, wasn’t it? To open up the dialogue around the disease. Being open and honest and raw. To create a better understanding of the cancer experience – to ensure that future Deborahs, Laurens and Rachaels would never feel lost or alone. We were just three friends talking cancer taboos over a cup of tea. There just happened to be microphones in the room. Since your death we’ve been overwhelmed with the outpouring of love for both you and the podcast. Messages confirming that your crusade to normalise the conversation around this bastard disease is truly taking effect. That cancer patients are finding solace in our weekly chinwags, that carers are gaining an improved insight into what their loved ones are going through. And most importantly – you’d buzz off this – that the pod is enabling medical practitioners to better treat their patients. You’d be proud to know that Deb and I haven’t once said you “passed” or that we’ve “lost” you (we didn’t leave you in Primark). Along with your husband Steve we’re also confronting the whole “battle” cliche surrounding cancer – you, my girl, were and always will be a winner. You carried yourself with guts, grace and gumption and I’ll go Danny Dyer on anyone who dares say you “lost”. So much has happened in the past few days that I know you would be absolutely awed by. It breaks my heart that I can’t call you, that we can’t shriek at one another excitedly down the phone. Babes, we’ve had 175,000 listens on iTunes alone last week and we finally made it on to The One Show sofa to share the You, Me and the Big C crusade. Cate Blanchett and Jack Black think you’re incredibly brave, FYI. It’s bittersweet, though, mate. Because the only reason all this amazing stuff has happened, that the cancer conversation is centre stage, that people are beginning to sit up and listen – is you. It’s all you. Rachael Bland, to most you are an outstanding journalist and broadcaster. But you were also a cherished wife, mother, sister, daughter, colleague and friend. The darkness left in the wake of your death is lit by the impressive legacy you have created. You’ve changed so many lives for the better. Including mine. You’ve taught me the meaning of courage and of class. You offered me a space on the pod that became my very own sanctuary. My purpose. I’ll be forever grateful for the role you have played in beginning to heal my broken heart. I honestly don’t know how I’m going to get back into that studio with your seat bare. To not make you a brew or hand over my fan when it’s your turn to hot flush. I’m going to miss you sliding into my DMs cooing over my latest purchase or cackling over inappropriate suggestions for GIRLvsCANCER slogans. As per your wishes, I promise to continue the pod with Deb and I’m more determined than ever to continue the conversation you’ve started and to make yourself, Steve and Freddie proud. We’ll make sure he knows exactly what a rock star his mummy was. I just really hope you knew it too. Thank you for letting me be a part of your world. Lauren Mahon is a presenter of You, Me and the Big C cancer podcast Comments are premoderated to ensure the discussion is about topics that have been addressed in this article