They’ve tried dams, dykes and dialogue over the years in vain attempts to reverse one of the world’s most stunning environmental disasters – the near-total disappearance of a sea that was once the size of Ireland. So it’s time for a different approach. On Friday, the deserted, dried-out bed of the Aral Sea in a remote part of Central Asia will echo to the sound of an electronic music festival, as activists try to raise awareness of the catastrophe, and put the sea back on the map, figuratively, if not literally. Visitors to Moynaq, a forlorn Uzbek town, are usually disaster tourists coming to gawk at the desolation of the apocalyptic landscape, where the carcasses of ships rot on sand once covered by the world’s fourth-largest lake. But this week, revellers have been descending for the festival of electronic, techno, avant-garde and dance music. DJs from Moscow and Berlin will mix music “that teleports you mentally to other places”, organiser Otabek Suleimanov enthused. It will very possibly be the first electronica festival to be held in a ship graveyard. “It’s great!” said Farukh Sharipov, a 25-year-old graphic designer standing on the quay on Thursday under the burning sun, seeking a spot to pitch his tent after flying in from the capital Tashkent and driving two hours across the desert to Moynaq. “The whole world should know about the Aral catastrophe … Not everyone pays attention to an ecological catastrophe, but if we come here to party then people will come and start taking an interest.” A lawyer who moonlights as a DJ, Suleimanov dreamt up this quixotic event to draw attention to the plight of the Aral Sea, which has shrunk to a tenth of its original size because of shortsighted Soviet policies. News doesn't always have to be bad – indeed, the relentless focus on confrontation, disaster, antagonism and blame risks convincing the public that the world is hopeless and there is nothing we can do. This series is an antidote, an attempt to show that there is plenty of hope, as our journalists scour the planet looking for pioneers, trailblazers, best practice, unsung heroes, ideas that work, ideas that might and innovations whose time might have come. Readers can recommend other projects, people and progress that we should report on by contacting us at theupside@theguardian.com Intense cotton farming that diverted feeder rivers for irrigation has been blamed for the recession of the sea in the late Soviet period. The waters left behind a toxic, salt-encrusted, pesticide-poisoned land that poses a serious environmental and health hazard. The music for the festival will be pumped out beside a former lighthouse in Moynaq, a once thriving fishing port left high and dry when the waters disappeared from the town in the 1980s. Organisers are predicting a turnout of a few hundred hardcore fun-seekers – but although they are starting small, they have big ambitions: they hope the festival, which is free of charge, will become an annual event. In their wildest dreams, one day it will turn into a central Asian version of the Nevada desert’s Burning Man. That may be a pipe dream, but locals including hotelier Mahmud Akbarov are excited anyway. “This is wonderful!” he said. “More events like this should be held, to attract people here.” There are no big names playing, but there are some interesting acts – DJs include Orgatanatos, an Uzbek project producing “ambient, glitchcore, noise and other experimental styles” and Interchain, a Moscow punk-techno duo. The festival’s name evokes its environmental aspirations: Stihia, a Russian word loosely translating as “the elements” but with connotations of something “unstoppable”, Suleimanov told the Guardian – like the drying up of the Aral, which split into two parts in the 1980s. Its northern part in Kazakhstan has been rejuvenated by a dam, but the southern Uzbek section is in a dire state: in drier years, it is just a narrow strip of water on the western side. Stihia has a mystical element as well as a pragmatic one: Suleimanov sees the music-makers as akin to the rainmakers of the area’s ancient nomadic tribes, although “rainmakers were using drums, and we’re using electronic music to call the sea back”. On Thursday afternoon, gazing out over the former seabed as he waited for the sound systems to trundle across the desert from Nukus, his main concern was that those making the trip to Moynak should have a good time. “It’s all about the aftertaste – how people feel when they leave.” Stihia looks set to rock not just Moynak but all Uzbekistan, a predominantly Muslim country of 34 million people that until recently was known as one of the world’s worst police states. Since long-ruling dictator Islam Karimov died in 2016, his successor Shavkat Mirziyoyev has been experimenting with a thaw often dubbed the “Uzbek Spring”. Under Karimov, Uzbekistan was a buttoned-up conservative state that frowned upon fun, discouraging everything from rap music to Valentine’s Day celebrations. Official backing for Stihia is a sign of the changing times – and Suleimanov believes the festival will send out some positive vibes about Uzbekistan by “telling the world: look, guys, things are changing – and if the government is supporting such a crazy idea as having electronic music in the middle of a desert, then you can trust that at least something is going well!”. The idea would have seemed “shocking” not long ago, said Sharipov with a chuckle. “Now this is kind of normal, because our society is becoming more open. People can just have fun, without being afraid of anyone.” This article is part of a series on possible solutions to some of the world’s most stubborn problems. What else should we cover? Email us at theupside@theguardian.com