I have lived in Northern Ireland all of my life, raised in the small border town of Newry on a political boundary line that has historically been more treacherous footing for politicians than any sheer gorge or ravine. And yet, as someone in their 20s growing up in the aftermath of the Good Friday agreement, I barely noticed that the foundations on which I had built my young life rested on this uncertain ground – which extremist Brexiters could now thoughtlessly yank away. Brexit presents a clear and present danger to my way of life, and that of my family – and many more like us. I want to make a plea to the governments responsible for negotiating the Brexit deal: there are flesh-and-blood people on the Irish border whose lives could be ripped asunder if you don’t act now. It is up to policymakers in London, Dublin, Brussels and across Europe to avoid a catastrophe. The 2016 decision to take the United Kingdom out of the EU hit our border communities like a punch to the gut. Before the vote to leave, our border was seamless, and its invisibility was a dependable axis around which life in our corner of the island of Ireland could revolve. When we crossed the border, there was no way for us to tell that we had travelled into another legal state other than new road markings. And even these were easily missed by all but the eagle-eyed. The frictionless border was a formality nobody had to factor into their life choices. Collective naivety about the stakes in Northern Ireland may mean that is all about to change. And now, as the shadow of Brexit hangs over all of the UK, the Irish border looms grimly in the background. I won’t urge policymakers to consider every possible solution, because to my mind the real miracle of Brexit in Northern Ireland is the range of ideas that have been offered from every corner. People across the political spectrum, but particularly Jacob Rees-Mogg and his European Research Group, are very keen to propose solutions that have no bearing upon the material facts as they present themselves here. Young people in Northern Ireland are desperate for our voices to be heard. Like a majority of young people across the UK, we voted to remain, and it is doubly crushing to watch the UK’s relationship with Europe crumble even as our border arrangement with Ireland is imperiled. The democratic deficit in Northern Ireland only compounds our difficulties. Much to our chagrin, Northern Ireland has recently surpassed Belgium’s 589-day record for the longest time without a sitting government in peacetime. This fact is embarrassing – but it is essential for everyone in positions of responsibility to be aware of it. There is no government to represent us or to answer our pleas and petitions. Nor are the elected MPs we do possess in Northern Ireland up to the task of representing us. Half of them have been bought out by Theresa May’s £1bn slush fund to prop up her government; the other half don’t take their seats as they do not agree with British rule. Young people in Northern Ireland are not passive victims in this fight. We constantly ask ourselves, “What can we do to save our future?” There is a way out of this crisis, in the form of a people’s vote on the final Brexit deal. And there is a strong local precedent for a referendum on the eventual Brexit deal. Two decades ago, after nearly 30 years of civil strife, thousands of deaths and an untold amount of damage and hurt, the people of Northern Ireland were offered the chance of a deal to stop the violence. In 1998, every single household in Northern Ireland was given a copy of the Good Friday peace agreement. We were democratically allowed to decide if we agreed with a proposed deal that would eventually bring peace and prosperity back to our streets. Ordinary citizens were able to decide their future. Twenty years on from voting to sign this agreement, Northern Ireland has peace on its streets and its people have pride in their communities. The final Brexit deal, like the peace agreement, requires the informed consent of the people. As a nation, we did vote to leave, though by a small majority, and the sands have shifted. The voting public throughout the UK are raising their voices, demanding to be heard, and many of them recognise that this is not the Brexit they voted for. Only through a people’s vote on the final deal will people throughout Great Britain and Northern Ireland be able to decide the shape of their future. I believe that young people in Northern Ireland deserve to have a say on the deal that will irrevocably shape the political landscape around which they will build their lives. A people’s vote is our megaphone. To any policymaker reading this with the ability to shape the Brexit negotiations, I would ask this: trust young Northern Irish people that we understand what is best for us, and respect our right to help decide our future. • Doire Finn is the co-founder of Our Future, Our Choice Northern Ireland