Chas Hodges, of the musical duo Chas and Dave, has died at the age of 74. A statement on the pair’s Twitter account said: “It is with tremendous sadness that we announce the passing of our very own Chas Hodges. “Despite receiving successful treatment for oesophageal cancer recently, Chas suffered organ failure and passed away peacefully in his sleep in the early hours of this morning.” It is with tremendous sadness that we announce the passing of our very own Chas Hodges. Despite receiving successful treatment for oesophageal cancer recently, Chas suffered organ failure and passed away peacefully in his sleep in the early hours of this morning. pic.twitter.com/bwxqfHUjUg Tributes quickly poured in. The football club Tottenham Hotspur, whose players performed several songs with Hodges, tweeted: Everyone at the Club is deeply saddened to hear of the passing of one of our own, Chas Hodges. Our thoughts are with his family and friends at this difficult time. pic.twitter.com/AMB7pWHUa4 Among the many songs Hodges recorded with the club, Tottenham, Tottenham, Hot Shot Tottenham and Ossie’s Dream were favourites among fans. Sir Lenny Henry tweeted: What a shame. When they were on Tiswas they were always kind,respectful and played live. RIP Chas. https://t.co/R85oEQFrnt The deputy leader of the Labour party, Tom Watson, wrote: This is very sad. Chas was a very accomplished musician who brought joy to many with his performances. And Chas and Dave’s songs are in the memories of millions. https://t.co/0XTAYDAM2J The comedian Rob Beckett tweeted he was saddened by the death of Hodges, who, with Dave Peacock, “wrote the soundtrack to my childhood”. The Welsh music critic Simon Price tweeted: “I don’t know if I’ve ever had as much shameless fun at a gig as last time I saw Chas and Dave.” Comedy writer and author Adam Kay tweeted: “Sad news. The very least we could do in Chas’ memory is make Ain’t No Pleasing You the new national anthem. Belting tune.” Radio DJ and TV presenter Iain Lee tweeted: Absolutely gutted about @ChasnHodges passing. Was always a real gentleman to me and very generous with his time. Absolutely one of the best. Played piano at Eric Clapton's wedding. The other members of the spontaneous band? Paul McCartney, Ringo Starr and George Harrison The musical duo were popular during the 1970s and 80s, known for their cockney take on rock’n’roll. They rose to fame with hits Rabbit, Gertcha, Snooker Loopy and Ain’t No Pleasing You. They split in 2009 when Peacock retired after the death of his wife, Sue, but reunited a year later. In 2017, Hodges revealed he had been diagnosed with cancer of the oesophagus after he struggled to swallow a glass of water. He underwent chemotherapy and returned to performing last year, but was forced to cancel all gigs in August on doctor’s advice. Before teaming up with Peacock in a musical partnership that lasted more than 40 years, Hodges was a member of the band called the Outlaws. Hodges also backed a string of famous musicians in the late 1950s and early 60s, including Jerry Lee Lewis, Gene Vincent and Bill Haley. He appeared as a special guest alongside the Beatles on their final British tour in 1966, as a member of Cliff Bennett and the Rebel Rousers.