It is rare for me to plan a sandwich, the most satisfying – on every level – inevitably coming from late-night desperado fridge-raids. That said, the blueberry sauce I made to dress a soft beef roll the other day is worth 10 minutes of anyone’s time. Essentially blueberries with an underlying piquancy from red wine vinegar, juniper and rosemary, this would have worked just as splendidly with cold roast pork. I spooned the inky-blue dressing over crisp, pinkly pickled onions and thin slices of rare beef and sandwiched it all in a suitably giving brioche bun. It took all of 10 minutes and beat my kneejerk dressing of horseradish mayo hands down. I know there will be a need to stick something delectable between two pieces of bread and wolf it The other sandwich worth mentioning this week was of the open variety – a slice of toasted sourdough supporting a crisp, pickle-sharp salad of cauliflower, artichoke and peppers. It had something of a caponata about it, and the basil dressing soaked its way pleasingly into the thick, crisp toast. More of a light lunch than a snack really. Despite my claim of not planning for sandwiches, there must be some explanation for why shopping always includes smoked mackerel, cream cheese and treacly pumpernickel. The ingredients for my go-to sandwich. And why else would I buy buns and pitta and tortillas if not to use them as a way to eat slices of cold roast pork and apple sauce without use of knife and fork? Secretly, I know damn well that there will be the need, before the week is over, to stick something delectable between two pieces of bread and wolf it. A week without a sandwich is, at least in this kitchen, unthinkable. I have given details for cooking the beef here in case you want to make it from scratch, but the recipe is really about leftovers, and Sunday lunch is more likely to be the source of your beef. The dressing is enough for at least 4 buns. Serves about 10 picanha rump 1.2kgolive oil a littlered onion 1, medium sizedred-wine vinegar 6 tbsprosemary 4 sprigsjuniper berries 9blueberries 150gsugar 1 tbspbrioche buns 4watercress a good handful per person Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Season the rump, rubbing a little oil, salt and finely ground black pepper on all sides. Warm a thin film of oil in a roasting tin over a high heat, then add the seasoned meat, letting it brown lightly on each side, turning it over as necessary. Transfer the meat to the oven and roast for 45 minutes to an hour, depending on how rare you like your beef. Remove the meat from the oven and leave to rest before carving. While the meat roasts, peel the red onion, slice it thinly and put it into a small mixing bowl. Pour over the red wine vinegar and add a little salt, then the spiky leaves of the rosemary, finely chopped. Lightly crush the juniper berries, then fold them into the onion and its marinade and set aside in a cool place. While the beef is resting, drain the marinade from the onions into a small pan. Add the blueberries, sugar and a grinding of black pepper, and bring to the boil. As soon as the sugar has dissolved, remove from the heat. The flavour should be slightly sweet and with a deep, fruity acidity. Set aside (it will keep for a few days in the fridge, covered). Split the brioche buns horizontally, then toast them on their cut sides until golden. I like to do this over a heated griddle pan, but a toaster will do. Slice the beef thinly, removing only enough for the sandwiches you are currently making (you will get at least 10 slices from the weight above). Wash and dry the watercress then place a handful on each bottom half of brioche, then add the beef, rings of pickled onions and a spoonful of blueberry dressing. Place the second half of each bun on top and serve. A fine salad in its own right, this stir-up of crisp cauliflower and soft ripe peppers takes on a new substance once it is piled, perilously high, on rounds of toast. Serves 4 shallots 4, mediumRomano peppers 2 red and 2 yellowaubergine 1, smallcauliflower half a small onegarlic 6 clovesolive oil 5 tbspmarinated artichokes 250golives 100g, stonedsourdough bread 6 slicestomatoes 2, largebasil leaves 2 handfuls Preheat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Peel the shallots then halve them from root to tip. Put in a roasting tin with the halved and seeded peppers and the aubergine, cut in half lengthways. Cut the cauliflower into florets and tuck among the vegetables. Peel the garlic and add to the tin. Trickle over the olive oil, making sure all the vegetables are lightly coated. Season with salt, then bake for about 40 minutes, turning the vegetables after 20. They should be soft and sweet. If not, give them another 10 minutes or so until they are tender. Cut the artichokes into segments and slice the olives into 3. Skin the roasted peppers – it should come away easily – then cut into long strips. Roughly chop the aubergine then toss with the cauliflower, garlic, peppers, shallots, artichokes and olives. Tear the basil leaves and add them with a little ground black pepper to the vegetables. Leave to settle for 30 minutes or longer, for the flavours to mingle. Toast the bread. Slice the tomatoes and place on the toast. Spoon a little of the juice over, then pile the vegetables on top, scatter a few salt flakes and serve. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater