I am my boyfriend’s first sexual partner. We have been together for eight months and he is very good at pleasuring me. We have sex two or three times a week and I always have at least one orgasm. I have had quite a few sexual partners, but my boyfriend doesn’t seem to enjoy anything I do.  He only climaxes during intercourse and only when it is “hard and fast”. When I am on top, he still controls the rhythm. I prefer slow, sensual sex that is not just about having an orgasm. Oral sex doesn’t seem to do anything for him. It frustrates me that I can’t satisfy my boyfriend, especially because I really enjoy everything he does to me. We have talked about this, but he doesn’t really know what he likes or what he wants me to do differently. Is there a way that we can figure this out? Try to let go of the idea that you need to be so busy during sex. There is a competitive quality to your love-making because both of you currently prefer to give pleasure and neither of you has learned to be comfortable simply receiving it. For better compatibility between you, he needs to learn to relinquish control over his own journey to orgasm, and you need to learn not to try to control his. But these learning processes can take some time. Both of you would do well to stop being intent on having or giving an orgasm by design. Instead, focus on simple pleasure. You could consider making a game of this – perhaps assigning a time limit each for giving and receiving. Remember that, just as it gives you pride and pleasure to please him, it is equally pleasurable for him to provide you with an orgasm. For now, allow him the pleasure of giving, and let him climax the way he needs to. Don’t expect super-fast improvements; fine love-making has to be taught and learned. •Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. •If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms