My parents separated more than a year ago. I’m 21, so it didn’t have the biggest impact on my day-to-day life, but emotionally it’s been an extremely challenging time. They’re both finally moving on. Although I obviously love seeing my parents happy, I can’t help but feel uneasy thinking about them being with other people. It hurts my feelings that they seem to be replacing each other, and the child in me is terrified of being forgotten and overlooked, even though the rational part of me knows this is somewhat ridiculous. Am I right to feel worried and insecure? Is it rational to raise it with them, even though they are both happier now that they have separated and are dating other people? I feel stuck in a massive dilemma and I don’t know how to ever feel comfortable about this. Sometimes, when we have a big problem, we spend so much time thinking, “Am I right to feel like this?” that we end up with two dilemmas: the original problem and then the avoidance of it. So I think you need to let yourself feel this way – it’s natural. You are having to come to terms with the fact that your parents are separating, which can make you question everything you thought you knew (“When did they stop being happy? Were they happy when I lived at home?”), and you have to accept your parents are sexual beings and have new partners, which many children can find difficult. I wonder also, is there something about this that taps into what’s going on with you at the moment, for example, in your own love life? I went to family psychotherapist (aft.org.uk) David Secrett, who has a lot of experience studying the effects of divorce, and asked him why you might be feeling like this. “While separation of parents is frequent and may these days be considered ordinary,” he says, “we often develop, in childhood, a core need for emotional unity, consistency and continuity with our parents. The 18- to 25-year-old age group can be at risk of considerable distress and instability when their parents separate.” You are preparing to leave home and say goodbye to the status quo of family life, but at the same time, you expect it to remain in place and don’t want to lose your past. Secrett’s advice is not to dismiss how you feel as “ridiculous”. He suggests you might want to “see your childhood life in a broader, richer way when the sadness gets too difficult”. So have a leaf through family photo albums, wallow in who you are and where you’ve come from and realise that nothing has changed, or can change, that. At the moment, all you can see is what you might lose and what you’re leaving behind, not what you might gain – you can’t see or enjoy your new life yet, one where your parents may be happier, only mourn for the last one. This is a period of massive transition over which you have little control; I call these forcefields – you can’t go back, you can only go forward. I find them easier to bear if I accept I have to – for a while – simply attempt to stay upright and stop trying to direct what happens, because I can’t. It might also be worth honing in on what you are worried about, then work through how realistic these worries are and sort them into things you can do something about and things to let go. Sometimes, even adult children of divorcing parents can be concerned about practicalities such as: “Where will I spend Christmas?” or “Where will my childhood belongings live?” These worries aren’t silly. Secrett thought you would benefit hugely from some CBT sessions; you should be able to get some free via your GP – but you can also look at babcp.com. CBT isn’t right for everyone or every situation but can be very helpful in looking at how you approach certain situations. It’s a primal fear that we will be overlooked/replaced by our parents, but they are replacing their partners, not you. Your role in their life is unchanged from their perspective. You ask whether you should talk to your parents: you should. So often problems that are growing out of control can be pruned to a sustainable level by a good conversation. I think you need to trust yourself, and your parents, a bit more. Hopefully you will get reassurance and comfort from them – they may also welcome it. • Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article.