Alastair Cook will leave international cricket as England’s most capped Test player ​ and highest Test run scorer. The fifth Test against India, his last, will be his 161st, 159 of them consecutive. As captain – before Joe Root – Cook oversaw a record 59 games, and won 40.67% of them – a lower percentage than Root (so far), Andrew Strauss and Michael Vaughan, though higher than Nasser Hussain and Kevin Pietersen and significantly higher than Andrew Flintoff, Alec Stewart and Michael Atherton. One way of ranking England’s captains is awarding two points for every victory and one point for a draw. Based on this rating, having played the most games, Cook comes in third behind Vaughan and Strauss. Under Vaughan, England regained the Ashes in 2005 after eight straight series defeats. With Strauss, England notched Ashes wins both home and away, as well as a 12-month stretch atop the ICC ​ Test rankings between 2011 and 2012. Cook led England to a pair of Ashes series wins, albeit both on home soil. Where the data suggests Cook set himself apart as captain was in his consistency and durability at the crease. Cook’s average as captain was ​ higher than over the rest of his career, unlike Vaughan and Strauss. Cook’s run of 159​ consecutive Tests dates back to 11 May 2006 – his streak would have been 161 if not for an illness that kept him out of the third Test in India in 2006. Only four other players have played 100 consecutive Tests. At 33, Cook retires from England duty relatively young. He is sixth on the list of most Test runs scored, and needs 147 runs to overtake Kumar Sangakkara ​ in fifth. The ​ Gloucester-born opener is a full five years younger than the average retirement age of the top 10. Cook’s average runs per dismissal is unfavourably low among the world’s best but, while it’s unlikely he would have challenged Sachin Tendulkar’s record of 15,921 runs, he could have risen further up the rankings had he decided to continue to make himself available for England into his late 30s. Among England batsmen, Cook will enter his final Test 6,535 runs ahead of Vaughan and 5,217 ahead of Strauss.