Cristiano Ronaldo’s first Serie A goal arrived right on schedule. Granted, it might not have felt that way to the Juventus supporters who had been waiting impatiently for this moment since July. But by opening his account in their fourth league game, with his 28th shot of the season, he was emulating precisely the start he made with Real Madrid in 2017-18. Nobody can truly have believed his ‘drought’ would go on forever, yet the relief at its ending was evident even in Ronaldo’s performance. His first goal was a tap-in: described by Tuttosport as “pushed into an empty net from 30cm out”. Yet it felt like no accident that the Portuguese’s second should arrive 15 minutes later, drilled into the bottom corner with a confidence that had hitherto been lacking. The desire to get this monkey off his back had been evident in Ronaldo’s approach, the extra gym sessions since arriving in Turin and his request – accepted by Portugal manager Fernando Santos – not to be called up for the most recent round of internationals. “I wanted to score,” the player acknowledged. “There’s been a bit of anxiety in general since my move from Madrid – there was a great expectation.” Now it is done, though, how long do we need to keep talking about it? There will doubtless be many more ahead. Ronaldo did not come to Turin dreaming of 2-1 wins over Sassuolo. By full-time, his thoughts were already on to Wednesday’s Champions League visit to Valencia. He described the European Cup as “my home … the competition I love most”. Were this not Ronaldo’s very first goal for the Bianconeri, then the whole match might have been reported in very different tones. The occasion had been marred by the actions of Douglas Costa, who first elbowed, then butted, then spat in the face of Sassuolo’s Federico Di Francesco. The first two incidents were witnessed by referee Daniele Chiffi, who inexplicably only showed a yellow card. Costa’s final transgression came after, and was initially missed by the official before he was alerted by colleagues in the VAR booth. This is going to be a huge story in world football. Douglas Costa spits in Federico Di Francesco's mouth during the #Juve and #Sassuolo game. pic.twitter.com/IXyYDClct8 At least a three-match ban is expected, which would cause Costa to miss Juve’s game against Napoli at the end of this month. He made no attempt to justify his actions in an Instagram post, apologising to fans and teammates, saying only that he hoped they could see it was an out-of-character moment. Massimiliano Allegri condemned his behaviour, observing: “Even if he was provoked, a football match is not a bullfight.” What a shame it would be, though, if people should choose to devote all their attention to events in Turin. Rather than talk about goals scored from 30cm out, we could focus on strikes from 30 metres instead. Federico Dimarco had always dreamed of scoring at San Siro. He was deployed as a left-winger or left-back as he worked his way through Inter’s youth system, all the way from the Pulcini (Under-11s, though the word literally means ‘Chicks’) through to the Primavera (Under-19s, or ‘Spring’), but in either role had demonstrated his capacity for striking a ball accurately from distance. Usually the shots fly off his boot like missiles. This weekend was different. After heading the ball down for himself from an attempted clearance, Dimarco beat an opponent with one touch then swung his boot across the ball with the next, generating spin with his instep. It arced up and around the keeper into the top corner. “It felt as though I was watching it in slow motion,” Dimarco said. “The ball seemed like it would never reach the goal. But then, once I saw that it was going to finish in the net, I don’t even know what happened next.” What happened that Dimarco ripped off his shirt and sprinted back to perform a triumphant knee-slide. All this, while the fury of 60,000 Inter fans poured down on him. Dimarco, you see, was not playing for the club that nurtured him, the one he supports, the one who still own his contract. Inter packed him off on loan to Parma in the summer. His goal would earn the Ducali their first victory since returning to the top-flight. It would condemn Inter to their second defeat of the season already. This has been a catastrophic start to the campaign for the Nerazzurri, who, as Luciano Spalletti reflected, have not even faced an especially taxing schedule. The manager had almost all of his transfer requests met, with only the late and optimistic pursuit of Luka Modric failing to come to fruition. Inter were unfortunate on Saturday – Dimarco could have been called for a handball in his area at 0-0, and the failure of referee Gianluca Manganiello to conduct a VAR review was baffling. There were a number of other missed decisions, and the erratic use of the replay system in this early part of the season is becoming a source of bewilderment for fans. Yet Inter’s lack of creativity in the middle is striking, as is the paucity of the full-back play with Sime Vrsaljko injured. Spalletti had one eye on Tuesday’s Champions League clash with Tottenham, leaving Mauro Icardi and Matteo Politano out of his starting XI, but even those choices reveal something about the presumptuousness of a team that so often seems to get its approach wrong against less prestigious opposition. Can Spalletti fix things in time to face Spurs? The more troubling questions for the club will regard whether they are moving in the right direction, after awarding him a new €4.5m per year contract until 2021, just one month ago. Ronaldo’s goals remind us to guard against knee-jerk reactions. But Inter began this season billed as the team most likely to deny the Portuguese a Scudetto at his first attempt. After four games, the gap to Juventus stands at eight points. • A quick word on Parma, who had only ever beaten Inter once at San Siro but were due a result like this. Gervinho looks an inspired signing, his speed lending this team a threat that even Juventus struggled to deal with. Leo Stulac offered precisely the sort of calm distribution that Inter lacked and demanded a good save from Samir Handanovic before the goal. They don’t look out of their depth. • Just the five goals for Sampdoria, as they demolished Frosinone. That rout of Napoli might have been no accident: this team is setting up to go for the jugular under Marco Giampaolo, and Grégoire Defrel looks right at home alongside Fabio Quagliarella in a front two. • The only other player than Defrel to have scored four times so far? Genoa’s Krzysztof Piatek. A €4m signing from KS Cracovia, the 23-year-old is looking quite the bargain. • Inter aren’t the only big club struggling. Roma blew a two-goal lead at home to Chievo, and with five points from four games are off to their worst start since the American-led takeover of 2011. Napoli look easily the most impressive of the chasing pack, and were richly deserving of their win over Fiorentina. Inter 0-1 Parma, Napoli 1-0 Fiorentina, Frosinone 0-5 Sampdoria, Roma 2-2 Chievo, Genoa 1-0 Bologna, Juventus 2-1 Sassuolo, Udinese 1-1 Torino, Empoli 0-1 Lazio, Cagliari 1-1 Milan