The rapper Nas has denied Kelis’s allegations of domestic violence during their marriage and claimed that his ex-wife was violent towards him. Kelis described their relationship as “toxic” and claimed that Nas would “drink way too much”, became angry if she spoke to other men and was violent towards her. “I’m not afraid to throw a punch. But I wouldn’t have started it. I’ll participate in ending it,” she told Hollywood Unlocked in April. She claimed that she had “bruises all over [her] body” while she was seven months pregnant with their child. “I was terrified. I was like, I cannot bring a person into this. I can’t control this. I’ve got to get out.” Five months after Kelis’s initial allegations, Nas has made a seven-part statement on Instagram in response to being informed of a forthcoming Essence magazine profile of his ex-wife. “I do not beat women,” he wrote. “I did not beat up my ex wife.” He accused her of fabrication: “You made up stories about me and claimed I did things that YOU DID.” He alleged that Kelis was the abusive party in their relationship, describing “10 years of keeping my silence during a decade of dealing with very hostile behavior [sic] and verbal abuse and even your stepfather holding you back from one of your physical violent Attacks [sic] on me right outside your house THIS year while trying to pick up our son while he watched from the window”. He also claimed that she had attempted to sabotage his career, turning off his phone so colleagues could not reach him and insulting his associates. Nas makes extensive allegations that Kelis keeps him from seeing their nine-year-old son, Knight, despite winning joint custody in March. He further alleges that Kelis was “jealous and verbally abusive” to his daughter Destiny, born in 1994 to his ex-fiancee Carmen Bryan. Nas and Kelis married in 2005 and divorced in May 2010. He acknowledged Kelis’s claims that he had been unfaithful during their marriage. “I have to say I wasn’t the most faithful husband,” he wrote. “I was immature. I’m sorry about that.” He accused Kelis of a wider pattern of bad behaviour. “Luckily for you our assistants all signed NDA’s [sic] [non-disclosure agreements] or you would have a list of men and women who would happily talk about how verbally abusive and evil you are.” In a final post, he acknowledged the complexity of making his statement in the wake of #MeToo. “And to those that were lead down a wrong path… I get it… very sensitive times and all things must be taken seriously. This is MY TRUTH.” Kelis has not commented publicly on the matter. Her representatives offered the Guardian no comment. Nas released his 12th studio album this June. Nasir was executive-produced by Kanye West and formed part of West’s five-album summer release marathon on his record label GOOD Music. Kelis’s last album was Food in 2014; the singer has retrained as a chef at the Le Cordon Bleu culinary school and has a successful line of sauces and cookbooks.