The lingering uncertainty over England’s optimal batting order was summed up on the third day in Southampton when Moeen Ali emerged at No 3 in a surprise move that saw Joe Root drop down to his favoured position one spot lower. After a poor first innings in which he made just four, the England captain sent Moeen in ahead of himself – up four places from No 7 – only for the all-rounder to be caught at second slip for nine. Root at least made a more assured 48 before a shambolic run‑out involving Ben Stokes. Speaking after stumps Jos Buttler, who made 69 to help steer England to a lead of 233 with two wickets remaining, insisted the move was purely tactical and made the previous evening with a view to getting the in-form Moeen into the spot he bats for Worcestershire. But Moeen is not considered a long-term option in this berth and dressing-room discussions are understood to have been taking place throughout this fourth Test match regarding the order. Root is said to now be convinced he must return permanently to the position where he averages 52, compared with just 40 at first drop, and thus not what the head coach, Trevor Bayliss, would prefer. Buttler, the vice-captain, said: “I thought Joe batted fantastically well. People will debate it but it could be the difference of one ball. I think in time stability would be important but at the minute we are trying to work out the best combinations. “The best teams in the world, you guys [the press] could turn up every week and write it out. That’s the golden egg of what every team is trying to get to and stability is a key pillar in a lot of successful teams.” Another issue bubbling away behind the scenes is Jonny Bairstow’s current mindset amid a continuing debate over the future of the wicketkeeping gloves and his having been the denied the chance to perform the role here despite believing his broken finger was fine. The Yorkshireman was upset by lack of assurances that he will be restored behind the stumps – England’s man management could be questioned here – and in this Test match, as a specialist batsman, he followed up six runs in the first innings by being bowled first ball by Mohammed Shami playing a wild drive. Buttler, keeping in this Test, said: “From my angle we have played a lot of cricket together, both him keeping or me, one-dayers or Tests. It’s not been a problem. Jonny is not fit and that’s frustrating for him. Whatever happens going forward doesn’t affect me or Jonny. “I’m not fussed, to be honest, I still look at a few months ago that to be in the team was fantastic. Gloves on or off doesn’t matter.”