Anthony Joshua admits as he edges towards a seemingly inevitable heavyweight unification showdown with Deontay Wilder that, although he is unbeaten in 22 fights and holds three of the four recognised belts, he still lives in fear of losing to “one punch”. Joshua ignored a lingering head cold to stop the obdurate but ageing Russian Alexander Povetkin in the seventh round at Wembley Stadium on Saturday night to keep safe his IBF, WBA and WBO titles. “I always think about that one punch,” Joshua said. “No one can beat me skill-for-skill, I don’t think. But it’s that one punch: I’d hate for that to be the reason why I lose. One punch. And that’s what they’re all looking at.” Joshua, who got up from the floor to stop Wladimir Klitschko in the same ring 18 months ago, was wobbled early by Povetkin but finished his sixth defence in style with two knockdowns in the seventh round. Only Joseph Parker has interrupted Joshua’s run of early finishes and the champion was pleased to win by stoppage for the 21st time. Wilder, who is scheduled to defend his WBC title against Tyson Fury at a venue yet to be decided in the US on 1 December, has gone the distance once in 40 fights and owns what is regarded as the single most powerful right hand in the division. But Joshua feels no need to go knockout for knockout with Wilder. “I’ve got no worries in the ring any more. I haven’t found that perfect style but I’ve found a style that is working at the minute. If people say: ‘Do you want to make it exciting?’ Yeah, for sure. I’m still learning but I’m good enough to get the outcome I want, as well. “Every fight is scary. You don’t want to lose everything you’ve got – especially this one – this was a banana-skin fight because of what’s to come. As with the Parker fight, I didn’t want to take any risks. “I’ve got to look forward, whatever it is – if it’s Dillian Whyte, if it’s Tyson Fury, if it’s Wilder, if it’s Luis Ortiz, if it’s Jarrell Miller. I can’t be bothered any more, worrying about Wilder. If he wants it, let’s get it on. He’s a good fighter, he’s a good champion. He has stepped up. But to step up against me, I don’t know.” As for Fury’s chances against Wilder, Joshua said: “He knows how to spoil a fight. He can definitely spoil that fight.” Joshua also revealed he fought with the lingering effects of a heavy cold. “I got hit by a cold [Friday of the previous week]. I had it over the weekend but I thought by Wednesday I should be good. My throat cleared up [on Friday]. But it was still there, a head cold. “I’ve been through this feeling a million times in training camp. I sparred 15 good rounds, and felt worse. But I thought I’ve got one geezer in the ring with me, so I’ve just got to get on with it.”