The confirmation process for Donald Trump’s supreme court nominee Brett Kavanaugh has been thrown into turmoil by accusations he committed sexual assault decades ago. Here’s what we know so far about the allegations, and their possible ramifications. Christine Blasey Ford, a psychology professor at Palo Alto University, says that Kavanaugh sexually assaulted her in the 1980s when they were both teenagers. She said in an interview with the Washington Post that at a party in Montgomery county, Maryland, Kavanaugh led her into a bedroom, pinned her to the bed and groped her, attempting to remove the bathing suit she was wearing and putting his hand over her mouth to stop her from screaming before she was able to escape. Kavanaugh has denied the accusation. Ford said she sought to tell her story in confidence to give senators a “fuller understanding” of Kavanaugh’s character and history as they vetted him for the supreme court. Ford contacted the Washington Post’s tip line in early July, when Kavanaugh was shortlisted as a possible nominee but before he was selected by the president. Around the same time she wrote a letter describing the alleged incident to her California congresswoman, Democrat Anna Eshoo, who relayed it to California senator Dianne Feinstein, the ranking Democrat on the Senate judiciary committee. Feinstein said she did not disclose the allegation to the committee out of respect for Ford’s request to remain anonymous. But last week, she provided the letter to the FBI after the Intercept reported that she was withholding a document related to the nominee. Last week, Feinstein released a cryptic statement saying she had “received information from an individual concerning the nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the supreme court” and referred it to the FBI, without specifying the nature of the allegation. Ford then came forward in the interview with the Post on Sunday. The allegation has roiled the confirmation process in its final stage, unexpectedly imperilling his nomination. Under pressure from a bipartisan group of senators, GOP leaders delayed a judiciary committee vote on the the nomination, originally scheduled for Thursday, in order to allow for a hearing on the assault allegations. But Kavanaugh’s unwavering denial amid demands that the hearing be delayed have helped consolidate GOP support for the embattled nominee. And since the hearing was scheduled, Republicans and Trump have increasingly rallied around Kavanaugh, insisting they will move forward with the confirmation process next week despite calls to delay the hearing. It’s not clear. The judiciary committee scheduled a hearing for Monday to hear from both Ford and Kavanaugh after Ford’s attorney said she was willing to testify. But in a letter to the committee Tuesday night, her attorneys demanded an FBI investigation into the charges as a “first step” before she would testify. Republicans rejected the call for a delay. Trump rushed to the defense of his supreme court nominee Tuesday, saying he feels “terribly” for the judge. “I feel so badly for him. This is not a man who deserves this,” he said at a news conference at the White House. He said Ford should have the opportunity to “state her case”, but predicted that hearings would establish Kavanaugh’s innocence. On Wednesday, he doubled down on that defense, saying it would be “very hard” to imagine anything happened between Kavanaugh and Ford.