For all of José Mourinho’s obsession with the notion that everyone is obsessed with him, the Manchester United manager may be able to put what the rest of the world thinks to one side when he wakes up on Sunday morning and enjoy instead the simple satisfaction that comes with three points. Mourinho was chirpy as he mused on the ramifications of a narrow victory over Watford – one he acknowledged was a fragile win given how his team followed a dominant first half with a more passive second which required a trademark intervention from David de Gea deep into stoppage time to keep hold of the points. In keeping with their high-fashion kit, this result was coloured with a blush of pink relief. “Very happy with the points. Very happy with the spirit. Very happy with something that represents the spirit of the team – Romelu Lukaku’s sliding tackle after 50 metres running back to help the team,” noted Mourinho. His comments emphasised how much graft was required to get this particular result over the line. “I am a bit frustrated because we had everything in the first half to win the game. Then we stopped being aggressive with and without the ball, gave them a chance to be reborn and give us a difficult match.” Watford’s qualities showed their flying start to the season has been no fluke. Their state of blissful cohesion – so in the groove Javi Gracia has not felt the need to tinker with their starting XI at all so far – created a feelgood factor that was tangible. The stage was set for teams in slightly different moods to trade opportunities, to chase chances, to make the difference. Full commitment was on show. When one attack fell to Abdoulaye Doucouré, his shot shuddered straight into Marouane Fellaini’s block. It was a moment when you almost winced for the ball, caught as it was between two giants competing so earnestly. The game ebbed and flowed until United forced the issue and found a breakthrough in the 35th minute. It all started with a free-kick, won when Jesse Lingard was hauled back by Étienne Capoue. A scruffy affair ended up with Ashley Young’s whipped pass catching out Watford’s defence. The ball brushed Lukaku’s torso and drifted past Ben Foster and in. A goal off the stomach? They all count. United suddenly slipped through the gears and had a period during which they really sparkled. The second goal was delivered by Chris Smalling, who cushioned the ball on his chest before swivelling to slam the ball home. Mourinho’s touchline celebration was vigorous. “We trained the corner during the week and the best thing that can happen to coaches is you train and then see it happen during a match.” During the 15-minute spell leading up to half-time Paul Pogba did his utmost to extend United’s lead with three dazzling attempts. Foster had to impress to keep the deficit at two. This was a huge test of Watford’s newly honed spirit. But their task was made even more complicated by United coming back out after the break intent first and foremost on staying solid. Pogba swaggered. Lukaku maintained a physical presence. Fellaini protected. Mourinho had particular praise for the latter: “We made defensive mistakes against Brighton and Tottenham – six goals [conceded], and then go to two difficult matches away at Burnley and Watford. I felt my central defenders in this moment of instability need somebody to support them, to give them the first wall. Marouane is giving us more than that, also quality and simplicity in his football.” In fairness to Watford their endeavour and approach in trying to build positive football did not let up even if the barrier was a difficult one to overcome. They were rewarded with a foothold back into the game, engineered by a smart passing move which culminated in the excellent Doucouré shimmying and picking out a perfect reverse pass for Andre Gray to plant past De Gea. Watford came again, and a warning light flashed for United when Smalling nudged at Troy Deeney as he looked to make inroads in the penalty area. Once upon a time a 2-0 lead for a Mourinho team was a dead game but this was prised back open, chances cropping up at both ends. In the dying moments Nemanja Matic was sent off for clattering Will Hughes, and from the free-kick De Gea took centre stage to keep out Christian Kabasele’s header. It was not to be for Watford but Gracia was proud of his team’s attitude and direction. “The most important [thing] was we made a very big effort. If we have to lose we have to lose this way – fighting until the end, showing our spirit and character – our fans have to be proud of us. I think the players did that.”