The latest chapter of a remarkable Tiger Woods comeback has been set in stone, with confirmation that the 14-times major champion will make a playing appearance in this month’s Ryder Cup. Woods was named as a wild card pick by the United States captain, Jim Furyk, on Tuesday. Phil Mickelson and Bryson DeChambeau were also given the nod by Furyk, with the 12th and final member of Furyk’s contingent to be named on Monday. All eyes, as ever, were on Woods as Furyk delivered golf’s worst kept secret from a Philadelphia hotel suite. Amid recovery from a fourth back surgery, Woods had initially been named as one of the US team’s vice-captains. He has not played in a Ryder Cup since 2012, with subsequent years marked by physical and professional turmoil. The 42-year-old Woods described as “beyond special” an elevation which has seen him contend again in major championships and now seal an eighth Ryder Cup playing berth. “At the beginning of this year one of my goals was to make this team,” Woods said. “I got the call from Jim, asking if I would be a vice-captain and I said ‘Absolutely, I’ll do anything to help you’ but also, deep down I wanted to make the team. I really wanted to play on it. It was a goal. As the year progressed I have gained some traction and was somehow able to get some high finishes. Lo and behold I’m part of this team. It’s incredible, like I said it is beyond special for me.” With Woods having now taken a step back from backroom duties, Furyk added David Duval, Zach Johnson and Matt Kuchar as vice-captains. “Tiger has been instrumental in helping not only captains before me but me as well,” Furyk said. “That’s in terms of strategy, pairings and we will continue to use that knowledge but we want to free him up to practise and prepare, to work with his partner or partners. His role won’t change much but he will be a player. “We are all excited; Tiger and I spent time as partners and a lot of time as vice-captains talking strategy. It has been great to have his help and to get a feel of one of the best minds in the history of the game on your side, helping out. It is a feather in our cap to have him on our side.” Woods reflected on his Ryder Cup debut, as a 21-year-old at Valderrama in 1997. “From that moment on I wanted to be part of every team,” he said. DeChambeau will make his Ryder Cup debut after three wins this year on the PGA Tour, the last of which came on Monday at the Dell Technologies Championship. Mickelson was without a victory since the Open of 2013 before delivering a memorable success at a World Golf Championship in Mexico six months ago. Mickelson has featured in 11 Ryder Cups but is yet to sample team glory on European soil. “It’s obvious that the one thing that has been missing has been for our team to go over to Europe and win,”Mickelson conceded. “I’m excited about the team this year, I’m excited to be part of the team. We have some incredible players and a really special opportunity to do something we haven’t done in a long time. It is a great challenge and a strong challenge because we know how well the European team plays at home.” Tony Finau is the favourite to be named as the 12th member of Furyk’s team early next week.