It started with an estate agent listing: a two-bedroom bungalow for sale in west Wales, with sea views and planning permission for an extension. It was just a short walk to the “beautiful seaside town of Borth” and the schools and transport links were, as ever, “excellent”. The asking price: £650,000. Dean Tweedy still remembers travelling from his home in Kent for the viewing with his wife, Tracy. It was a sunny day and the drive along the coastal road, over the hill from nearby Aberystwyth, had already seduced a couple looking for a fresh start. “We could see there was a lot of work to do, but we had taken on rundown properties before,” Dean says, more than a year after moving to Wales. “We were prepared for all of that. We just weren’t prepared for the lynx escape.” The Tweedys had bought more than a modest house by the sea. They had bought a zoo. Borth Animalarium – now Borth Wild Animal Kingdom – opened in the late 1980s and is home to about 300 animals, including lions who crunch through pigs’ heads like apples and a six-metre Burmese python called Bernie. Much earlier in their relationship, the Tweedys had shared a fantasy of owning a zoo, but always assumed it was out of reach. They were hoping only to buy a place with a petting barn to house their own modest menagerie of small mammals and reptiles. Now the fantasy had a price they could afford. Borth would be a business opportunity, but also an idyll where Tracy, who had trained as a psychotherapist, could use the animals in her work, and where their children could thrive. “It was going to be relaxing,” she recalls. “A sanctuary for animals and for people.” It would be, as the attraction’s slogan reads, “the little zoo with a big heart”. But the lynx escape, which made national headlines last October, triggered a series of disasters for the zoo. The extent to which the dream has become a nightmare for the Tweedys, 15 months after they moved in, unfolds during my visit to Borth and afterwards. It includes accounts of mounting debt, a family at war, several more deaths – and accusations of incompetence and neglect. “So much for buying a quiet little zoo in a quiet seaside town,” Tracy says. Dean, 49, a mural painter by trade, holds a mug of tea while he watches two young Eurasian lynx, each the size of a large dog, play around their mother. He speaks softly and wears a flat cap and paint-splattered jeans. There is an hour to go before the zoo opens, and all is quiet but for the hollering marmosets next door. The older lynx, with its spotted fur and pointy ears, arrived shortly before the Tweedys and unexpectedly gave birth days later. The lynx enclosure used to have more greenery, and Dean thinks that Lillith, one of the litter, must have leapt from a branch on to the fence one night late last October. At first, he and the half-dozen keepers that he and Tracy kept on after buying the zoo thought that the cat was hiding in the enclosure. But it was soon clear she had escaped. “We just thought: ‘What do we do now?’” Dean recalls. “How do you catch a lynx?” Soon a police helicopter was flying overhead as news spread that a category-one animal (the most dangerous level) was on the loose. Bait traps were placed on surrounding land. After 10 days, and a failed attempt to trap the animal under a caravan, Ceredigion county council called in a game hunter. “We got a call at about 2am to say: ‘You can stand down now – we’ve shot your cat,’” Dean says. “It was devastating. We’d spent 10 days not sleeping … our world began to collapse at about that point.” Until Lillith’s death, the Tweedys say they had enjoyed a thrilling, if hectic, first summer at the zoo, after moving there in April last year. On a nice day, 500 people might visit the site, set around a hill with views up the Dyfi valley. The couple, who resettled with the four youngest of their six children, aged nine to 17, had followed a well-known path. In We Bought a Zoo, Benjamin Mee, played by Matt Damon, buys a house in California with a derelict zoo attached, and tries to revive it against all odds. The real Ben Mee, on whose memoir the film is based, reopened Dartmoor Zoological Park in 2007. Like the Tweedys, whom he has advised, he had a passion for animals but no experience of running a zoo. He has faced battles with recession, bereavement, escapees and washout summers. “People often say to me they’d love to own a zoo, and I always say to them: ‘No, you wouldn’t,’” Mee tells me. After the success of his first book, the former journalist is working on a follow-up. “It’s going to be called Never Buy a Zoo,” he says. But dreamers have selective hearing when it comes to advice. Buying the place was the easy part for the Tweedys; they had sold a large family home in Kent. Dean’s parents, Christine and Dennis, who moved to the county when Dean was 10, and ran a small chain of car spares shops, became directors, alongside Dean and Tracy. They own half the zoo. But the older couple’s relocation to a caravan on the site came during the lynx escape. The move, at such a stressful time, as winter loomed, would end up dividing the family. But, before that, another lynx died. While Lillith ran free, the Tweedys shut the zoo. They say that when they arrived in Borth, the council presented a list of six improvements it required (local authorities are responsible for licensing and inspecting zoos). During the lynx crisis, further inspections bumped that up to more than 120 improvements. Some were easy, such as more secure storage for the quad bike petrol. Others were essential if Borth was to keep its category-one licence. Failure to comply “would have left us with basically a few rabbits and guinea pigs”, Dean says, exaggerating only a little. The zoo was given just weeks to make improvements to almost all its enclosures. In haste, keepers used a catchpole with a noose to move Nilly, another young lynx, to a vacant enclosure while work on her own took place. She died of strangulation. Dean regrets the use of the pole, but says his research suggested that it was a legitimate method in some circumstances. “Everyone was sympathetic when the lynx escaped,” Mee recalls, but at this death “the zoo community made a sharp intake of breath and thought: ‘What’s going on here?’” The shooting and the strangulation brought heat on the Tweedys from all sides. The zoo’s former owners, who did not respond to my messages, accused the couple of wrecking it. Farmers used the escape to attack a national campaign to reintroduce lynx to the wild. Lynx UK Trust, a husband-and-wife group that leads that campaign, said the Tweedys’ “levels of incompetence and ineptitude” were “mindblowing”. Ministers debated the zoo at the Welsh assembly in Cardiff, while a steady stream of reporters knocked on the Tweedys’ door. The zoo remained closed for five months while the improvements were made (the council eventually approved its reopening in February – with its category-one animals, such as the lynx and lions). Revenues vanished, while Dean says it still cost about £15,000 each month just to keep the place running, including £3,000 for food. While a contracted coffee machine sat idle in the cafe, its supplier demanded thousands of pounds in penalties. But money was only one of the Tweedys’ problems. I get a whiff of these in the town of Borth, where the air is thick with gossip. Less than an hour after my arrival, a restaurant owner sits down opposite me to grill me over my lamb, having heard that a reporter was staying in town. As I get to the zoo the next morning and wait for Dean, Guy Simmonds, the zoo’s manager, is feeding yellow chicks to a black-chested buzzard-eagle. He seems wary of me and won’t talk. Dennis Tweedy, Dean’s father, appears briefly, only to issue conspiratorial whisperings. Dean doesn’t talk about Simmonds or Dennis, preferring to tell me about a man named Mark Antony, an animal trainer who arrived in Borth to help during the lynx escape. Antony told the press that several other animals had died due to neglect and and poor conditions. They included Dana the squirrel monkey, Mrs Grivet the African green monkey and an escaped emu that died during an attempt to recapture it. On the phone, Tracy Tweedy confirms the deaths, but denies all allegations of mistreatment. Instead, she blames the deaths on Antony. He, in turn, insists he had nothing to do with them. “I have never had involvement with animal deaths,” he says. Antony then tells a different story involving Simmonds and Dennis Tweedy. He claims that the men are working together, fighting Dean and Tracy over control of the zoo. He says Tracy has fired Simmonds, but that the manager refuses to leave. Simmonds returns my call while he flies a falcon on the hill above the zoo. He initially confirms what Antony has told me, but later retracts his comments, only wishing to credit his management and the staff’s dedication with improving conditions at the zoo. Dennis Tweedy, who is 70, says he has been advised not to speak, confirming only that there has been “a big breakdown in relations”. Tracy says she and Dean will only speak to his parents through their respective solicitors. The Tweedys say the family relationship began to suffer as soon as the older couple moved into their caravan. They only get worse after my visit. Tracy, who is 48, had to leave the zoo moments after I arrived. I speak to her on the phone the following week. “Someone’s opened a can of worms, haven’t they?” she says when I ask what’s going on. Her account of the months since the lynx escape matches Dean’s, and she confirms that the family breakdown is at the heart of the saga. She says it came to a head last week when a confrontation with Simmonds in the zoo shop ended with a call to the police. Tracy says that Dennis, who with his wife owns half the zoo, is trying to legally seize control of it from her and Dean, installing Simmonds as manager – a move that she is challenging. She says the older couple then intend to return to Kent to run a pub. “It has been horrific,” Tracy says. “But Dean’s parents seem to think that we have stitched them up … It’s a sad mess because I think that, at their time of life, they feel like they shouldn’t have to deal with this stress.” If the stress has taken its toll on the younger couple, they won’t show it. When Dean gave me a tour of the lion enclosure, where Wilma and Zulu were showing little interest in each other, he recalled meeting Tracy 31 years ago, and being taken by the rat she kept in her top pocket. He said the couple were used to living under scrutiny, having fostered more than 100 children together. “If anything, this has brought us closer,” Tracy adds during our phonecall. She remains hopeful that the wider family rift might be closed, if not any time soon. Meanwhile, the zoo is preparing for winter. The Tweedys say they are applying for a “company voluntary arrangement”, a way for a business to repay its debts gradually while continuing to trade. Even as the cold weather approaches, with a schedule of further improvements, Tracy is confident she will find the sanctuary she looked for. Does she regret buying a zoo? “No,” she says. “I still see a future where people can relax and be with animals that are happy and content and have the enclosures they deserve. I couldn’t wish for anything more.”