It was just another summer Friday night in California’s Inland Empire, the dusty eastern suburbs of Los Angeles where scores of mainly young men get their kicks from staging street races on lonely stretches of road. Sometimes, these illegal car races are semi-organized events, with heavy betting and dozens of extra vehicles to block off the designated route and form an early-alert system if the cops show up. This time, though, it was – to all appearances – a spur-of-the-moment thing, a dare between two vehicles speeding into the setting sun along a deserted stretch of the 60 freeway. One car, according to police, was a late-model Honda Civic. The other was a white BMW with five passengers including a woman who was seven months pregnant and her fiance. All of them were 21 or younger. All had driven out from San Bernardino, a struggling, heavily Latino city 20 miles to the north. A couple of miles outside Moreno Valley, a little short of the neighborhood Walmart and the first lines of tract homes typical of the area, the BMW hit the freeway’s concrete central divider and flipped over. The two young men in the front flew through the car’s twisted metal and broken glass, police said, and landed on the divider where officers found their bodies. The young couple, 20-year-old Airyana Luna and 21-year-old Valentino Ramos, died trapped on the back seat. The fifth passenger, a 19-year-old woman, somehow escaped with just minor cuts and scrapes to her arms. Ten days later, investigators are still piecing together exactly what happened – and are looking urgently for the occupants of the Civic. As they do whenever they are forced to deal with the carnage from street racing, they are interviewing whatever witnesses they can lay hands on and scouring social media – where street racing often takes on a second life. “We just hope someone will come forward and tell us what happened,” said Sergeant David Robles of the California highway patrol. It’s a depressingly familiar law enforcement lament in a part of California where street racing – inspired by the Fast and the Furious movies, and by a dearth of opportunities for young people – has become extremely popular. Police say they get calls about street racesevery day. Sometimes they stumble upon them and break them up. Sometimes, the street racers move aggressively to block their path until the racing vehicles have had a chance to make their getaway. And sometimes, people die. In May, a Honda Accord racing in the wrong lane of a two-lane country road a few miles south of Moreno Valley hit an oncoming vehicle at the crest of a hill, killing two boys aged six and eight. In 2016, a street-racing car struck a UPS delivery truck on a freeway six miles southeast of downtown Los Angeles, causing the truck to fly into the air and then explode as it collided with two other vehicles. Three people died, and four others were injured. Sometimes, the danger is not from a race but from cars performing dangerous tricks. In late 2015, more than 100 people congregated in the same industrial area where the UPS truck exploded to watch drivers performing doughnuts. One of the vehicles collided with another car and killed three people, including a 15-year-old. It's too big. We don’t have the manpower to keep our eyes out everywhere Some victims’ relatives have set up pressure groups to deter teenagers from joining street races – and to lobby law enforcement to stop them. “We deeply believe that no parent should ever have to feel the horrible pain and emptiness of burying their child,” one such group, Street Racing Kills, says. Police have been scrambling to catch up with street racing – a phenomenon that, until recently, did not form part of its statistics on accidents and violent deaths. Hundreds of people are believed to have died in street races in the Los Angeles area since 2000, but nobody knows for sure. The California Highway Patrol began tracking street racing only in 2016. Since then it has recorded about 700 races a year in Los Angeles county alone. (Moreno Valley is in neighboring Riverside county.) Races known as “takeovers” – when vehicles block public streets – can involve 30 to 40 vehicles, and sometimes many more than that. Sergeant Robles said that the Riverside office of the highway patrol had set up a task force that regularly patrolled known racing sites, in addition to responding to calls. “Racing happens throughout the county,” he said. “Some of the favorite spots are intersections in remote areas – places with sparse populations, no regular traffic and no law enforcement.” When the racers stay close to the big towns, police stand a chance to catch them. Last weekend, authorities in Riverside – the Highway Patrol, the county sheriff’s department and the city police – staged a crackdown in response to the Moreno Valley crash. They impounded eight vehicles and made eight arrests. Riverside county, however, is vast, and stretches more than 150 miles across the Colorado desert to the Arizona border. “It’s too big,” Sergeant Robles said. “We don’t have the manpower to keep our eyes out everywhere.”