A calm, beautiful game that rewards patience, curiosity and wonder, The Gardens Between tells a bittersweet story with no script and only three buttons. While this time-travelling puzzler does not revolutionise the swelling wave of “chill out” games, it is essential playing for the genre. It will no doubt become a reliable go-to for enticing people of all ages into video games, but it’s also a pleasure for regular players craving something original. The Gardens Between’s child protagonists are neighbours who escape drab homes using a rope ladder and plastic chair to get to their favourite play area. Here they flee rainy suburbia for adventures in a beaten-up treehouse. Soon, with their wooden hideout deployed as a boat, the duo are whisked on a journey into their own memories. Giant relics of their friendship – a lake-sized paddling pool, a towering bowl of popcorn, a paintbrush taller than a person – are perched on top of islands that sit in boundless bodies of water. Headstrong and impatient Arina and her more pensive bespectacled buddy Frendt do not question why they are island-hopping between surreal worlds or why their TV is four storeys high. They are kids, why would they? So neither do you. Refreshingly, these children explore their little isles of imagination independently of your control. It’s their job to solve each puzzle by carrying a lantern of light to the peak. The player is relegated to observer, each dreamlike setting presented as a little diorama, accompanied by a unique electronic soundtrack tailored to its theme. Your role is to be their guide, but indirectly, by moving time forwards and backwards. A button prompts Arina or Frendt to interact with their cartoon-style surroundings. It’s a collaborative process. Occasionally, they will point out items worth investigating. Because you’re not in complete control of the characters, they feel a lot more like individuals. The passage of time is not straight in The Gardens Between. It’s a labyrinth of possibilities, all but one with dead ends. In one option, you find the pair stuck at the bottom of a cliff, but if Frendt plugs in a video player, a car-sized VHS tape will pop out and form a ramp. Reverse time to before they passed the cliff, and you’ll find they can now climb up it. Controlling time instead of people is relaxing and fun in other ways: collapsing a mammoth Jenga set and then rebuilding it is a delight. There were a couple of times when I was stumped by a puzzle. Once, a little voice in my head started suggesting that the level might be broken. I’d travelled back and forth through time for ages, trying to figure out wrinkles I could exploit – but I finally did get to the solution and was smiling rather than frustrated. The diversity and creative ingenuity of these little four-dimensional riddles is truly impressive. I was sad to finish the game after four or so hours, but enriched by the journey. • The Gardens Between is out on PlayStation 4, PC, Mac, and Nintendo Switch on 20 September.