Thomas Bjørn is set to side with experience when naming his captain’s picks for the European Ryder Cup team on Wednesday. Henrik Stenson, Paul Casey, Ian Poulter and Sergio García have emerged as the favoured quartet to join Bjørn’s eight automatic qualifiers as Europe look to reclaim the trophy in France at the end of September. While the selection of Stenson, Casey and Poulter will raise few eyebrows, García’s inclusion, if confirmed, will trigger debate. The Spaniard found himself embroiled in a late battle with his compatriot, Rafael Cabrera Bello, and the in-form Englishman Matt Wallace to reach the European team. Both will have cause to be upset if, as expected, García gets the nod. Poulter, who has emerged as something of a Ryder Cup icon for Europe, was always part of the equation amid a terrific career renaissance. Stenson has struggled with an elbow injury this summer but, at 42 and as a former Open champion, is a valuable part of the team dynamic. Casey’s return to the European Tour fold after making himself unavailable for the last Ryder Cup meant Bjørn would struggle to omit the matchplay specialist. García has been woefully out of sorts, in essence since ending his wait for a major championship at the Masters last year. The 38-year-old, who has missed the cut in his last five major appearances, has slipped to 30th in the world rankings. He was not one of the 125 players exempt for the PGA Tour’s end of series FedEx Cup play-offs. Yet influential in Bjørn’s thought process has been the appearance of five rookies in those who earned their spots automatically. García has played in eight Ryder Cups – first as a teenager – amassing 22.5 points, making him one of the most successful European players in history. He also finished in the top 10 at this year’s France Open, played on the Ryder Cup course on the outskirts of Versailles. In addition he is viewed as a player compatible with multiple partners. Cabrera Bello, a spot ahead of García in the world rankings and part of the Europe team who lost to the United States at Hazeltine two years ago, finished in a share of seventh at the PGA Tour’s Dell Technologies Championship on Monday. The 34-year-old posted four rounds of under 70. “I’ve done everything I can,” he said before leaving Boston. “I love the Ryder Cup. It would be a huge honour to represent my continent again. And I would be 100% available if he needs me. I do understand it’s a difficult pick because there are lots of good players outside. But I feel like, if he was trying to see if I was in form or not, this week proves that I am.” It is thought Bjørn may have taken a dim view of Cabrera Bello’s desire to compete in the United States rather than at the last counting event for the European team, the Made in Denmark event. That being the case, it is notable García, who was not eligible for the PGA Tour competition, did not travel to Europe either. Suspicion will automatically emerge García was sure of a pick, regardless of the form of others. Wallace won a four-man play-off in Denmark for his second European Tour success in three months. Working against Wallace, though, was always the qualification of so many debutants: Tommy Fleetwood, Jon Rahm, Alex Norén, Thorbjørn Olesen and Tyrrell Hatton. Bjørn will lead Europe against a United States side whose strong reputation firmly goes before them.