A man sneezes a live rabbit on to the table. Here comes another rabbit. The man is seated in a characterless room that looks more like a cell. I guess this is his job, sneezing rabbits all day long. Other operatives come and go. Now they are sneezing light bulbs, now a lamb chop. Don’t ask why. Nothing seems to get stuck in their nostrils, but their grotesque, pullulating noses have clearly seen a lot of action. The noses, one hopes, are prosthetic, while the bunnies look real. The New York-based Argentinian/Israeli  Mika Rottenberg is the first artist to show at the new Goldsmiths Centre for Contemporary Art in south London. Rottenberg makes the most of the labyrinthine galleries, designed by the Turner prize-winning architectural collective Assemble. Up on the top floor, in an eerily black chamber that once housed the water tanks for this former swimming pool, Rottenberg has arranged a number of hotplates on the floor, each heating up a frying pan. Water drips from the ceiling. It sizzles on the pans, sending up clouds of steam. Each hotplate and pan is spotlit. The cast shadows and illuminated steam are nice. Tssk, tsssk, goes the water as it hits the pan. Water also drips in a lower corner from an old air-conditioning unit mounted on a wall in another gallery, feeding a pot plant underneath. So far, all this is reminiscent of the kinds of things that get scrutinised in tutorials across the Goldsmiths’ campus. “Hmmm, what are you trying to say?”, a tutor might ask, pointing a finger. There’s a finger here, too, poking through the gallery wall. It slowly revolves, with an absurdly long painted fingernail twirling slowly at the end. Painted nails and sneezes are two of Rottenberg’s signal leitmotifs – a posh word for gimmicks – and recur in her sculptures and videos. Her art can be absurd and slight and mystifying, as well as taking you to corners of the world you may not have visited: a grim, artificially lit bingo hall somewhere in America; Chinese-Mexican restaurants on the Calexico/Mexicali border and the barren territories beside the border fence; wholesale markets of plastic tat in Yiwu, China, and a sodden, semi-darkened basement where cultured pearls are winkled from oyster shells. In the bingo hall the atmosphere is dismal. No one looks happy or entertained, and daylight never penetrates. Like the galleries themselves, with their sunken wells and strange and unexpected sightlines, Rottenberg’s art is labyrinthine. She plays with time as well as space, with the longueurs and boredom of repetitive and seemingly pointless labour and leisure, the anterooms of wasted time and diminished lives, lost opportunities or no opportunities. Much of what her film work depicts is a kind of affront to pleasure. Workers sit among overloaded displays of garish inflatable toys making inventories, waiting for customers, staring at their phones, crowded in by mountains of plastic dreck. It is a world of bilious magentas, sour yellows, sickly greens and hyper-intense, impossible blues, all lit by sallow neon. These cheap promises of pleasure are the most dismal of commodities. The scenes from a Chinese market and life on the border between California and Mexico are connected by a tunnel, part intestinal tube, part escape route. Rottenberg filmed all this, and fabricated her tunnel for her film just as Trump was calling to build a wall, and instigating a trade war with China. Rottenberg’s films are often painfully overextended. Sometimes they make you wish your shift as a viewer were over. This I think is deliberate, turning us, like her cast, into weary souls caught up in dreary occupations. Her actors – she calls them “talents” – often have unusual jobs in real life, and she pays them what they command for their everyday services. They perform ridiculous, repetitive, tasks in her films, playing the roles of the bored and the wearied. In an early work, Mary’s Cherries, a cast of female wrestlers pedal at bicycle-powered machines, fabricating Maraschino cherries from fake fingernails and putty (or is it chewing gum?). Outside the gallery, a group of students are protesting in support of the college’s cleaning staff, whose jobs have been outsourced, and urging the college not to renew its contract with cleaning company ISS. Rottenberg has issued a statement in support of the cleaners and the protest, though the vuvuzelas and loud music, the posters slapped on the windows, the taunts and banners – “Who keeps the cube white”, reads one – collide with Rottenberg’s strange plays on hidden labour and futility, productivity and play in a strange reciprocation. • At Goldsmiths Centre for Contemporary Art, London, until 4 November. 