As the young Queen Elizabeth in the Netflix series The Crown, Claire Foy portrayed an under-confident woman growing into steely self-assurance. But away from the camera, the actor has revealed she has battled for many years with paralysing anxiety, characterised by “lots of thoughts about how shit I am”. Speaking to the Guardian Weekend magazine, Foy, 34, said she had struggled with the condition since childhood, but that it had “exploded” as she got older and began working as an actor. “When you have anxiety, you have anxiety about – I don’t know – crossing the road,” she said. “The thing is, it’s not related to anything that would seem logical. It’s purely about that feeling in the pit of your stomach, and the feeling that you can’t, because you’re ‘this’ or you’re ‘that’. It’s my mind working at a thousand beats a second, and running away with a thought.” Foy’s parents separated when she was eight, and she said her response to the family breakdown had been to try to “make everyone happy. Never be angry. Be really sweet and well-behaved. I didn’t want to upset people.” Her anxiety, she believed, had developed “as a tool to survive, definitely. To try to hold on to everything. To try to feel safe.” She had become focused on trying to anticipate and second-guess the consequences of her every action. “If I knew a day was going to be ruined by anxiety, that was good in a way, because it meant I knew what was going to happen.” It had made her doubt her suitability when auditioning for the part of Queen Elizabeth, she said, and for her earlier role as Anne Boleyn in the 2014 BBC adaptation of Wolf Hall. “I’d read Hilary Mantel’s novel. And I just thought: ‘I’m not her. Not in any way, shape or form.’ Anne was so intelligent, so alluring, so able to be mysterious and have people be fascinated with her. Anne knew she was special. She spoke five languages. I just didn’t see it.” In fact, she won widespread praise for her role as Anne, the Guardian praising her “dazzling” self-assurance, and was nominated for a Bafta among other awards season nods. The role of the Queen, which she played for two seasons (Olivia Coleman will now take over as the older Elizabeth), was even more rapturously received, earning her a Golden Globe, an Emmy and two Screen Actors Guild awards, among others. She will shortly be seen in Oscar-winner Damien Chazelle’s film First Man, about the 1969 moon landing. It was while filming Wolf Hall that Foy discovered she was pregnant, which “upped things”, she told the Guardian. “I felt like the game was on in life. I had to get my shit together.” Her daughter with fellow actor Stephen Campbell Moore is now three; the couple have since separated. She began seeing a therapist for her anxiety (“I’m glad I did”), but her career successes had not changed her life as she might have expected, she said. “We laud success so much, and think that if you’re successful, you’re special. Maybe it changes some people. But what I found really disconcerting was that it hadn’t changed me at all. Ultimately, all the same old crap is going on.” At last, however, she has begun to get her anxiety more under control, she said. “All your shit – and everybody has shit – it doesn’t go away. It’s still there, but I guess I don’t believe it so much any more. I used to think that this was my lot in life, to be anxious. And that I would struggle and struggle and struggle with it, and that it would make me quite miserable, and that I’d always be restricted. “But now I’m able to disassociate myself from it more. I know that it’s just something I have – and that I can take care of myself.”