When is a manager happy with his goalkeeper giving away a goal after trying a Cruyff turn in his own box? This is not the start of a joke, but if it was then the punchline would be “Saturday”, and the manager in question Jürgen Klopp. The closing stages of Liverpool’s 2-1 win at Leicester were less comfortable than they should have been after Alisson’s error donated a goal to Rachid Ghezzal. The Liverpool manager could be forgiven for having goalkeeping PTSD after Loris Karius’s errors in the Champions League final, but in a fine example of positive thinking, Klopp claimed he was actually pleased the Brazilian’s first clanger was out of the way. “To be 100% honest I am really happy it happened because we don’t have to wait for it now,” said Klopp. He might not have looked on the bright side if Liverpool had conceded another but as they have won their first four games in a season for the first time in 27 years, Klopp could afford to. Rather than the error, Klopp chose to focus on how Alisson – who himself said he was not “arrogant enough not to learn from” his mistake – responded to it. “I don’t think he’ll be the type to be influenced, I’m pretty sure,” Klopp said. “You need a lot of things to do the things he’s doing and one of those is confidence. He’s 0.0% arrogant. I’m pleased with his reaction. “It’s a big mistake and everyone was waiting for it after last week: he did it, the [Leicester] crowd were on their toes but he was still cool. That’s the only thing I’m interested in. I don’t look for anyone responsible: the final [mistake] was Alisson but we should have cleared the situation before.” Joe Gomez, otherwise excellent but one of the players who perhaps should have cleared it, remains comfortable with Alisson’s style. “All the time he gives us that confidence that we can play and it relieves a lot of pressure for us. Everyone has their style of play and we don’t want him to change.” When it was put to Klopp that the error might encourage teams to press his keeper, he maintained the upbeat attitude. “That’s good. If they go for the goalkeeper then someone else has the space, so [we should] use it.” The mistake was an aberration in an otherwise solid game from Alisson, and while Liverpool’s general performance was extremely scratchy, their results are hard to quibble with. The four victories have also allowed Klopp to justify gently easing Fabinho into life in England: the £40m summer signing from Monaco has not even been involved with a matchday squad yet. “Nothing,” he said when asked what was wrong with Fabinho. “The team is good, he needs time to adapt. He could have been in the squad but it’s quite difficult when they are all fit. He will come back. He’s already made big steps in the last few weeks.”