Ed Smith’s selectorial announcements this summer have often been diverting and the same could apply when he reveals on Friday England’s squad for the three November Tests in Sri Lanka. There are a few ticklish choices to make and scope for Smith to deliver the odd surprise. The selectors are meeting – with Trevor Bayliss on the line from Australia – on Friday morning and the bulk of their discussions will centre on the top-order batting. Alastair Cook has retired and the assumption is that Surrey’s Rory Burns, by a huge margin the highest run-scorer in division one, has earned the right to take his place. Seldom has an uncapped player been such a certainty for a call-up. Keaton Jennings is the man in possession of the other opening slot by a slender thread. Since scoring a century on his debut against India in Mumbai in December 2016, Test cricket has been a struggle for Jennings. In 12 Tests he averages 22 and his loss of confidence has been reflected by several dropped catches. No one doubts his admirably conscientious approach to the game but a stiff-leg technique militates against much fluidity at the crease. Jennings remains in the frame because the alternatives also represent a considerable gamble. James Vince is the second highest runscorer in the top division but has never opened and he has exasperated in his modest Test career (13 matches and an average of 24). Joe Denly of Kent, 32 years of age, used to open the batting but has not done so recently when his obvious talent has started to bear fruit more consistently in the middle order, albeit in the second division. Like Vince, Denly has always looked a quality batsman. He has played 14 white-ball games for England but the last of those was in 2010. The real wildcard choice has played one red-ball innings all summer. Jason Roy hit a typically silky 63 for Surrey at Taunton on Tuesday. In normal times it would be laughable to suggest this qualifies him as a candidate. However his one-day batting for England hints at a special talent but is that transferable to Test cricket? At the very least, if Roy bats spectacularly well in the ODIs in Octobernext month they could decide to keep him in Sri Lanka. It has been suggested Stuart Broad might be rested for this tour especially since the spin bowlers are expected to be busy. This notion was not greeted with any enthusiasm by Broad and has not been confirmed by those involved in selection. However if he tours he may not be a regular in the team. A minimum of three spinners will be required so Somerset’s Jack Leach will join up with Moeen Ali and Adil Rashid. The addition of a fourth is just possible but not easy. Dom Bess has played only sporadically since his Tests against Pakistan and without much success. Surrey’s Amar Virdi has been much more effective – as a pure bowler. Meanwhile Olly Stone, promoted to the ODI squad, and Jamie Porter of Essex will not stray too far from their phones – just in case.