It’s a poorly kept secret that the Ryder Cup remains a far bigger deal in Great Britain and Ireland than in the United States, where the event is routinely overshadowed by the ratings-grabbing bluster of the NFL and college football, the business end of baseball’s regular-season and even the opening of NBA training camps. Golf writer Stephanie Wei believes the disparity in interest between Europe and the United States is down to cultural differences. “The last Ryder Cup at Hazeltine, there were Europeans singing songs on the first tee,” Wei says. “They had a song for each American, too. It’s so creative. That culture from my understanding comes from football or soccer. They know how to cheer for a team. I think that camaraderie is why it’s more popular and there’s more interest in Europe. They’re the underdogs. It’s the one time they can kind of come in and kick the Americans’ ass.” Yet there’s reason to expect an atypical spike in mainstream interest when golf’s grudge match kicks off on Friday at Le Golf National – thanks in no small part to the one golfer capable of drawing in even the most casual passers-by. The splashy resurgence of Tiger Woods – the headline attraction of Jim Furyk’s USA team after a litany of back operations relegated him to a vice-captain’s role at Hazeltine two years ago – is exactly what’s needed to broaden the reach of an event that stirs highly concentrated enthusiasm among golf’s niche audience Stateside, but seldom crosses over to the sports-shouting shows on cable TV and the column-inches above the fold. While most of golf’s marquee tournaments are individual affairs with a player competing for themselves at strokeplay across four days, at the Ryder Cup the 12-strong teams of European and American golfers face off playing matchplay golf in a competition held every two years and played over three days. The USA are the holders, winning the 2016 event 17-11 at Hazeltine, Minnesota. The bookmakers are seldom wrong and make the USA odds-on favourites but Europe have always relished the underdog role and will not be lacking in motivation on home turf. Each team has a non-playing captain, which this year is Thomas Bjørn for Europe and the USA’s Jim Furyk. Each is assisted by five vice-captains, in Europe’s case Luke Donald, Padraig Harrington, Graeme McDowell, Lee Westwood and Robert Karlsson. Bjørn has five rookies to handle in Paris, although two of them are the US Open runner-up, Tommy Fleetwood, and the world No 7, Jon Rahm. Furyk has three, one of whom, Justin Thomas, is ranked No 4 in the world. The teams will battle it out for 28 points and the first to 14.5 points wins the Ryder Cup, while the USA will retain the trophy as defending champions should the contest end 14-14 on Sunday. It is comprised of three types of matchplay. Fourballs Two golfers from each team compete but each player uses his own ball. The lowest score from each pair will count for the score for their side. There are four fourball matches each morning for the first two days. Foursomes Two players from Europe compete against two players from USA, with team members alternating between shots and each team using one ball. Four matches are played on Friday afternoon and four on Saturday afternoon. Singles All 24 players compete on the final day of the tournament. There are 12 match-ups, with every member of the European team going head-to-head over 18 holes with a player from the USA team. “It helps that Tiger just won. And I think come the weekend people [in the US] will watch,” says Wei. “Because whenever Tiger is playing, he does have that effect that no other player has had that I’ve seen in my years out here.” Woods was enjoying a revival even before he captured his first PGA Tour win in five years at last week’s Tour Championship. He came in sixth at the Open at Carnoustie before a gripping runner-up finish at last month’s US PGA Championship at Bellerive, where he finished two strokes behind Brooks Koepka. Can the 42-year-old defy his scratchy history in the competition – a career 13-17-3 record and just one team win in seven appearances – to lead the United States to their first triumph on European soil in a quarter-century? It may be the one question weighty enough to tear Americans’ eyes away from LeBron James’s preseason arrival at the Los Angeles Lakers. “As a casual fan of golf, one who tunes into the majors and whenever Tiger Woods is leading an event, I imagine I am similar to many American sports fans who are not hardcore golf watchers,” says Richard Deitsch, a sports media writer for the Athletic. “But the Ryder Cup has always drawn my interest – and interest beyond the diehard golf fan – because Americans love a team competition that involves, well, Americans. This obviously holds historically true for the Olympic Games, the World Cup, and writ smaller, the Ryder Cup.” Deitsch notes the final day of the 2016 Ryder Cup at Hazeltine drew 4.3 million viewers on NBC, down 22% in viewership from 2012 (5.5m) but up 2% from 2008 (4.2m). The 2016 figure is roughly a third of the audience for the final round of this year’s Masters and less than half of the average NFL Monday Night Football game. But there’s no question the Tiger effect stands to offer those figures a considerable boost, even if the run-up to this year’s competition has been somewhat muted in the crowded US sports market. “With Woods coming off a victory last week at the Tour Championship, look for significant viewer interest even amid an NFL weekend,” Deitsch says. “While the time zone from Paris is not ideal for American viewers, it will certainly draw eyeballs.” Jeff Ritter, senior editor for Golf magazine, believes American interest will correspond with the caliber of passion on display, citing the extraordinary 2016 singles match between Patrick Reed and Rory McIlroy as the sort of theater that will command attention. “I think the Ryder Cup continues to get more heated and emotional with each passing edition,” he says. “If the players are into it, viewers generally respond.” That said, Woods remains the X factor. “Tiger Woods is fresh off his first PGA Tour win in five years,” Ritter says. “Somewhat remarkably, he’s only played on one winning Ryder Cup team in his life. He’ll be the star attraction in France, but for the first time he might also play a starring role in a team win. Who wouldn’t tune in to see that?”