Street signs tell us not only where we are but also where we’ve been, with their typography and styles stretching back centuries. The graphic designer Alistair Hall is using Instagram to draw attention to them. For the past two years he has been sharing shots of London’s “most significant, most beautiful, most curious” street nameplates with details of their histories, as unearthed through research and interviews. Some of the signs in London date back to the 17th century. “They hide in plain sight, these little labels,” says Hall, who founded the design studio We Made This in 2004. “We use their information daily, but too often fail to really notice them.” He has photographed about 2,000 nameplates since 2016 – “from the iconic nameplates of the City of Westminster to the stunning tiled signs of Hampstead, from the revival nameplates of Lambeth to the ghost signs of the no-longer existent NE postal district; from enamel plates to incised lettering, from the simplest cast iron signs to the most ornamental architectural tablets.” Hall, who teaches at Central Saint Martins and the Sir John Cass School of Art, Architecture and Design, hopes to turn his photographs and research into a book next year. Norwood High Street SE27. An exemplary revival of old enamel street nameplates from design studio Atelier Works. The studio studied hand lettering on existing signs in the local area and created a matching bespoke alphabet (called Northwood) for these signs, including stylistic alternates for various letters depending upon their position within each street name. A post shared by  London Street Nameplates (@londonstreetnameplates) on Mar 20, 2017 at 3:40am PDT Portugal Street · W·C 2, City of Westminster. Finely carved serif (and blackletter) lettering cut into recessed panels in the stonework of Strand House, the head office of W. H. Smith & Son from 1920 to 1976. The building stands on the site of the old King’s College Hospital, and three plaques near the street name document the site's history. A post shared by  London Street Nameplates (@londonstreetnameplates) on Apr 13, 2017 at 5:01am PDT Rymer Street (SE24, Lambeth). Glazed ceramic sign in Herne Hill - I've only seen one other like this (Lavender Place on Lavender Hill). A post shared by  London Street Nameplates (@londonstreetnameplates) on Apr 20, 2017 at 7:30am PDT The Fleet Street Courts: Hen & Chicken Court, Crane Court, Red Lion Court, Johnson's Court, St. Dunstan's Court, Bolt Court, Hind Court, Wine Office Court, Cheshire Court (EC4, City of London) A series of plaques embedded in the ground at the entrance to nine small streets on the north side of Fleet Street. As well as showing the street names, the plaques document the printing and publishing history of the local area. There's no information about who commissioned them, nor why, nor when - do get in touch if you know. A post shared by  London Street Nameplates (@londonstreetnameplates) on Jun 7, 2017 at 8:10am PDT Mint Street, E2, London Borough of Tower Hamlets. An unusually smart pair of contemporary enamel nameplates on this Peabody Housing Association development in Bethnal Green. The award-winning building was designed by Pitman Tozer Architects, and completed in 2014. The nameplates are sized specifically for the site, aligning to the proportions of the brickwork. The street name and postal district are set in a serif face with soft rounded terminals. A post shared by  London Street Nameplates (@londonstreetnameplates) on Jul 25, 2017 at 4:03am PDT Electric Avenue (SW9, Lambeth) A large electric sign designed by the Polimekanos studio. It was first installed on the corner of Brixton's Electric Avenue in October 2016, as part of the street's redevelopment by architectural practice Gort Scott. The street also features a revival enamel nameplate by @atelierwork featuring their Northwood lettering. Built in the 1880s, Electric Avenue was the first London market street to be lit by electricity. A post shared by  London Street Nameplates (@londonstreetnameplates) on Aug 17, 2017 at 2:23am PDT Abbey Road, NW6 (Borough of Hampstead). A tiled sign at the junction with Priory Road. A very similar, but different, sign features on the cover of the Beatles album of the same name. Unusually, neither the band name nor the album title are on the front cover, both instead featuring on the back. The sign was photographed by Iain Macmillan, who also took the iconic shot of the band walking across a zebra crossing in front of Abbey Road studios (then known as EMI Studios) on 8 August 1969. The sign was on the corner of Abbey Road and Alexandra Road (just a few streets up from Priory Road), but it was taken down a few years later when work began on a housing estate. The Beatles name was mocked up at the cover artworking stage. Where this sign features an abbreviated 'Rd.', the sign on the album features the full 'Road'. A post shared by  London Street Nameplates (@londonstreetnameplates) on Aug 19, 2017 at 1:17am PDT Ball Court (EC3, City of London) A real survivor this one - a tiled sign in a sheltered spot in a small back alley in the middle of the City. These tiled signs were once the standard type throughout the City (archive pictures I’ve seen so far show them in use as far back as the 1870s). This one doesn’t show a postcode area - they were introduced in 1857 - so it’s just possible it predates that. The same style of tiled sign is still visible in Soho, but the ones still present are unframed (which perhaps explains why so many have lost letters). Ball Court is the home of Simpson’s Tavern, established 1757, the oldest chophouse in London. Huge thanks to George Wright for spotting this one for me. - - #ballcourt #ec3 #simpsonstavern #londonstreetnameplate #streetnameplate #londonstreetsign #streetsign #cityoflondon A post shared by  London Street Nameplates (@londonstreetnameplates) on Apr 6, 2018 at 3:49am PDT Woodside Lane (N12, Barnet) An ornate cast iron nameplate, one of many in the area (see my earlier post on Percy Road). This sign is unusual in featuring an additional ‘Leading to’ sign of the same style. - - #londonstreetnameplate #streetnameplate #londonstreetsign #streetsign #woodsidelane #n12 A post shared by  London Street Nameplates (@londonstreetnameplates) on Apr 23, 2018 at 6:25am PDT Richmond Road. N.E. (E8, Hackney). A two panel ceramic sign from the abolished NE district, officially merged into the E district in 1866 (with NE later becoming the code for Newcastle). There are still a few of this style of sign across London, and I think they date from the 1860s. - - #richmondroad #ne #e8 #hackney #londonstreetnameplate #streetnameplate #londonstreetsign #streetsign A post shared by  London Street Nameplates (@londonstreetnameplates) on Jul 6, 2018 at 7:34am PDT Draycott Avenue.. S.W., Borough of Chelsea. Milk-glass probably c.1899-1917. A post shared by  London Street Nameplates (@londonstreetnameplates) on Mar 2, 2017 at 8:55am PST Farringdon Road E.C. Enamel sign, pre 1917, possibly pre 1899 (when the Metropolitan Boroughs were created). A post shared by  London Street Nameplates (@londonstreetnameplates) on Mar 2, 2017 at 11:09am PST Guardian Cities brings together the best in urban photography on Instagram at @guardiancities. Share your shots with us on Instagram with the hashtag #guardiancities