Maurizio Sarri has been at pains to insist Chelsea are a work in progress under his stewardship yet, a month into the new campaign, their perfect record remains intact. This was another win which had to be ground out against stubborn opposition but, as Eden Hazard skipped through to score the hosts’ second late on, after Pedro’s opener, the whole occasion had a very familiar feel. It all ended up appearing deceptively comfortable. Not that the head coach will be satisfied as yet. The huff and puff endured for over an hour will have left him dissatisfied, and the nagging concern remains that his team are still too reliant upon Hazard’s quick feet and vision against teams who seek to clog up the play, as Bournemouth did for long periods here. But leaning upon a world-class talent is no chore when he delivers form this dazzling. There was a trademark exchange with Marcos Alonso out on the left in the build-up to his goal, then a skip into the box and fizzed low finish through Asmir Begovic to lance any tension so close to the end. On four out of the five previous times Chelsea have won their opening four fixtures, they have gone on to claim the league title. It is still far too early to suggest they are setting up another such challenge, but theirs has been an impressive start. At present, they are finding ways to prevail. The visitors, just as on two of their recent visits when they had prevailed in this arena, had made life distinctly uncomfortable for their hosts until midway through the second half. While Chelsea always enjoyed the majority of possession, and would strike the post in stoppage time at the end of the first period through Alonso’s shot, there had been a solidity to Bournemouth’s performance which was admirable. Eddie Howe’s side opted to play five across the back, with the muscular Jefferson Lerma patrolling central midfield, and cluttered up so much that was flung at them. There were a few blocks from Asmir Begovic, who once counted this home, and some timely interceptions from Lerma and, most notably, Adam Smith to thwart Mateo Kovacic’s scurry forward. Yet it was only at the end of the half that Chelsea threatened reward. The pace of N’Golo Kanté’s burst through the middle from deep, as he collected a delicate flick from Willian, unnerved previously resolute defenders, with Álvaro Morata chipping a cross from the Frenchman’s pass to the back post. Hazard, forever the livewire from whom Chelsea draw inspiration, gathered and waited for Alonso to arrive on the edge of the area, only for his right-foot shot to dribble on to a post and behind. Sarri had worn a troubled expression as his players retired. His primary concern over his first few months in charge had centred upon his defence, where players are being asked to press high and track ball, rather than man, and fragility flared too often. Bournemouth thrive on the counterattack – as proved by the thrashing they inflicted here in January – with the speed of Josh King and Callum Wilson unsettling. David Luiz’s stray pass had presented them with an early chance, the strikers combining before King liberated Ryan Fraser, with Kanté doing well to slide in and block. Yet that was not their clearest opportunity. Wilson, scuttling unchecked between Chelsea centre-halves to reach Diego Rico’s fine cross, could only skew an awkward half-volley high and wide from beyond the home side’s backline. Then, with the hour-mark approaching, Rico’s in-swinging corner reached Nathan Aké, another formerly of these parts and a scorer here in January, in the six-yard box but, yet again, the attempt was skied high over the bar. The ball had arrived with the centre-half quickly and through a muddle of bodies, but such a clear-cut miss felt critical. It took Chelsea time to find some rhythm but, when allowed to ping passes in their buildup play 18 minutes from time, they finally roused themselves to squeeze out a lead. Their progress upfield culminated in Pedro, injecting some zest into the performance, collecting from another substitute, Olivier Giroud, with his shot from just outside the area flicking from Steve Cook to fly beyond Begovic and into the far corner. Hazard’s second would quash any hope of a Bournemouth revival. Chelsea, off the top only on goal difference, have early momentum.