For the last – or possibly penultimate – time England were indebted to Alastair Cook for keeping them afloat. He alone made crease occupation a relatively trouble-free occupation on another day when the quality of English batting came under severe scrutiny. Once he had departed for 71 a placid, sluggish Oval surface suddenly resembled a snake pit as Joe Root and Jonny Bairstow both departed without scoring. England slumped from 133 f or one to 134 for four and then to 198 for seven at the close. What had seemed the most prosaic day of an incident-packed series was transformed in the final session as six wickets fell. The batting woes remain as the selectors contemplate their squad for Sri Lanka and therefore it remains a minor miracle and a source of relief to the England camp that they have already secured the series. Forget the sentiment. England desperately needed Cook’s runs and his serenity on Friday. At the start he calmly walked through an Indian guard of honour, shook hands with Virat Kohli and then proceeded to play in the manner to which we have all become accustomed over the last dozen years. There was some ice in his veins again. He batted for four hours and 20 minutes for 71 runs, his highest score of the summer, gleaned with the clinical inevitability of old until he was bowled by Jasprit Bumrah off the inside edge. His innings was a reliable microcosm of his career: the same shots and in the final session the all-too familiar situation of England subsiding after his departure. Until that final session not much happened. The contest resembled two heavyweight boxers in the last few rounds of a gruelling bout doing their level best to land some telling blows without doing much damage. It was as if both teams had punched themselves into impotence after so many back-to-back Test matches. The ball came sluggishly on to the bat; quite often it passed the edge, especially when the unfortunate Mohammed Shami was bowling to Moeen Ali throughout a long middle session. By modern standards England progressed at a funereal pace but for a while the scoreboard at least suggested that the upper-order fragility had finally been overcome. Keaton Jennings, who scorned the opportunity to accompany Cook through the guard of honour (maybe that was a tacit declaration that he is not finished yet), batted for 90 minutes without too much bother before a soft dismissal. Against Ravi Jadeja, drafted into the Indian side for the first time in the series, Jennings turned the ball from the middle of his bat into the hands of KL Rahul at leg-slip. He slapped his pads with his bat in exasperation before leaving the crease in the knowledge that a good opportunity to resuscitate his Test career had gone begging. Out came England’s latest No 3, Moeen, and for great chunks of his innings he did his best to make Cook look like Matthew Hayden. He could not match his senior partner’s run-rate – after 28 balls he had mustered two runs. Well, England have been craving more solidity at the top of the order but the only problem was that when Moeen was batting against Shami the ball seemed to be passing his bat more often than hitting it. In that spell perhaps Shami bowled a fraction wide and a fraction short but how he deserved a wicket or two. At the end of the day he had accumulated the best “nought-fer” of the summer. India’s frustrations grew despite England’s slow progress and this was reflected by their loss of both reviews when seeking speculative lbws. In the afternoon session there were 55 runs from 31 overs and both batsmen had survived. It was not pretty but it suited England. Then 20 minutes after tea Cook was bowled and there was mayhem. Root was patently lbw to his third ball from Bumrah though this did not stop him asking for a review, which merely emphasised that his judgment is currently awry. Increasingly he is becoming a strong lbw candidate at the start of his innings as he falls over to the off-side when attempting to clip the ball to midwicket and beyond. Bairstow lasted one ball longer. He was caught behind poking at a good ball from Ishant Sharma for his third duck in four innings. He is currently ill at ease and the decision to play him when not fully fit at Southampton now looks foolhardy. Meanwhile Moeen’s self-denial began to assume ever-greater importance. His usual fluency was absent but he soldiered on regardless, unflustered by playing and missing and the regular comings and goings at the other end. He had some luck, most notably when dropped by Kohli on two, but he was prepared to graft unglamorously. Ben Stokes kept him company for 13 overs and once again he was in dour mode. The circumstances may have required circumspection but he is currently diminished as a batsman because he is batting so warily. This has never been his strength. He frightens opponents when he seeks to dominate but he has not managed to do that since his return to the Test team after the Ashes. Here indecision prompted his dismissal. He set himself to sweep Jadeja, changed his mind because the ball was too full and was lbw to a simple straight delivery, the sort he has pummelled down the ground in the past. Then there was another ugly flurry of wickets. Moeen, having reached the slowest half-century of his career in 167 balls, edged to the keeper off Sharma as did Sam Curran in the same over as he tried to leave the ball. England are in a bit of a mess again, but still in the game, thanks to Cook.