When season two of The Deuce airs later on this month, it will return us to a very specific section of 1970s New York society, populated by mob heavies, crooked cops, Vietnam vets, smut-peddlers, prostitutes and pimps. The Martino twins, both played by James Franco, will continue thwarting each other’s ambitions on the nightlife scene, ex-street hooker Candy (Maggie Gyllenhaal) will inject a new artistry into the nascent porno industry, and more wide-eyed innocents will be mercilessly “turned out” by Larry Brown (Gbenga Akinnagbe) and Rodney (Method Man). Yet of all the sinners featured in this epic chronicle of the American sex trade from The Wire’s David Simon, only one – pimp CC, played by British actor Gary Carr – is truly chilling. CC is the most solemnly unnerving of the Midtown mack daddies – feminine perm, giant clown collars and all – because CC is the one whose relationships most blur the line between cold commerce and loving kindness. One moment he’s treating women like a nurturing father figure, the next he’s their most sadistic tormentor. So it seems oddly incongruous to meet a smiling CC – or rather actor Carr – at a yummy-mummy lunch spot by the Thames over a shared pot of jasmine tea. Until now, this 31-year-old from the south London suburbs was best known as the handsome jazz singer with whom Lady Rose had a brief fling in Downton Abbey, and he chats happily about his work, his plans to attend the Notting Hill carnival at the weekend and his close relationship with his mum and dad. “I still live with them and I don’t care,” he says with a warm, goofy chuckle that you’ll never once hear in The Deuce. “Like, I said to my friends the other day: ‘I don’t give a damn, guys! I’m gonna tell you straight, I want to live with my parents for ever. They’re adorable!’” In fact, Carr’s success means he is rarely based in the UK for any significant length of time. During his 2011 to 2014 stint on cosy BBC One drama Death in Paradise, he spent six months a year filming on the French Caribbean island of Guadeloupe. He lived in New Orleans while shooting the lead role in an upcoming biopic of the early jazz pioneer Buddy Bolden and, in keeping with his strict “no hotels” policy (“I hate them”), when he won the part in The Deuce, he found a warehouse apartment in Brooklyn’s Bed–Stuy neighbourhood and quickly went about transforming it into an artists’ commune. “I had a lot of people staying with me. We had this massive eight-by-four table in the middle of the space and we painted it red, then just decked everything out with plants, speakers, played music all day.” He chuckles some more: “It was cool, yeah. It was vibes.” Carr has always wanted to go everywhere and do everything. Dance, music, photography, philanthropy and film-making; in Europe, Africa and South America. In the last few years, between acting jobs, he has been travelling all over, “following refugees and shooting their stories”. He also spent some time documenting the effects of climate change in Ethiopia after reading an Oxfam report on the subject, and hopes to bring all his work together in the form of a soon-to-launch online campaigning platform, called arthumanityrevolution.com. As the man who cast Idris Elba as Stringer Bell, David Simon is known for giving career breaks to black British actors frustrated by the limited opportunities at home, but Carr says that is not his story. “From the day I joined [my agency], I was always getting scripts for, like: ‘White Lad from Birmingham’ and then I’d just do my best and sometimes I’d land the role.” Take Downton Abbey; Britain’s most successful TV export famously found room for only one non-white actor and Carr’s reps made sure that actor was him. The response to his casting was mixed, with some “fans” even vowing to boycott, but Carr says he was both unsurprised and unbothered. “I was so chill, because I know the industry. It’s just something to talk about for a few days, like when a new person arrives at school.” Alexa L Fogel, casting director on The Deuce, The Wire and several other of Simon’s projects, cannot recall ever having seen Carr in Downton, but once he got into her audition room, that didn’t matter anyway: “He found a way to understand the line CC walks between his charm and his dangerous side that was very in keeping with the way it was written,” she says on the phone from her New York office. “He doesn’t ‘pimpify’ him. He just ‘is’.” TV’s role in perpetuating negative stereotypes of black people is an ongoing topic of controversy, but Carr says he had no such concerns about his character in The Deuce. “He’s not a pimp,” he says. “He’s a person first and he’s a pimp second and I love that about the writing … If it was any other project and maybe the writing wasn’t as good, I’d be like hmm … ” CC isn’t all bad. Indeed, some of the same ambitious energy and uncynical optimism that the character uses to make his way in his 70s NYC is recognisable in Carr, too. It’s the genius of his performance that these qualities are allowed to shine through even in CC’s darker moments. This will be tested in the next chapter. “In season two, we find CC struggling to keep his hold on Lori as she is pulled deeper into the porn industry,” Carr explains. “As she experiences continuing fame and success, the dynamic in their relationship shifts in a big way, leaving CC frustrated with his position and out of his element. And, as a result, unsure of his future altogether.” For Carr, The Wire has long been an inspiration: “I remember at drama school me and my friend looking at each other, like: ‘Wow, this changes everything.’” But he hasn’t always dreamed of decamping to the States. Growing up, his cultural influences ranged from the vinyl collection his dad amassed as a DJ in Trinidad, to the West End musical Five Guys Named Moe (written, coincidentally, by The Wire’s Clarke Peters), and Storm Damage, a Lennie James-penned BBC Two drama about children in care that he vividly remembers from its 2000 TV broadcast. The educational ethos at home was also aptly David Simon-esque in its scope. “My parents always thought it was important for us to know not only about stuff but about people. Not in a judgmental way, but to have a 360 view on everything.” So far, Carr has found that it is the US’s on-set culture, with its occasional 23-hour working days, that suits him best. “In the UK, everyone goes home and they have their tea and they go to bed,” he says. Michelle MacLaren, a director on several episodes of The Deuce, does things differently, however: “She’d take the camera and be shooting crushed up in the corner of this, dirty I-don’t-know-where, like: ‘Go, go! Action! Let’s get this shot!’ It’s like, this is my vibe. I need to be working with people like you! Always.” The Deuce returns to Sky Atlantic later this month