The little formal chef training I got was in a very French environment, where I was taught a set of techniques and recipes formalised decades earlier. For my ability to make a decent stock or chop vegetables uniformly – both important skills, yet ones I exercise less and less – I will always be grateful to my French mentors, but for inspiration that is more relevant to the way I cook today, I owe more to visits to France itself. Rustic, regional cooking, still going strong, as well as innovations in the big cities, feed me a constant flow of fresh ideas from this culinary giant of a nation. Socca is a popular chickpea-flour pancake from the French Riviera. The batter is traditionally poured on to vast pans and grilled over fire or in wood-fired ovens. Locals tend to enjoy it with a cold glass of rosé. I urge you to do the same. Prep 15 minRest 50 minCook 30 minMakes 4, to serve 8 as a snack 150g chickpea flour (AKA gram flour)½ tsp baking powderSalt100g tinned chickpeas (drained weight)1 tsp thyme leaves, finely chopped1 tsp lemon zest3 banana shallots, peeled and finely sliced 110ml olive oil For the salsa2 lemons – 1 left whole, the other cut into wedges, to serve140g tinned chickpeas (drained weight), lightly crushed½ spring onion, finely sliced on an angle1 tsp rosemary leaves, finely chopped½ tbsp parsley leaves, finely chopped¼ garlic clove, crushed60ml olive oilSalt and black pepper Whisk the chickpea flour, baking powder, 370ml water and a quarter-teaspoon of salt to a smooth batter. Stir in the chickpeas, thyme and lemon zest, and set aside for 30 minutes (the mix will be quite watery at first, but it will thicken up). Put the shallots, 90ml oil and a quarter-teaspoon of salt in a large, ovenproof saute pan on a medium-low heat, and fry gently for 12-15 minutes, stirring often, until very soft and golden brown. Leave to cool for a few minutes, then stir into the batter and leave to rest for another 20 minutes. Meanwhile, heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas 4. For the salsa, cut two slices from the whole lemon (discard any pips) and finely chop them, skin, flesh and all. Squeeze the rest of the lemon to get a tablespoon of juice. Put the lemon flesh and juice in a bowl with the other salsa ingredients, a quarter-teaspoon of salt and plenty of pepper, and mix to combine. Wipe clean the shallot pan, return it to a high heat and, once very hot, brush with a teaspoon of oil. Pour in a quarter of the batter, tilting and swirling the pan to coat the base. Fry for two minutes, then transfer to the oven for six to eight minutes, until crisp at the edges and set in the middle. Carefully return the hot pan to the stove-top on a medium-high heat, loosen the socca with a fish slice, then flip it over (it may be easier to use your hands). Cook for three minutes on a high heat, then slide out on to a plate and keep warm. Repeat with the remaining batter. Cut each socca into quarters and serve golden side up with the salsa and lemon wedges. The perfect dish to see out the last of the summer evenings. Serve at room temperature with grilled bread to mop up the oil and juices. Prep 15 minCook 45 minRest 15 min Serves 4 2 duck breasts, patted dry 2 tsp herbes de ProvenceSalt and black pepper90ml olive oil2 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed 2 lemons – peel finely shaved to get 4 strips, juiced to get 1 tbsp and the rest cut into wedges, to serve1 red chilli, finely sliced on an angle5g oregano sprigs2 bay leaves½ small red onion, peeled and sliced 5mm thick ½ small fennel bulb, sliced 5mm thick 2 red romano peppers, deseeded and sliced 5mm thick 1 tsp tomato puree180g ripe cherry tomatoes, halved 60g pitted dry black olives, roughly torn1 tbsp baby capers, drained2 anchovy fillets, roughly chopped2 tbsp tarragon leaves, plus 1 tbsp extra to serve5g chives, roughly chopped, plus 1 tbsp extra to serve Season the duck on both sides with a teaspoon of herbes de Provence, a quarter-teaspoon of salt and plenty of pepper, and set aside for 30 minutes. Put a large saute pan on a medium heat with three tablespoons of oil, the garlic, lemon peel, chilli, oregano, bay leaves and two-thirds of a teaspoon of salt. Fry gently for eight minutes, stirring often, until golden, then turn up the heat to medium-high, add the onion, fennel and peppers, and cook gently, stirring often, for 20 minutes, until softened (turn down the heat if the vegetables start colouring too much). Stir in the tomato puree, tomatoes, olives, capers, anchovies, the remaining lemon juice and herbes de Provence, and set aside. Lay the duck breasts skin side down in a cold nonstick pan, put on a medium heat and, as the heat builds up, gently fry for 10-12 minutes. Spoon off any fat as it renders (save it for roast potatoes) and press down on the breasts every now and then, so the skin crisps to an even, deep golden brown. Turn the heat to high, flip over the breasts and cook for two to three minutes on the flesh side, moving it as you go, so it all gets some colour. Transfer to a board, rest for 15 minutes, then cut into 1.5cm-thick slices. Stir the tarragon and chives into the cooked vegetables, transfer to a large platter and drizzle over the remaining three tablespoons of oil. Discard the duck’s resting juices and gently mix the duck slices with the vegetables, making sure some of the meat is visible. Season with a little salt and pepper, scatter over the remaining herbs and serve with the lemon wedges squeezed over the top. This impressive dessert is inspired by a tart I had at Liberté Ménilmontant, a wonderful bakery in Paris. You’ll end up with twice as many biscuits as you need here, but they keep for up to a week in a sealed container; you can make them a day in advance. The apples are best made a day ahead, so they soften and macerate. Prep 10 minMacerate 4 hrCook 1 hr Serves 6 For the apples150g caster sugar200ml water¼ tsp vanilla bean paste 6cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and thinly sliced 2 tsp fennel seeds, toasted and crushed4 cox apples 2 tbsp lemon juice For the biscuits40g caster sugar125g unsalted butter, softened160g plain flour20g Horlicks powder, or other malted milk powder1 tsp fennel seeds, toasted and crushed1 tsp ground ginger40g desiccated coconutSalt30g flaked almonds For the coconut cream 120g cold coconut cream (ie, 2 x 160ml tins), water discarded50ml double cream50g soured cream For the apples, put the sugar and water in a saucepan on a medium-high heat. Bring to a boil, swirling the pan, until the sugar has dissolved, then add the vanilla, ginger and fennel seeds, and boil for about three minutes, until the syrup thickens slightly. Set aside to cool. Peel and core the apples, keeping the fruit whole, then cut into 2mm-thick rounds and stir into the syrup. Add the lemon juice and leave to steep for at least four hours, and preferably overnight, to soften, stirring every once in a while. Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas 4. For the biscuits, put the sugar and butter in the bowl of an electric mixer with the paddle attachment in place. Beat for two to three minutes, until pale and fluffy, then add the flour, Horlicks, fennel seeds, ginger, coconut and a quarter-teaspoon of salt, and beat for a few minutes more, starting on slow and increasing the speed, until the dough holds together when you press it between two fingers. Stir in the almonds, bring the dough together in a ball, then place between two 40cm-wide sheets of baking paper. Gently roll into a 2-3mm-thick rectangle about 28cm x 32cm. Peel off the top layer of paper, lift the dough on to a large baking tray and bake for 15 minutes, until dark golden brown. Leave to cool a little, then break into 5cm-long shards. Set a sieve over a small pan, then drain the apples; you should end up with about 250ml of the syrup mix. Bring to a boil on a high heat and cook for about six minutes, swirling the pan often, until there is about 80ml thick syrup left in the pan. Turn off the heat and leave to cool. For the coconut cream, put all three creams in the bowl of an electric mixer with the whisk attachment in place, add a pinch of salt and whisk on high for two to three minutes, until thick but light. To serve, divide the apples between six bowls and arrange three or four biscuit shards to one side of the fruit. Spoon a generous dollop of the cream mix alongside and serve with a tablespoon of syrup drizzled over each portion. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.