It was a moment to further age the hard-bitten souls in attendance. In the 81st minute of this Carabao Cup tie, Slavisa Jokanovic sent on Harvey Elliott for his professional debut. The Fulham winger was 15 years and 174 days old. The Surrey schoolboy became the youngest player to appear for Fulham and it is also believed he became the most youthful in this competition’s history, beating the record of 15 years and 203 days set by Leicester’s Ashley Chambers in 2005. Records are a little hazy because of data protection laws. Elliott began the day at school, taking exams – according to Jokanovic – and he finished it by showing some nice touches and sharp bursts off the right flank. He will return to school in the morning on a high and with stories to tell. “I don’t know if I use a wrong word in English but he is arrogant and positive,” Jokanovic said. “The kid shows personality, when he tells me: ‘I want to show you I am a very good player.’ I say: ‘OK. If you can show me, I give you this opportunity.’ He has made a few trainings with us. We believe the future can be bright for him.” Fulham were a cut above Millwall, particularly in the first half, when they ought to have led by more than the one goal, which was scored by Joe Bryan. Millwall chased shadows and the frustration among a low home crowd was palpable. Neil Harris’s team were booed off at the interval. Luca de la Torre, the man of the match and another Fulham academy product, added the second and although Millwall hinted at the unlikeliest of comebacks when Tom Elliott forced home from a corner, Cyrus Christie smoothed the Premier League club’s progress into the last 16 with a 25-yard curler. Burton Albion produced another shock to beat Burnley 2-1 and reach the fourth round of the League Cup for the first time in their history. Kevin Long headed the Premier League strugglers in front just before half-time, but Liam Boyce equalised and then set up Jamie Allen’s 83rd-minute winner. Danny Ward was Leicester City’s hero at Wolves as the three-times winners squeezed into the fourth round on penalties. The goalkeeper saved spot kicks from Romain Saïss, Diogo Jota and Adama Traoré as the Foxes won the shootout 3-1 following a 0-0 draw at Molineux. But Leicester must sweat on the condition of Demarai Gray after the winger was carried off with his left leg in a brace. Bournemouth scraped through 3-2 against Blackburn as substitute Callum Wilson headed an injury-time winner. The Cherries seemed to be coasting through after Junior Stanislas and Jordon Ibe scored either side of half-time. But Craig Conway reduced the deficit and Adam Armstrong levelled from the spot with 18 minutes remaining. Blackburn had the defender Derrick Williams sent off late on for a deliberate handball before Wilson prevented a penalty shoot-out. Roy Hodgson had a happy return to The Hawthorns as his Crystal Palace side beat West Bromwich Albion 3-0. Andros Townsend scored twice for the Eagles with Patrick van Aanholt also on target. League One Blackpool upset QPR 2-0 with Armand Gnanduillet (28) and Jay Spearing (89) on target and their Championship visitors reduced to 10 men with Jordan Cousins sent off midway through the second half. Jordan Rhodes scored his first hat-trick in four years – and the 10th of his club career – as Norwich City edged out Wycombe Wanderers 4-3. Tom Trybull was also on target for the Canaries with Paris Cowan-Hall, Sam Saunders and Adebayo Akinfenwa scoring for Wycombe. Middlesbrough went through 4-3 on penalties at Preston after a 2-2 draw in normal time. Ashley Fletcher and Marcus Tavernier cancelled out efforts from Callum Robinson and Tom Barkhuizen to take the tie to penalties. Press Association Christie, who joined in January from Middlesbrough, collected the ball on the right before he cut inside and unfurled a left-footed classic. It was his first goal for the club. Bryan, one of a glut of summer arrivals, had also opened his account and it was a goal to emphasise Fulham’s early dominance. De la Torre revelled in a free role behind the strikers and he ushered Bryan into yards of space inside the area. The wing-back took a touch before lashing low into the far corner. Jokanovic made 10 changes to his Fulham team while he also switched to a back three system but there was cohesion from his stand-ins. The only blot for Fulham was their first-half profligacy. De la Torre was the biggest culprit. He had two glorious chances only to be denied by Ben Amos. Harris made eight changes to his struggling Championship team, advertising where his priorities lay, and he switched to a 3-5-2 formation for the second half. There would be greater intensity from his players. De la Torre got the goal he had threatened from Floyd Ayité’s low cross but Elliott’s header from Shane Ferguson’s corner briefly stirred the home support. Christie’s beauty restored the established order.