The proportion of children in England getting immunised for measles, mumps and rubella (MMR) has fallen for the fourth year in a row, as uptake for a further nine out of the 12 routine vaccinations has dropped, figures show. Experts have said the impact of this is already playing out, with an ongoing measles outbreak in England. So far this year 876 cases have been confirmed, more than three times the number for the whole of 2017. They said the figures painted a concerning picture and that a continuing downward trend in immunisations for children could prompt the spread of harmful diseases within communities. Data from NHS Digital revealed the proportion of children receiving the MMR vaccine by the age of two fell to 91.2% in England in 2017-18, from 91.6% the year before. The figures showed 87.2% of five-year-olds had received both MMR vaccines, well below the 95% recommended by the World Health Organization. Dr Doug Brown, the chief executive of the British Society for Immunology, said: “We are currently witnessing the impact of this lower vaccination rate in the ongoing measles outbreak in England … Measles is a highly infectious disease that can lead to serious consequences for those infected. However, we have at our disposal a safe and effective vaccine that can stop the spread of [it].” He added: “We need to redouble efforts to ensure that vaccination rates improve and that our communities benefit from continued protection against this serious disease.” Brown put the fall in vaccinations down to a combination of factors, including parents facing logistical problems in accessing immunisation services. Another issue, Brown said, was that there was no consistent approach to reminding people when the vaccination is due, with some areas doing this better than others. “Thirdly, there is also some hesitation to immunise – views on the safety of vaccines … people are not really informed on the benefits of vaccines and the fact they are safe and effective. More work is needed on that front.” Last month the World Health Organization said the huge surge in measles across Europe was due to low MMR vaccination rates. More than 41,000 cases of measles were reported in the European region between January and June. Last year there were nearly 24,000 for the whole 12 months, the highest count in any year of the last decade. Helen Donovan, professional lead for public health at the Royal College of Nursing, said: “Successful vaccination programmes require a system-wide approach, yet the changes to commissioning in 2012 left services fragmented. It is vital we understand the full reasons behind the decline in vaccination coverage and take steps to improve before it is too late.” It is the fifth successive year coverage for the vaccine for diphtheria, whooping cough (pertussis), tetanus, polio and Hib disease has fallen in children aged 12 months. Brown said lower levels of vaccination meant “harmful diseases could spread within communities, infecting people who have not been vaccinated, including vulnerable individuals who are unable to have vaccinations such as young babies”. The statistics, published in the NHS Digital report Childhood Vaccination Coverage Statistics, showed a regional disparity in uptake, with highest coverage in the north-east and the lowest in London. Of the nine English regions, the north-east (95.5%) and the south-west (95%) reached the target of 95% coverage for the five-in-one vaccine at 12 months. The report measured the numbers who had been immunised aged 12 months, 24 months or five years, looking at 2017-18 compared with the previous year. Uptake for the rotavirus vaccine was the only one that increased, from 89.6% in 2016-17 to 90.1% in 2017-18. “The government needs to work with the NHS and local authorities to prioritise immunisation services and learn lessons from regions that are performing well,” Brown said. This year’s report is the first where figures for the meningitis B vaccine (meningococcal group B, referred to as the MenB vaccine) are included as a national statistic, having been published as experimental statistics in last year’s report. The figures show that national coverage for this vaccine was 92.5%. Eight out of nine regions achieved coverage above 90%.