For a long time it was a reminder about what it used to be like with England, back in the days when the football seldom strayed above six out of 10, when the crowd had to make their own entertainment and the idea that Gareth Southgate could lead a side to within one game of a World Cup final felt far-fetched, to say the least. At least England had the strength of personality to change the complexion of the evening and, in the process, remove the paradox that, 62 days since their semi-final in Moscow, they might be about to set the unwanted record of having lost four games in a row for the first time in 146 years of competition. After the excitement of the summer, however, it was a strange and lacklustre evening. Was not the purpose of the Nations League to do away with games of this nature? Still, the crowd seemed happy enough at the final whistle. Southgate even brought on Ben Chilwell for his England debut, in a move that was guaranteed to go down well with the locals, and Marcus Rashford’s 54th-minute winner should soothe the team’s confidence before their Nations League ties in Croatia and Spain next month. Overall, however, it was surprising that more of the players did not appreciate this game represented a chance to sway Southgate’s thinking. Danny Rose, England’s most impressive performer, did at least play as though he recognised the opportunity. Too many others were guilty of going through the motions and, in a strange way, it was actually a prosperous night for some of the players left out of the team. Here was the evidence, if any was needed, that England look better with Harry Kane in attack, John Stones in defence and Jordan Pickford in goal. England Under-21s survived a scare as they came from behind to beat Latvia 2-1 in their European Championship qualifier. The Group Four leaders fell behind to Raivis Jurkovskis' opener but goals from on-loan Chelsea youngsters Tammy Abraham and Mason Mount earned victory in Jelgava. It was an impressive debut for Mount, who also set up Abraham's leveller and enhanced his growing reputation. After Jurkovskis put the hosts ahead in the 28th minute, Dominic Solanke missed a chance to equalise soon after – but Abraham got England back on terms before half-time. The forward, on loan at Aston Villa, was in the right place to head home Mount's cross at the near post. England began to control the game and could have taken the lead on the hour but Latvia goalkeeper Kristaps Zommers produced an impressive double save to to keep out Solanke and Abraham from close range. Mount, on loan at Derby, got the winner with 17 minutes to go. Solanke Solanke provided the assist after neat build-up play as Mount fired in a composed finish from an angle. Aidy Boothroyd will be hoping his side can book their place in Italy next summer with their final qualifiers against Andorra and Scotland next month. It was certainly a strange set of events that England could start with two attacking midfielders, Ruben Loftus-Cheek and Fabian Delph, who have played a combined 33 minutes for their clubs this season. In the circumstances perhaps it was inevitable those two would look rusty. They did reasonably well but it would be stretching the point to say they – or any of the others who had been promoted to the starting XI – provided conclusive evidence for Southgate to think they ought to be first-team picks in the matches that matter. At least Rashford, with his second England goal in as many matches, demonstrated why Southgate has been telling the Manchester United striker he should spend more time in the opposition penalty area rather than coming deep for the ball. Rashford was one of the few players who seemed intent on livening up the evening. Otherwise the tempo was too slow, particularly in the first half, when it must have been startling for Southgate that the opposition moved the ball with more fluency and confidence. Switzerland were experimenting with their own wing-back system and Vladimir Petkovic’s players quickly adapted to the new formation, with so much of the ball in promising positions they could have been forgiven for feeling disappointed not to be ahead at the break. If nothing else, Southgate should have learned more about his players during that period – just not, perhaps, in the way he had hoped. There was the moment, for example, when Jack Butland tried a pass across his own penalty area, got it badly wrong and strayed dangerously close to putting the ball into his own net, in a moment reminiscent of Petr Cech’s faux pas when Arsenal played Manchester City on the first weekend of this season. In the next passage of play Butland gave the ball to James Tarkowski, who committed the centre-half’s sin of losing it on the edge of the penalty area and was lucky, in the extreme, that Xherdan Shaqiri’s shot came back off a post. Southgate complained about his team defending too deeply and their tendency to “give the ball away cheaply”. Rose went even further in his criticisms, describing the first-half performance as “embarrassing” and saying England could have been three goals down. The players, he said, had spent the interval angrily remonstrating with one another. Southgate brought on Kane, Stones and Jesse Lingard just after the hour and, at that stage, the crowd might have expected a lift in the team’s performance. Instead the most inviting chance throughout the remainder of the match fell to Shaqiri, denied by a brilliant saving tackle from Stones, and the game’s decisive moment came earlier in the half. Rose’s corner was over-hit, eluding everyone inside the penalty area, but Kyle Walker had ventured forward from his position in defence and returned the ball from the other side. Danny Welbeck, one of the players to be substituted, could not reach a deep, hanging cross but Rashford was at the far post to sweep a low shot past Yann Sommer, the Swiss goalkeeper.