Jack Harrison scored a late equaliser to preserve Leeds’ unbeaten start to the season with a hard-fought 1-1 draw with Millwall at the Den. Jed Wallace broke the deadlock 10 minutes into the second half but Harrison, on loan from Manchester City, levelled for the Championship leaders with a low shot into the bottom corner a minute from time. Leeds still nearly lost though, Tom Elliott heading against the inside of the post for the Lions in stoppage time. Middlesbrough, who began the day sitting second on goal difference, suffered their first defeat as they went down 1-0 to Norwich at Carrow Road. Teemu Pukki, who scored two winners for Finland on international duty, opened the scoring in the 58th minute after Emi Buendía’s cross – the first goal Boro had conceded in the league for 561 minutes. Norwich thought they had been reduced to 10 men with 15 minutes left when Timm Klose was shown a second yellow card only for the referee to reverse his decision and award City a free-kick for offside after consulting with his assistant. Brentford took advantage of Boro’s slip-up as they moved into second place after beating 10-man Wigan 2-0 at Griffin Park, where they have a 100% record. The in-form Neal Maupay grabbed his sixth goal in as many games when he converted Saïd Benrahma’s cross from close range in the 24th minute. Wigan had Sam Morsy sent off in the 58th minute after a clash of heads with Yoann Barbet, who played a part in Brentford’s second when his shot was blocked on the line and Maupay slammed home his second. Frank Lampard was sent to the stands as Derby’s three-game winning run came to an end when they lost 1-0 to Rotherham at New York Stadium. The Rams had Tom Lawrence dismissed for a bad foul on Richard Towell in the 58th minute and the Millers made the numerical advantage count when Ryan Manning converted from the penalty spot after Kyle Vassell was fouled. Lampard then saw red as frustrations boiled over. Reading moved off the bottom after a 3-2 win at Preston, Leandro Bacuna scoring an 81st-minute winner, while QPR made it three wins in a row with a 2-1 victory at Bolton, who avoided administration this week. Blackburn 1-1 Aston Villa, Bolton Wanderers 1-2 Queens Park Rangers, Brentford 2-0 Wigan Athletic, Bristol City 1-0 Sheffield United, Hull City 2-0 Ipswich Town, Millwall 1-1 Leeds United, Norwich City 1-0 Middlesbrough, Preston North End 2-3 Reading, Rotherham United 1-0 Derby County, Sheffield Wednesday 2-2 Stoke City, Swansea City 0-0 Nottingham Forest Blackpool were forced to defend a 1-0 lead with nine men in the dying seconds of their win over bottom-placed Plymouth after two of their players were sent off for almost coming to blows. Blackpool’s manager Terry McPhillips, who has just been awarded the job on a permanent basis, said Donervon Daniels was unhappy with the former Arsenal youth-team player Marc Bola’s defending during a frantic finale. “I think Donervon was upset that maybe Marc didn’t header it away or something like that and ran over and confronted him,” explained McPhillips. “There was certainly no punches thrown or heads to each other so I thought it was a bit harsh.” The red mist descended! It is not often two players of the same team are shown straight red cards.#pafc #weareargyle #blackpoolfc #bfc #utp https://t.co/evNoILiQTv Portsmouth moved top of League One after Ronan Curtis inspired them to a 2-1 victory at the previous leaders, Peterborough. Curtis, who missed last week’s draw with Shrewsbury due to a Republic of Ireland call-up, crossed for Oli Hawkins to head the visitors in front just after the hour-mark and they made the game safe when Hawkins and Curtis combined again to set up Jamal Lowe. Sunderland suffered their first league defeat of the season as Burton won the battle of last season’s relegated sides. Jamie Allan and Kyle McFadzean gave Burton a 2-0 half-time lead, with Sunderland having Charlie Wyke take off on a stretcher. Wyke’s replacement Chris Maguire pulled one back from long range but Albion held on. Doncaster came from behind to win 4-1 at Walsall and climb above their opponents to fifth place in the table. AFC Wimbledon 2-3 Scunthorpe United, Bradford City 0-2 Charlton Athletic, Burton Albion 2-1 Sunderland, Coventry City 1-0 Barnsley, Fleetwood Town 1-1 Accrington Stanley, Luton Town 1-0 Bristol Rovers, Peterborough United 1-2 Portsmouth, Plymouth Argyle 0-1 Blackpool, Rochdale 3-0 Gillingham, Shrewsbury Town 2-0 Southend United, Walsall 1-4 Doncaster Rovers, Wycombe Wanderers 0-0 Oxford United Yeovil ended Newport’s winning run in League Two in emphatic fashion with a remarkable 6-0 win at Rodney Parade. The hosts had won four in a row and were unbeaten in six but suffered a humbling loss which dropped them to third in the table and lifted Yeovil to fifth. The visitors took the lead when Yoann Arquin powered Jordan Green’s cross home and Green picked out the bottom corner to double their lead. Diallang Jaiyesimi’s header made it 3-0 and Green added his second before Olufela Olomola and Carl Dickinson completed the rout. Robbie Willmott was then sent off on a miserable day for the hosts. The leaders Lincoln returned to winning ways to open up a three-point gap at the top of the table after a narrow 2-1 victory at struggling Macclesfield. Tom Pett gave the visitors the lead midway through the first half as he smashed home John Akinde’s header from 12 yards. Jamie Grimes equalised late on for the hosts but Jason Shackell edged the Imps back in front with three minutes left. Harry Kewell’s Notts County remain bottom after they had to settle for a point from a thrilling match against Stevenage. County went ahead three times, through Jon Stead’s penalty and goals from Enzio Boldewijn and Kane Hemmings, but they were pegged back each time as the visitors refused to be beaten. Carlisle 0-2 Tranmere, Cheltenham 0-0 Crewe, Colchester 3-0 Cambridge, Crawley 2-0 Morecambe, Grimsby 0-3 Oldham, MK Dons 1-1 Forest Green, Macclesfield 1-2 Lincoln, Mansfield 1-2 Exeter, Newport 0-6 Yeovil, Notts County 3-3 Stevenage, Port Vale 2-0 Northampton, Swindon 1-2 Bury