Locked up in a tiny cell in Wayland prison, in Norfolk, detoxing from heroin and methadone, Mike Smith found that bending and breathing his way through a yoga meditation could give him up to three hours without any withdrawal symptoms – even with other inmates hammering on the door yelling “You’re mental” at him. The 46-year-old charity worker has been clean of drugs for seven years after breaking his two-decade cycle of addiction, reoffending and imprisonment. He now has a full-time job with the Karuna Trust, a charity working in India and Nepal, and he’s been out of prison for more than five years. He puts this down to the self-control he gained during his daily sessions of yoga and meditation while “inside”. Smith says: “Yoga is up there as one of the most important things I have ever done. It is better than any drugs. It has helped me to get my life on track by sorting out my addictions.” Smith’s certainty about the power of yoga to change his own life is backed by two Swedish studies that found it may reduce reoffending. The new study, led by Professor Nóra Kerekes at University West, Trollhätten, in Sweden, and published last week in Frontiers in Psychiatry, found that 10 weeks of regular yoga can lead to a significant reduction in obsessive-compulsive and paranoid thinking, which in turn, say researchers, can make reoffending less likely. This effect is specific to yoga, and not to exercise in general, they found. It can also lead to a decrease in “somaticisation” (mental distress leading to physical symptoms such as breathing problems, heart pains and stomach upsets). One man told me that the yoga class was the first time he had ever relaxed in his life The study of 152 volunteers in nine medium- and high-security prisons in Sweden builds on a 2017 study of the same volunteers that showed that yoga improved stress levels, concentration, sleep quality, psychological and emotional wellbeing, as well as reducing aggression and antisocial behaviour. Kerekes says: “We know that all physical activity has benefits for mental health, but what we see here are specific positive effects of yoga that reduced the chance that someone will go on to engage in further criminal activity. We don’t think yoga is a cure, but it makes inmates more open and able to benefit from other treatment programmes.” So, could yoga play a part in helping to reduce crime in England and Wales where the latest figures show adult reoffending rates are 37%? Smith’s transformation began when he picked up a leaflet for the Prison Phoenix Trust (PPT) – a charity that runs weekly yoga and meditation classes in 84 prisons around the UK. It reaches around 2,000 prisoners a month – a fraction of the 80,000-plus prison population. It also runs workshops and trains teachers to run yoga sessions inside. The £2,500 annual cost per yoga teacher is borne by individual prisons. Jane Craggs has been teaching yoga for the PPT at HMP Forest Bank – a category B men’s private prison in Pendleton, Manchester – for five years. The prisoners erupt into her class in a flurry of high-fives and loud patois. “Seeing the same men an hour later lying in rows on their backs with their eyes closed in meditation is really moving,” says Craggs. “One man told me that the yoga class was the first time he had ever relaxed in his life.” She says many more tell her that yoga has got them through their sentence. “I think that everybody deserves peace whoever they are and everybody deserves to find a way to cultivate it,” Craggs says. Not all prison governors are convinced. At least 32 prisons do not provide any yoga. And the government has recently rejected moves to teach boxing and martial arts in prison despite evidence that it teaches young men self-discipline and respect for others. PPT director Sam Settle believes public perception of the purpose of prison needs to change. “Do you want a recently released prisoner you meet on the night bus to have been exposed to activities that promote emotional intelligence or do you want them to be angry at society?” he asks. A Prison Service spokeswoman says: “Research shows activities like this can make prisoners less likely to reoffend, keeping the public safer.” She was unable to explain why, given this evidence, it wasn’t government policy to make yoga available to all prisoners, but said it was up to individual prison governors to decide which activities to offer.