Good morning everyone, Graham Russell here to administer your daily dose of news. Jeremy Corbyn will today seek to move his party away from Brexit divisions to unite it behind his alternative to the “greed-is-good” capitalism that brought about the global financial crisis. The Labour leader will use his speech at noon in Liverpool to accuse the establishment of ‘“straining every sinew” to prop up the system that created the crash of 2008. “People in this country know – they showed that in June last year – that the old way of running things isn’t working any more. That’s why Labour is offering a radical plan to rebuild and transform Britain,” he will say. Corbyn will lay out a “green jobs revolution” that will create 400,000 new positions, part of his plan to reinvigorate traditionally Labour towns he says have been left behind. It will involve the building of 13,500 wind turbines and thousands of solar panels and a fresh look at other technologies, including nuclear, to tackle climate change. No mention of whether he will apologise for the handling of the antisemitism row but the issue returned to prominence when a bomb threat forced the cancellation of an event held by the Jewish Voice for Labour group on Tuesday evening. Alright, just a little bit of Brexit for you: Keir Starmer has sold his Brexit compromise to the party faithful, and Theresa May will try to sell hers to big business in New York. If you haven’t been following every cough and spit from the party conference, here’s a quick rundown of the best bits. ‘I didn’t expect that …’ – Donald Trump faced a tougher crowd than usual at the UN, with world leaders laughing at his suggestion his administration had achieved more than almost any other in history. Grandstanding aside, the US president’s main target was the “corrupt dictatorship in Iran”, who he blamed for the Syrian conflict. He made no mention of Russia. National security adviser John Bolton echoed that warning. Also in ill favour were Opec and the concept of multilateralism, while Kim Jong-un was praised for his “courage”. The address was a manifesto for nativism, writes our world affairs editor, Julian Borger. Today, Theresa May will make her keynote speech and and hold one-on-one talks with Trump. Problem drinking – Teenagers in the UK and Ireland are among the worst in Europe when it comes to getting drunk, a long-term study by the World Health Organisation has found. However, the rates, while still dangerously high, have fallen considerably. Falls in harmful drinking across Europe have been greatest in countries with the highest prevalence, which includes those in the Nordic region, said lead editor Dr Jo Inchley. Midweek catch-up – Your handy update on the main stories … > Theresa May has kept up the pressure on Iran over the jailing of Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, telling president Hassan Rouhani during talks in New York she has “serious concerns” about the detention of the charity worker. > Bill Cosby has been jailed for between three and 10 years for drugging and sexually assaulting a woman over a decade ago. “It is time for justice,” said judge Steven O’Neill, who handed down the sentence on Tuesday in Pennsylvania. > The second woman to accuse supreme court nominee Brett Kavanaugh of sexual misconduct has been accused by Donald Trump of being “totally inebriated and all messed up”. “The second accuser has nothing,” Trump said. “The second accuser thinks maybe it could have been him, maybe not.” > Police are demanding almost unfettered access to highly personal records and data from potential rape victims before pressing ahead with their cases, documents obtained under freedom of information requests show. In some areas, complainants are being asked to disclose health, school and college records, counselling notes and all data from their electronic devices. > Theresa May has ruled out the idea of another general election before Brexit, saying it “would not be in the national interest”. Speculation has increased since the prime minister’s Chequers plan got a cool reception from EU leaders in Salzburg. BBC to drop number two – BBC Two is ditching its digital approach – at least in terms of its on-screen identity – opting for colourful curves (see below) instead of the numeral. It is supposed to represent the channel’s “constant eclecticism” and is part of the first total rebrand in decades as the channel looks to head off Netflix et al. Controller Patrick Holland said it was out with celebrity-fronted documentaries and in with new ideas from Charlie Brooker plus a big-budget adaptation of Eleanor Catton’s Booker prize-winning novel The Luminaries. Current news – A whale more at home in the waters off Greenland or Svalbard has found its way up the Thames to Gravesend, Kent. Storms are thought to have blown it south, and authorities are keeping an eye on its health. The Briefing pauses here for a moment to remember the poor old Thames whale of 2006. During a school summer break, Elise travelled to South Korea from her home in Chicago with her mother. But instead of a six-week holiday spent with friends and family, the teenager found herself trapped at Grace Road Church, a South Korean cult that has been in the media spotlight since its leader, Shin Ok-ju, was arrested in August, accused of depriving followers of their liberty and subjecting them to ritual beatings. Elise’s mother, who became interested in the cult after listening to hours of sermons online from Chicago, destroyed Elise’s passport and told her she’d never see her father and sister again. One time, when Elise refused to attend a sermon, she was half-carried, half-dragged screaming downstairs. Over her screams Elise says she could hear the pastor of the church, Shin Ok-ju, tell the congregation; “Do you hear that? She has a demon inside of her and that’s why she’s screaming. Do you want to turn out like that?” The pressure on manager José Mourinho continues to mount after Manchester United’s shock loss to Derby in the Carabao Cup. Scott Carson saved an effort from Phil Jones to see Frank Lampard’s Championship side progress on penalties, but there was more drama off the pitch as the Portuguese’s testy relationship with Paul Pogba hit a new low, with Mourinho vowing the player would never again captain United. Elsewhere, Manchester City comfortably progressed past Oxford United with youngster Phil Foden scoring late, while Fulham handed a debut to 15-year-old Harvey Elliott in their win over Millwall. Lance Armstrong has savaged former rival David Millar’s candidacy for president of the professional riders’ union calling him “the last person that would come to mind for this role”. Meanwhile, Tiger Woods has warned rivals he’s back in business ahead of the Ryder Cup, as the resurgent American chases just his second win in eight tournaments. Delays of just 30 minutes at UK ports and the Irish border could bankrupt one in 10 British firms, says the Chartered Institute of Procurement and Supply (CIPS) as it warns of the dangers of a no-deal Brexit. “The idea of day-one no-deal is just crazy,” said John Glen, an economist at CIPS. Ryanair has cancelled nearly 200 flights as it prepares for strikes across Europe on Friday. It said all 30,000 affected passengers had been notified by text and email, but wouldn’t say which flights they were. The pound is buying $1.317 and €1.119. Several papers lead today with news of the Labour conference, which Jeremy Corbyn will address today, including the Guardian, which splashes with “Corbyn pledges radical plan to end ‘greed-is-good’ capitalism”. The Mirror reports on Corbyn’s plans to expand childcare: “We’ll put kids first”, the i has “Power to the wind farms” as a headline on a story about Corbyn’s renewable energy policy. The Telegraph’s lead story today is “May: We’ll slash taxes to lowest in the G20” and the Express also has a quote from May on its front: “I’ll slash taxes to battle EU”. The FT’s lead is “Argentina crisis deepens as bank chief quits after 3 months in post”, the Sun has a report of a “sick stunt” by police: “Stay in Fred West cell for £75”. The Mail is unhappy about “Banks hanging us out to dry” and the Times leads with “Pret A Manger told nine times of deadly seed risk”. Featuring heavily in picture slots are Bill Cosby, who received a jail sentence of between three and 10 years on Tuesday, and Meghan Markle, who was out for her first solo royal evening event last night. For more news: www.theguardian.com The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here.