The woman who has accused the supreme court nominee Brett Kavanaugh of sexual assault was given until 2.30pm ET on Saturday to negotiate conditions of her testimony to the Senate. The Republican chair of the Senate judiciary committee, Chuck Grassley, reluctantly set the new deadline after the committee failed to reach agreement with lawyers for the Californian professor Christine Blasey Ford, who has said Kavanaugh attacked her when they were both teenagers. Grassley made the announcement late on Friday night in the unusual form of a tweet addressed to the nominee. “Judge Kavanaugh I just granted another extension to Dr Ford to decide if she wants to proceed [with] the statement she made last week to testify to the Senate,” Grassley wrote. “She should decide so we can move on. I want to hear her. I hope you understand. It’s not my normal approach to be indecisive.” Grassley also wrote: “Five times now we [have] granted extension for Dr Ford to decide if she wants to proceed w[ith] her desire stated one [week] ago that she wants to tell Senate her story. “Dr Ford if [you] changed [your] mind say so so we can move on I want to hear [your] testimony. Come to us or we to u[.]” In a remarkable final tweet the Iowa senator, who is 85, wrote that he felt he was “playing 2nd trombone in the judiciary orchestra and [minority leader Chuck] Schumer is the conductor”. On Saturday, a few hours before the new deadline was set to expire, one of Grassley’s top press aides resigned abruptly, after it emerged he had been fired from a previous job in part because of sexual harassment allegations. Garrett Ventry, who had been involved in crafting Republican tactics in response to Ford’s allegations, told NBC News he denied any past “allegations of misconduct”. The Republican majority on the judiciary committee had been arguing with Ford’s lawyers about the details of Ford’s appearance before the committee, such as the day of the hearing and how many cameras would be allowed into the chamber. Republicans, eager to move rapidly with Kavanaugh’s nomination in an attempt to consolidate conservative control of the supreme court, want the hearing to take place on Monday. Ford wants to appear later in the week. The previous deadline for resolving the disputes was set at 10pm on Friday but Ford’s lawyer, Debra Katz, rejected it as arbitrary and a bullying tactic. “The imposition of aggressive and artificial deadlines regarding the date and conditions of any hearing has created tremendous and unwarranted anxiety and stress on Dr Ford,” Katz wrote in an email to the committee. “Your cavalier treatment of a sexual assault survivor who has been doing her best to cooperate with the committee is completely inappropriate.” With Kavanaugh’s nomination hanging in the balance, and a poll showing he is the least popular supreme court nominee for more than 30 years, Trump waded into the row by impugning Ford’s credibility. “I have no doubt that, if the attack on Dr Ford was as bad as she says, charges would have been immediately filed with local Law Enforcement Authorities by either her or her loving parents,” Trump wrote on Twitter on Friday. “I ask that she bring those filings forward so that we can learn date, time, and place!” A Washington Post profile of Ford, who is now married with two children, gave an account of how she struggled with the trauma of the alleged assault in 1982, undergoing therapy. It said she had considered leaving the US when it became clear Kavanaugh would be Trump’s pick for supreme court justice.