After losing nearly a third of his body weight over the past year and reversing his type 2 diabetes diagnosis thanks to a new diet and exercise, Tom Watson knows exactly what he used to picture in his head to motivate himself. “Death,” he says, without any hesitation. “I pictured death.” Last week, by speaking out about his weight loss and its dramatic effect on his health and wellbeing, Labour’s deputy leader became an unlikely poster boy for a generation of new dieters: middle-aged men. Only 22% of men aged 45-54 in England are considered a normal weight, compared with 42% of men aged 25-34 and 31% aged 35-44. A third of men in the 45-54 age group in England are now obese, while an additional 46% are overweight, according to the latest statistics from the Health Survey for England. Watson used to be one of them. At his heaviest, he weighed 22 stone (140kg), leading to a diagnosis of type 2 diabetes in late 2015. Reading the biographies of Labour politicians who had died in their 50s made him consider his own chances of longevity. “For me, dieting was entirely a rational decision,” he says. “I’m 51 and I want to live another 51 years.” He had tried diets before and failed to lose weight, but this time, like other men of his generation, he decided to take a more scholarly approach. Before he started he spent 18 months reading about his condition: “I read and read, and began, over time, to really understand it – how it could be worsened, and how it could be made easier.” For example, he read up on the pioppi diet and found the work of Dr Michael Mosley, bestselling author of The Fast Diet, The 8-Week Blood Sugar Diet and The Clever Gut Diet, particularly helpful. “I read everything Mosley had ever written, and then I read the research he wrote about – hundreds of papers and commentary. I knew the exercise I’d have to do would be humiliating and the food bit would be tough. It was important for me to understand why I needed to change.” Watson’s appetite for scientific research about dieting is typical of men of his generation, according to Mosley. The UK dieting market is estimated to be worth £157m and grew by 6% in value last year. Mosley believes it is the wealth of science that has emerged, suggesting there are specific actions people can take to improve their health, that is driving middle-aged men in particular to start dieting. He says: “Historically, men have been less interested in their health than they are now, and dieting has been seen very much as a vanity thing, a fad or quackery, aimed at helping you slip into a little black dress. What is new to some degree is studies showing the health benefits of particular types of diets, such as rapid weight loss and fasting diets.” His books illuminating these studies have sold nearly two million copies worldwide. “It’s clear now that when you lose fat, particularly gut fat, that leads to a whole range of other improvements. We have our own fate in our hands. If you’re middle-aged today, you could live well into your 90s and you don’t want to be living those last 20 years in ill health. Nowadays men are proud of their diets and of what they have achieved.” Tom Kerridge, 45, and his fellow celebrity chefs Si King, 50, and David Myers, 60, from The Hairy Bikers, were among the first to join this increasingly vocal group of proud and conspicuously slimmer middle-aged men. All three chefs have sold millions of diet cookbooks off the back of their own dramatic weight loss stories, with Kerridge’s 2018 book Lose Weight for Good selling a quarter of a million copies in just eight weeks when it was published last Christmas. Over the past year even the original pin-up for lad culture, Men Behaving Badly star Martin Clunes, 56, has boasted he fasted to achieve his substantial weight loss not, as was rumoured at the time, suffered a virus. “Men in particular have told me that they see fasting more like a sport than a traditional women’s diet,” says Mosley. “It’s seen as more than a diet – it’s seen as a challenge.” Like Watson, Mosley was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes in his 50s. It was this diagnosis that led him to present a documentary about intermittent fasting, now known as the 5:2 diet, to test whether he could reverse his diabetes by eating normally for five days a week and cutting down calories to around 600 for two days a week. “I genuinely wanted to know. I’d seen my dad develop type 2 diabetes and complications from that, struggle with it and die from it. I really didn’t want to go down the same road. I was interested and intrigued.” Viewers hoping for before and after shots of him in his underwear were disappointed. “It wasn’t a vanity project. It was about my health before and afterwards. I was genuinely scared because type 2 diabetes is a terrible disease.” Mosley’s experiment – which did successfully reverse his diabetes – was based on a study by Professor Roy Taylor at Newcastle University. “We demonstrated that type 2 diabetes wasn’t the incurable condition we had believed for decades,” says Taylor. “We showed you could take people who had type 2 diabetes and get them entirely back to normal.” Not all patients who lose weight manage to reverse their type 2 diabetes – Taylor says about 46% of those who tried in his biggest study successfully put their diabetes into remission within one year – but of those that do, men are slightly more likely to succeed than women. “Even the 54% who didn’t reverse their condition ended up on far fewer tablets and had better control over their diabetes, in addition to enjoying the major benefit of weight loss,” says Taylor. This research made a strong impression on Watson. He considered what reversing his diabetes would mean for his relationship with his children, who are aged 10 and 13. “First, I wanted to stay alive and look after them. But also, I wanted to enjoy them growing up – running up hills with them, climbing things, chasing them in the park, being silly. I found that physically quite taxing. I felt I was losing out.” Studies suggest a significant number of middle-aged fathers in the UK may be having similar thoughts. A report by the Men’s Health Forum last year found that one in 10 men in Britain have been diagnosed with diabetes. Obesity rates among British males are the highest in western Europe, according to research by the European Society of Cardiology. In 2017 it ranked British men as the most obese across 47 countries, including the 28 in the EU. Weight gain carries significant health risks for men, not least because they develop type 2 diabetes at a lower body mass index (BMI) than women: 29 as opposed to 31. Taylor explains: “Women tend to keep their fat in places that are metabolically safe, such as the hips and thighs. A man’s excess fat tends to go inside the tummy, what’s often called a beer belly. Quite often, just a very small increase in weight size, without a man obviously being fat, can be enough to push him over his personal fat threshold.” This increase often occurs in middle age. “Men often become less active in their mid-20s and 30s,” Taylor says. “Due to the pressures of family and work, they stop doing competitive sport or playing football or other team games, for example. Then there’s a tendency for weight to increase and unfortunately, in Britain, the average adult increases in weight half a kilogram every year from the age of 20 up to about 70. So you can see why type 2 diabetes, a disease of too much fat in the liver and pancreas, comes about in middle years.” Overweight middle-aged men face other health problems. One in 20 cancer cases in the UK are linked to being overweight or obese, with obesity cited by Cancer Research as the UK’s biggest cause of cancer after smoking. A recent study by University College London found that people who have a high BMI are more likely to develop dementia. Even when a man manages to stay relatively healthy in middle age, the general trend for weight gain among his peer group may make him feel anxious and force him to reconsider his own masculinity, according to Professor Victor Seidler, a sociologist at Goldsmiths, University of London. “In midlife, you don’t have the energy you used to have. Even if you don’t get ill, people you know may get ill. Suddenly the way you’ve been living as a man, which you took for granted, has a question mark.” A three-year survey of 300,000 adults by the Office for National Statistics in 2016 found that, compared to everyone else in the UK, middle-aged men are the least happy, have the lowest levels of life satisfaction and the highest levels of anxiety. Books such as Mosley’s enable middle-aged men to privately read the latest scientific research without ever opening up about their anxieties to a doctor or making themselves feel vulnerable, Seidler says. “You’re not supposed to die when you’re 50. How do you respond to the possibility that you might? You want to feel, as a guy, that you can do something about it, in a traditionally masculine sort of way.” Taking action, he says, is a really important way for men of that generation to deal with their feelings of anxiety. Mark Briant runs MobFit, a popular health and wellness consultancy based in London. Two-thirds of his male clients are middle-aged men, and he sees thousands of them each year. “The middle-aged men we see tend to spend more time than other clients doing their own research into the science of a healthy diet, and they get really into it. They take control of the cooking at home, tend to become a little bit obsessive about what they eat and tie in nutrition stuff with pursuits like triathlons and ultra marathons.” Despite their age, these men don’t like the idea of ageing. “They really want to cling on to their youth and maintain their muscle mass. They have realised that their body is what will make them feel young or old in the future. They want to optimise their health for an extra five to 10 years and be in their prime for longer.” It is partly an ego thing, he thinks, but also partly a challenge – the question on their minds is: how long can they stay in shape? Dr Matthew Hall, University of Derby associate academic and editor of the Journal of Gender Studies, points out that men in their 40s and 50s today live in a more image-conscious society than previous generations. “There is an expectation now that middle-aged men should look after themselves, rather than simply being sloths.” He thinks men can be more open about dieting when they follow regimes linked to specific scientific research because it is seen as more masculine. “As a rule of thumb, dieting is coded as a more feminine activity. If men participate in feminine activities, they need to frame it in a way that gives them permission to do it. Scientific markers tend to be coded as male.” Men may also take pride in excelling at the technical challenges of dieting – the precision and monitoring involved – and see it as a sporting endeavour, he says. One of the ways Watson kept himself motivated was to set realistic targets and then track his weight loss and exercise using a fitness app on his phone. “I’d go to bed at night and do a review in my head, try to tell myself I’d done all right that day.” Gradually, monitoring his progress started to feel similar to competing in a computer game. “I’ve been a video gamer since the 1980s and my approach was definitely gaming theory applied to the self. When I walked 20,000 steps in one day, it felt like winning an extra prize on a video game.” In total he has lost seven stone (44kg). “I get emotional when I think about the difference it has made to the time I spend with my children. They are very, very proud of me – they tell me that – and we just have more fun now. We run around a lot more. I do handstands in the deep end of the pool and swing them around. I’m more playful around them.” He has cut out sugar completely and confesses he misses drinking Guinness. “Not the taste as much as having a craic with pals.” His middle-aged male friends have either tried to compete with him – telling him how far they can run or how many bench presses they can do – or quietly followed his example, telling themselves “if Tom can do it, so can I”. Speaking out about his weight loss publicly made him feel vulnerable, but now he is glad he did it. “I think there are more men nowadays who feel confident talking about their feelings in relation to their health and wellbeing, but not enough.” He has since had hundreds of emails – all positive, he says – from fellow type 2 diabetics. “I feel very, very responsible for trying to get other type 2 diabetics into remission. I feel I need to help them to do that. I am aware that not everyone has the time or inclination to read 150 pieces of research about how they can reverse their condition.” He thinks there are holes in regulation, particularly around the design and packaging of food, and is disgusted that certain global corporations – “companies like Kellogg’s and Coca-Cola” – are allowed to sponsor major sporting events. He is no longer worried about his weight though. “Now, I’m more worried about my strength, fitness, stamina and wellbeing,” he says, and it doesn’t sound like he’s joking. He conducted almost the entire half-hour interview with the Observer on his morning walk to work, and has noticed that his mind is clearer since he changed his diet. “That has been the biggest and most unexpected benefit for me. It’s like a brain fog has been lifted. My memory is better. My mental acuity is sharper. I can reach for words quicker. I have never been this calm before, especially in my working life, and if you look at the Labour party at the moment, that’s surprising.” His outlook on the future has also changed. “I didn’t start this diet thinking about my old age, I started it to stay alive. But now I really do want to live for another 51 years.” And with those final hopeful words, he marches off to start a new day. This is one middle-aged man, it seems, who is no longer thinking about how soon he will die, but how long he will live. Additional reporting by Siva PG-Thangarajah