Marin Cilic gave Croatia a stranglehold over the United States as he beat Frances Tiafoe, 6-1, 6-3, 7-6(5), to put the hosts 2-0 ahead in their Davis Cup semi-final in Zadar on Friday. Cilic overwhelmed the American youngster in the opening two sets but was made to work harder in the third as Tiafoe finally shook off his debut nerves. The match was umpired by Portugal’s Carlos Ramos – the official accused of sexism by American Serena Williams after docking her a game during a tumultuous US Open final. Thankfully for Ramos this match was a more tranquil affair, apart from the noisy Croatian crowd cheering on their man. “I’m just focusing on this tie and working again. That’s all I can say,” Ramos told the Associated Press on Friday. Ramos calmed the raucous crowd on several occasions and came down from his chair to check a few ball marks in the clay but otherwise had no impact on the match. “It was great. There were even a few calls where he came to check. Everything was really good,” Cilic said. “The atmosphere was also great. I enjoyed every single second of the match.” Tiafoe, who was making his Davis Cup debut, also didn’t have any complaints. “I didn’t know Ramos was sitting in the chair. I really wasn’t paying attention,” Tiafoe said. “I was more worried about the person across the net than the official.” USA captain Jim Courier added: “We thought the officiating was excellent all day long.” Cilic’s victory made him Croatia’s most successful Davis Cup player, moving him past the 36 rubbers won by Ivan Ljubicic. Earlier Coric gave Croatia a flying start by defeating Steve Johnson, 6-4, 7-6(4), 6-3, in the opening rubber. The 21-year-old Coric had lost his only previous encounter with the US No 3 at Roland Garros but on Zadar’s clay courts drew first blood for the hosts against Johnson, who was leading his country in the absence of John Isner and Jack Sock. Coric’s emphatic win just underlined why the Croats, who had won all their four previous ties with the Davis Cup’s most successful nation, were overwhelming favorites to repeat the dose and reach the final of the last Davis Cup to be played in its traditional historic format before next year’s revamp. World No 18 Coric was impressive from the start, taking an early break for 2-1, aided by Johnson missing plenty of first serves, and controlling the 35-minute opening stanza. The youngster brought the crowd to their feet with one extraordinary ‘tweener’ lob that left Johnson flat-footed as he earned another quick break in the second set but the American fought back strongly to take it to a tiebreak. Coric again stepped up his game, reeling off the final four points of the breaker, featuring a glorious forehand winner and a fine volley, to seal it 7-4. He then forged home his advantage over the world number 30 in the third set to wrap up victory in two hours and 24 minutes.