Ever since noughties boyband members began teaming sports jackets with their hoodies, whacking on two coats has been a simple solution for anyone unfulfilled by a single layer of outerwear. But such layering is now extreme – its a pile-on. Forget less is more, more is more! Why stop at two coats when three (plus) is on-trend and practical, too – swaddle up or peel off at will, subject to the thermostat’s stranglehold. Autumn runways were awash with chic, sentient laundry piles: Alexander McQueen’s biker/double-breasted tux/biker trio; Lemaire’s outerwear hat-trick topped by a floor-length overcoat; Vetements pairing of floral coat and rain-mac; and Balenciaga’s wondrous fabric lasagne – a $9,000 (£6,800) oversized layered parka coat, comprising seven distinct layers of jacket, raincoat, puffa, hoodie and more besides. Good news, then, for those allergic to clearouts. Finally, your cries of, “But I might wear this coat again” are justified. This is one trend you can easily recreate at home. And, reader, I did. I picked a long overcoat as my base, adding a lightweight parka for depth, before crowning it with a jacket which could, I hoped, be whipped off at a moment’s notice without spoiling the look. For maximum effect, all but the layer closest to skin need to be be unbuttoned, visible, and contrasting enough to be noticed. To avoid bulk, start long, then get shorter and looser – but for more drama, start short and sporty and graduate to formal the farther out you go. I tried this in 24C midday heat, on a trip to the dentist – don’t tell me I never suffer for fashion – and recommend keeping at least one layer light, to shed easily in a heat emergency. En route, a couple of people crossed the road to avoid me as I approached – I looked more burly than usual, I guess – and disrobing gracefully on arrival was a challenge. The dental receptionist, watching me defoliate, looked bemused andasked: “It is warm out, isn’t it?” Yes, yes it was. During my multilayered excursion I learned that pockets on your outermost coat must be accessible and contain the stuff you need at a moment’s notice; leave the inside pockets of your nearest layer for valuables. Forget pockets in other layers exist and leave empty to avoid desperate riffling for your debit card at the front of a long, vexed queue. Perhaps secrete a microfibre cloth in one, to dab away layer-induced perspiration. It’s also advisable that wherever you walk, walk slowly – while your multiple coats will likely break your fall should you faint from heat exhaustion, it’s best not to put them to the test.