I was having a mid-morning breakfast at Whole Foods in Jackson, Mississippi, when a young white mother I knew from around town walked up wearing workout clothes and pushing her youngest daughter in a stroller. “I wanted to tell you that after I read the story you ran in your newspaper about Jackson’s school integration history, I decided to send my daughter to public school,” she said, referring to her kindergarten-age child. After tons of research, she had decided that her daughter could get a good education there – and it was the right thing to do. It didn’t surprise me; her family also attends an integrated church with a black pastor. But her timing was auspicious. “You should read this,” I said, reaching into my tote bag for the new book, White Kids: Growing Up with Privilege in a Racially Divided America by Margaret A Hagerman, PhD, a sociologist at Mississippi State University. “She can help you avoid mistakes as a white parent in a majority-black school.” She looked excited to read it. A few hours later, I was sitting with Hagerman in her office 110 miles north to talk about her book. The soft-spoken woman with long, straight hair and bangs emanates more of a cool co-ed vibe than that of an academic who, in her book and press appearances for it, is bringing the ethnographic heat about how affluent white families across the country are promulgating white supremacy in America – whether they intend to or not. After spending two years with 30 families in three interconnected midwestern communities, she reports that delusions of “colorblindness” provide cover for ongoing structural racism. As our conversation began, I told Hagerman about the young mother back in Jackson. I saw a white mother walk out of a conversation recently about the societal costs of private-schooling their kids after declaring that her “kids aren’t guinea pigs”, a dehumanizing phrase you interrogate well in the book.I talk a lot about this tension many families face. You can really see it with school-choice issues, but it’s actually bigger than that. People get very defensive about choices made. On the one hand, they want to be good citizens and feel like they’re contributing to a just and equal society. They don’t want to be considered a racist because they genuinely believe they’re not. On the other hand, they feel the need to be a “good” parent. A lot of scholarship around school choice looks at race and find that many people believe that a better school is one with more white children. Other parents really thought it was important for children to develop an entrepreneurial spirit, start businesses, make money and think about college as a place they’re going to get something that would get them a good job. The third group was more invested in their children becoming members of a diverse democracy with tools to talk about inequality and experiences that would help them and resist these forms of inequality. They don’t do it perfectly; I’m critical of all of them. In a majority-white Seattle suburb, a public high school used the Confederate flag for years as its emblem and still call themselves the “rebels”. After a petition to change it, the student body voted to keep the nickname. You write about communities where racism is considered the “past”; do such educational holes make it harder for families to confront continuing racism?Some of the children really believed in meritocracy. Their understandings of inequality were that people who were successful and rich worked hard; those who where unsuccessful and poor were lazy. Without understanding the history of racism in America, that explanation that the kids are offering would make sense for them. They haven’t learned about the history of redlining, the history of slavery, the genocide of Native Americans, the relationship between the United States and Mexico. If they’re not learning this multicultural history, when they look out at the world and see that people who look like them are successful, it must be because they’re better, they work harder and their parents care about them more. That has dangerous consequences.How did your own background on race affect your work? I’ve spent a lot of time in spaces with affluent white people; I don’t think there’s enough scholarship and understanding about the dynamics that go on in these spaces that are often very exclusive. In some of the spaces I enter in the book – country clubs, private pools, private parties in people’s houses – there hasn’t been a lot of critical research on race. I tried to use my own position in a meaningful way; no one questioned me when I walked into the country club. I had a lot of people tell me they never would have talked to me if I wasn’t white, and that they never would have talked to me about their kids if I wasn’t a white woman, and they wouldn’t have talked to me about all this if I wasn’t young. They saw me as a future mom, and they wanted to impart their wisdom.What surprised you?The racial apathy. Feeling like you have to care about your own kid in order to be a good parent, and not understanding that being a good parent also means caring about other people, too. I encountered the assumption that white kids are bringing more to the table. That’s a really problematic idea underlying some of the school-choice processes; some white parents don’t believe black kids have much to offer. One parent in the book even tells me that.What are three actions people could do to help solve the race divides you reveal in your book?First, listen to people of color. Hear them. Second, match your actions with your values. The third is to seek out kids’ perspectives and take them seriously. These are children that are likely to go on to be powerful people as adults and already are powerful in their daily lives. They are thinking a lot about race. They’re not colorblind. Children are picking up on all kinds of things in our social environment, even when we don’t want to talk about them.This interview has been edited for clarity and length.