Officials are planning to airlift food and water to Wilmington after the city of nearly 120,000 people became cut off from the rest of North Carolina by rising flood water from Florence. At least 17 people have died in North and South Carolina, as rescuers continued to pull residents from homes threatened by swollen rivers. The US’s highest emergency official said other states were in the path of Florence. “Not only are you going to see more impact across North Carolina this week … but we’re also anticipating you are about to see a lot of damage going through West Virginia, all the way up to Ohio as the system exits out,” said Brock Long of the Federal Emergency Management Agency. In Wilmington, the state’s eighth-largest city, residents waited for hours outside stores and restaurants for necessities such as water. Police guarded the door of one store and only 10 people were allowed inside at a time. Woody White, the New Hanover county commission chair, said officials were planning for food and water to be flown into the coastal city. “Our roads are flooded,” he said. “There is no access to Wilmington.” About 70 miles (115km) from the coast, residents near Lumber river stepped from their homes directly into boats floating in their front yards. River forecasts showed the scene could be repeated in towns as far as 250 miles inland amid rising waters in the coming days. Florence, although downgraded to a tropical depression, had a huge impact. Radar showed parts of the sprawling storm over six states, with North and South Carolina at the centre. The mayor of New Bern, a city badly affected by flooding, told NBC he had imposed a curfew. Thirty roads remained impassable, Dana Outlaw said, with 4,200 homes and more than 300 commercial buildings damaged, 6,000 people left without power and 1,200 in shelters. More than 450 people had to be rescued from swirling flood water over the weekend. In Goldsboro, rain fell and the Neuse River was swelling above its banks. A Sunday service at Greenleaf Christian church was cancelled. Its pastor, the civil rights leader William Barber, had to evacuate his 86-year-old mother to Greensboro. Donald Trump said federal emergency workers, first responders and law enforcement officials were “working really hard” in the extreme weather. FEMA, First Responders and Law Enforcement are working really hard on hurricane Florence. As the storm begins to finally recede, they will kick into an even higher gear. Very Professional! Associated Press contributed to this report