After a fairytale final week as an England cricketer, Alastair Cook looked to divert some of the adulation on to his old friend Jimmy Anderson by describing the newly crowned leading seam bowler in Test history as the country’s greatest ever cricketer. Cook’s 33rd and final Test century may have led to a text message from Sir Ian Botham wondering when his scriptwriter will be returned but there was one last moment for posterity here when Anderson passed Glenn McGrath’s record of 563 wickets by detonating Mohammed Shami’s middle stump and completing the 118-run win. Speaking to Test Match Special, Cook said: “He’s the best cricketer England have ever produced. He’s an absolute freak. It’s been a pleasure to stand at slip for him. It’s fitting he knocked out middle stump.” Anderson, who bowled a 14-over spell for his golden moment, was close to tears about Cook’s retirement, saying: “It will take a while to sink in. It has been a big thing for me – I’m trying not to cry. To be honest, he’s been a bit of a role model. The way he goes about his business, I’ve tried to emulate that.” On his latest record, he said: “It’s been a special achievement for me. It’s not something I’ve aimed for. I’ve just enjoyed playing for England – it’s an amazing job.” Jimmy Anderson's dismissal of India's Mohammed Shami was his 564th Test wicket – meaning he moves above Glenn McGrath in the all-time standings. McGrath's 563rd and final wicket for Australia was none other than Anderson in early 2007. The England bowler is now the most successful pace man ever, with just three spinners – Muttiah Muralitharan, Shane Warne and Anil Kumble – having taken more wickets. 1 Muttiah Muralitharan (Sri Lanka) 8002 Shane Warne (Australia) 7083 Anil Kumble (India) 6194 James Anderson (England) 5645 Glenn McGrath (Australia) 5636 Courtney Walsh (West Indies) 5197 Kapil Dev (India) 4348 Stuart Broad (England) 4329 Richard Hadlee (New Zealand) 43110 Rangana Herath (Sri Lanka) 430 Such was the fluidity Cook’s valedictory 147 on the fourth day that it prompted Virat Kohli to ask him out in the middle whether it was really time to sign-off and after the end of his side’s 4-1 defeat the India captain paid tribute to the outgoing opener. Kohli said: “I congratulate him on a amazing career as an opener playing in these conditions. He’s a great example for everyone who loves Test cricket, having so much determination and passion to play for his country.” Root, Cook’s successor as England captain, also pestered the 33-year-old throughout the match about possibly reconsidering but though unsuccessful, he is confident he will still have Anderson at his disposal for some time to come. The 36-year-old was McGrath’s final Test victim before the great Australian signed off at the end of the 2006-07 series and Root fancies him to now challenge the three spinners above him in Anil Kumble (619), Shane Warne (708) and Muttiah Muralitharan (800). Root said: “What’s he is achieving and what he is capable of achieving still is astounding. To even be in the same league as McGrath and now chasing the big spinners is phenomenal. The most important thing is we do everything we can to prolong his career and give him opportunities to chase those guys down and win Tests.” Anderson’s take? “I feel fresh considering how many overs I’ve bowled. I’m enjoying playing. As long as that continues, I’ll carry on playing as long as I can.”