Eddie Hearn has said he would “revolutionise” British rugby league if he was given a central role in transforming its fortunes. But the boxing promoter has warned clubs he would be open to making significant changes, including the removal of the salary cap, to allow the sport to fulfil its potential. Hearn is due to meet the Rugby Football League chief executive, Ralph Rimmer, and the head of Super League, Robert Elstone, to discuss becoming involved in the game’s promotion. He and his father, Barry, were guests at August’s Challenge Cup final, after Hearn previously revealed to the Guardian in March how he was keen to help transform events such as the cup if asked. Hearn previously said it would be difficult to do anything more than promote stand-alone events for the RFL, something he is still open to doing, but he has now revealed he and his promotion company, Matchroom, would be interested in a far bigger role if everyone within the sport was receptive to their ambitious plans. “There’s the foundations of a great sport here,” Hearn said. “It’s very easy to understand and it’s fast-paced, which is great news in terms of attracting casual supporters. But there’s a distinct lack of those at the minute. There are things we’re going to bring up that certain people won’t like. But if the game wants to grow, those conversations need to be had. “We’re going to meet Robert and Ralph. I think all the relevant people need to be in the same room and we can hear each others’ views. But we can revolutionise anything we get our hands on. Whatever we’re asked to do, we know we have the ability to smash it.” Hearn’s comments on the salary cap, which limits Super League clubs’ spending on wages to £1.9m per season, indicate a more serious intent to shake things up, reiterating his previous stance that rugby league currently has no real superstars. “My dad already has some strong views on the cap which I’m not sure Ralph or the clubs will agree on,” he said. “But I don’t see the idea of everyone on the same level-playing field as great in some respects. The cap makes it a bit boring in a way, the big clubs need to dominate, like when rugby league was powerful in the 1980s with Wigan and St Helens. If the richer owners are pumping their money in to get the best players and create the biggest stars, surely that’s a good thing for the sport as a whole.” The meeting comes at an interesting time, with Elstone pressing ahead on his mission to revamp Super League’s profile following the successful vote to change the domestic league structure last week. All 12 top-flight clubs recently met to discuss a number of issues. Among them were verbal guarantees that Widnes will receive a parachute payment of £500,000.