On Saturday, I am heading to Cambridge to take part in the second annual Big Tent Ideas Festival, a cross-party gathering designed to encourage open and civil conversation about the pressing political issues of our times. Caricatured in 2017 as the “Tory Glastonbury”, the festival is co-chaired this year by its founder, George Freeman, the Conservative MP for Mid Norfolk, and Sally Morgan, Labour peer and a former minister. Its governing principle is a desire to escape the shrillness of social media and the feverish polarisation of Westminster, and to nurture ecumenical debate in an age of tribalism. Lurking beneath this, of course, is the collective identity crisis of centre-ground politicians and thinkers, still reeling from the double whammy of the EU referendum and Donald Trump’s election, anxious about their future role in a seething political culture that seems increasingly dominated by Brexit, antisemitism and ideological fixity. I understand completely why so many moderate Tories are in despair at the rush of former Ukip members joining their party to ensure that Theresa May’s successor conforms to their nationalist principles. I understand completely why Frank Field, the MP for Birkenhead, resigned the Labour whip, appalled by Jeremy Corbyn’s record on antisemitism. Opposition to Brexit is the basis for a campaign, rather than a new party seeking office I disagree profoundly with Field on EU membership – he is a passionate Brexiteer – but he is also a man of compassion, tireless industry and strong moral principle who, as minister and backbencher, has done as much as any parliamentarian in recent decades to address poverty, welfare reform and the relationship between the two. Any party that loses him is the lesser for it. Though Field, as so often, acted alone, his decision has given pause to the many MPs on both sides of the Commons who have been considering, with varying levels of seriousness, the formation of a new centre party. It is true that, at present, this is a more pressing question in Labour’s ranks. But that would change in a heartbeat if Boris Johnson or Jacob Rees-Mogg were to become the next Conservative leader. Dominic Grieve and Anna Soubry have already indicated that they would leave the party were the former foreign secretary to succeed May, and others feel the same way but have yet to say so publicly. Again, I understand completely the arguments and emotions that are driving centre-ground politicians to contemplate such drastic measures. But I hope that – on both sides – they restrain themselves. Prophecy is a dangerous game these days, but this much I know: a new centre party would fail. Why so? First, because it would resemble a coalition of losers, an institutionalised flounce. It would be defined – with some justice – as the liberal elite going on strike until the voters restore it to office. As one very senior politician who was involved in preliminary talks about a new movement said to me: “It would look like a Madame Tussauds of past politics. All those familiar faces in one place? Disaster.” Second, such a party would be bound together by the weakest of forces. Opposition to Brexit is what most of the potential members of such a grouping have in common. But that is the basis for a campaign, rather than a new party seeking office. When it comes to fiscal policy, public sector reform, the fine balance between liberty and equality, and much else besides, there is a reason that Chuka Umunna and Yvette Cooper are in the Labour party and Grieve and Nicky Morgan are Tories. Any party that wants to be taken seriously in our representative democracy must very quickly produce 650 candidates to run in a general election. I do not doubt that funding would be found for this putative undertaking: Simon Franks, the founder of LoveFilm, is said to have raised £50m to pour into such a project, and unconfirmed rumours continue to swirl around Westminster about the potential munificence of George Soros. But human capital is always harder to find than the financial variety. A parliamentary system requires any new party to have hundreds of candidates ready to stand for election to Westminster – not to mention the devolved assemblies and local authorities. Where are all these people? I recommend that wavering Tories and Labour politicians – understandably tormented by the present shabby state of politics – read James Carville’s book, Stickin’: The Case for Loyalty. As Bill Clinton’s former chief strategist, Carville knows all there is to know about allegiance under stress. But, as he writes: “Loyalty not taxed is really not loyalty … untested loyalty is just a bromide.” Carville does not mean unquestioning sycophancy, or career-saving cowardice. He is referring to the stamina and patience that are so unfashionable in the digital age, but so necessary to the preservation of all political ideas in a party system. Tony Blair did not join the Social Democratic party, but stood his ground as a Labour MP for 11 years before becoming party leader. Jeremy Corbyn, to be fair, waited 32 years to assume the same office. Sheer cussed tenacity is an underrated quality in modern politics. Which is not to say that centre-ground politicians can sit back and wait for the pendulum to swing back their way. There is no pendulum – only human agency, and the readiness to fail seven times but win on the eighth attempt. The answer to Ukip entryism is to recruit more Tory moderates. The answer to Corbynism is to present a centre-left alternative that is genuinely suited to 2018 rather than 1997. Yes, all this is incredibly hard. But who said it was going to be easy? Never has it been more important for the decent to stand up to the intemperate, to ignore the promptings of fatigue and pride. Designing your own comfort zone is for losers. Stand and fight. • Matthew d’Ancona is a Guardian columnist