Throwing young talent into the heat of the battle at the very front of the Formula One grid is a bold move. For Ferrari, who have chosen to do just that by promoting the 20-year-old rookie Charles Leclerc to the team for next season, it is also out of character, given their usually more conservative approach to appointing drivers. Yet the Scuderia are far from taking a chance with Leclerc, one of the most exciting talents in the sport, who has proved he has the attributes to partner Sebastian Vettel in the most prestigious drive in motor racing. Last season, on his way to a dominant title win in F2, Leclerc told me at the Hungaroring it was still a dream to make it to F1. He did not have to wait long and now drives for Sauber. Before this year’s Monaco Grand Prix, his home race, he said it was “a dream” to one day drive the red cars. In 2019 his remarkable and almost unprecedented fulfilment of all these aspirations will be complete as he joins Ferrari, to replace Kimi Räikkönen. This was sooner than expected, despite his talent. He is the youngest driver to have been appointed by Ferrari since Ricardo Rodríguez entered the Italian Grand Prix for the Scuderia in 1961. More noticeably, he is the least experienced driver they have appointed since Enzo Ferrari opted to give Gilles Villeneuve a shot in one of his cars at the Canadian Grand Prix in 1977. Villeneuve had only one race to his name; Leclerc will take his seat with just one season under his belt. Yet there is no sense that this unusual shift in policy is anything but calculated on Leclerc’s obvious talent. It would have been easy to maintain Räikkönen for one more season and for Leclerc to remain at Sauber. Ferrari have made a bold move but it is one the Monégasque driver deserves. He is calm, assured and mature beyond his years. Leclerc dealt with both the death of his godfather, Jules Bianchi, in 2015 and his father last year with remarkable composure. Before this season began he was honest about the scale of task that lay ahead and has since proved able to adapt and learn with alacrity. Ferrari brought him into their young driver academy in 2016 and were clearly aware then of his potential. At the Hungaroring last year, although he was driving in F2 for Prema, a representative of the Scuderia had to be present when he was interviewed, so protective were they of their protege. Their nurturing has worked well, if coming to fruition possibly sooner than expected. Crucially Leclerc had put in the performances this season to impress the late Sergio Marchionne, the former Ferrari chairman who wanted him in the car in 2019; the team have honoured his intentions. When the season opened this was far from a foregone conclusion. Sauber brought an aggressive new design this season. A rookie year is tough enough in a tried and tested ride but their car was a handful to drive as they began to understand the package and attempt to unlock its potential. A spin at the third round in China was chastening for Leclerc. He reacted with complete professionalism and went back to the team to work through ways he and the car could develop together. What followed caught Marchionne and everyone else’s attention. At the next round in Baku he was sixth. Four more points finishes from the following five races ensued. Over fastest lap pace the Sauber is the second slowest car on the grid, yet Leclerc has put it into Q3 three times and out-qualified his vastly more experienced team-mate, Marcus Ericsson, 11 times to three. Mere numbers do not tell the full story quite as clearly as his racecraft does. In Baku he took places at the start, then made Pierre Gasly and Lance Stroll look sluggish as he passed them at a restart, before defending his place against Fernando Alonso. It was the race of a driver who had found his feet in a new formula remarkably swiftly and another outstanding meeting in Spain followed. Since which the talk of him moving to Ferrari gathered more and more momentum, an additional weight he has handled with aplomb. Open and straightforward in person, he is given to considering answers to ensure what he says is of import, reflecting a character that is constantly looking for ways to improve. This ability to exercise self-analysis will stand him in good stead when steps into the spotlight next season. When he does so, Leclerc will immediately be in the mix with Vettel and Lewis Hamilton in a car proven to be well-balanced and quick. Ferrari believe he is ready to do so and F1 will be all the better for their faith in him.