The euro and stock markets across Europe fell on Thursday over fears that Italy’s populist coalition government could delay the presentation of its budget targets for 2019 because of an internal standoff. For weeks, the government’s two deputy prime ministers – Luigi Di Maio, the leader of the anti-establishment Five Star Movement (M5S), and Matteo Salvini, who heads the far-right League – have been engaged in a bitter battle with Giovanni Tria, the economy minister. Tria is trying to resist pressure to put together a budget that will result in Italy’s deficit rising in order to pay for election campaign promises such as a basic income, flat tax and pension reforms. Markets reacted negatively after reports that the ruling parties will push for a 2.4% of GDP deficit target, flouting the more conservative 1.9% that Tria is aiming for. Reports of the potential delay pushed Italy’s main stock exchange in Milan down as much as 2% in early trading, with shares in the country’s biggest banks under particular pressure. By 2pm (BST) on Thursday the market was down about 0.9%, or 180 points. The Italian’s government’s borrowing costs also hit a three-week high in the bond markets. The strains weighed on the rest of Europe, too, with stock markets in the UK, Germany and France opening down before recovering to move into positive territory by the afternoon. The euro was down 0.25% in the currency markets, having skidded all the way down to $1.17 (£0.89). The office of the prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, denied a cabinet meeting to discuss the deficit figure – due to take place on Thursday afternoon - would be delayed. There is speculation that Tria, an academic not affiliated to either of the ruling parties, could be forced to resign and potentially replaced by Giancarlo Giorgetti, the deputy leader of the League. A League politician Riccardo Molinari said on Thursday that if “Tria is no longer part of the government project, then we’ll find another economy minister.” Investors were spooked because they had been expecting the government to reach a compromise on a more cautious target. Italy’s debt pile already stands at around 131% of GDP, the second highest in the eurozone after Greece. Bonds rallied earlier this week on the anticipation that Tria would keep the targets within control. “There was a consensus, or at least one was materialising, that an agreement on deficit was almost there, it would not have exceeded 2% and that journey of the budget through parliament would not have been such a tragedy after all,” said Francesco Galietti, founder of Policy Sonar, a Rome-based consultancy. “As it turns out, there is no consensus at all.” Di Maio, in particular, has been stubborn in his insistence that money must be found to pay for a universal basic income – a key promise in the party’s electoral campaign. The 32-year-old has threatened to torpedo the budget in parliament if it does not include this goal. “When you do that, you open a government crisis,” Galietti said. “He’s escalating it to a level that was considered unthinkable for most observers.” Some speculate that the M5S sees Tria’s stance as an existential threat to its survival, especially before the European elections in May 2019. By law, the budget must be unveiled by midnight. Failing this, the only other option would to resort to the fiscal goals, including a budget deficit target of 0.8%, outlined by the previous administration’s Economic and Financial Document (DEF) in April. “The problem [with the DEF] is that the fiscal targets are much more aggressive than what the government wants, so politically it’s not an option but legally it’s the only other option [if the budget gets delayed],” said Wolfango Piccoli, the co-president of Teneo Intelligence, a research firm in London.