Lethal White, the fourth in JK Rowling’s crime series featuring the disabled war veteran turned private investigator Cormoran Strike and his partner in the agency Robin Ellacott, arrives with the customary fanfare, declaring itself “the most epic Robert Galbraith novel yet”. At nearly 650 pages, it’s a big book and it certainly doesn’t lack ambition. It’s set amid the 2012 London Olympics, that last precarious moment of national unity. There are whispers of blackmail and double-dealing in the corridors of power and something suitably nasty and gothic that happened in the country seat of a Conservative MP. Strike and Ellacott must walk the line between corrupt Tories, devious coalition Liberals and brutish proto-Momentum activists. Each chapter is headed with a quote from Ibsen’s state of the nation play Rosmersholm, indicating themes of social, political and moral conflict, and from the start it’s clear that we’re also on an emotional journey, particularly in the love lives of our two protagonists. Strike is a wonderfully complex creature, with just the right balance of contradictions to guide us through this labyrinthine world. An overweight former boxer with one leg amputated below the knee, ex-military police – and you don’t get much more authoritarian than that – he grew up in the counterculture of squats and communes with a groupie mother who died of an overdose. He’s one of those lost souls who joined the army in search of family, an outsider who knows the belly of the beast. And the time taken in describing the day-to-day workings of his craft ensures that he’s plausible enough in his occupation. One element of realism is that Strike, having solved many high-profile murders (not something actual private investigators do much in real life), has now become famous and compromised in his operations. His cover is blown and this predicament seems heartfelt to the author. For we now know Robert Galbraith as the nom de plume of JK Rowling, who intended to write her crime novels incognito until someone blew the gaff. The opening line, after a long prologue, is the most quotable in the book: “Such is the universal desire for fame that those who achieve it accidentally or unwillingly will wait in vain for pity.” But one suspects that Galbraith might have been a little more rigorously edited were he not the alter ego of our most successful living writer. The central murder doesn’t happen until nearly 300 pages in; while the slow burn to the plot shows admirable restraint, all the detail – the exposition and the setups that hint at withheld information – creates a sense of inertia. The sentence structure is more soft-boiled than hard-boiled. And the author, like the activist described giving a speech at a political meeting, is too often “losing herself in secondary clauses”. There is a discursive delight in many meticulously descriptive passages, but they keep us detached from what might be at the heart of this novel. Ultimately the main thread of the story, which provides as many plot twists as any element of the mystery, turns out to be the unresolved sexual tension between Strike and Ellacott. Here we lose a sense of balance, for though Strike is richly drawn, Robin is a little on the dull side. Trapped in a loveless marriage with a ghastly accountant, she has suffered the occupational hazard of falling in love with her work colleague. And whereas each flaw of Strike is lovingly detailed, all the women who fall for his rough charm (and there are a great many) are predictably conventional in their attractiveness. “Some women just like fat one-legged pube-headed blokes with broken noses,” he jokes. It’s a shame that none of his lovers has such interesting characteristics. There’s the doomed affair of his past, posh Charlotte, “wild, beautiful and aristocratic”. Then “Ciara Parker, a gorgeous one-night stand”. We’re rather misleadingly informed that: “Elin had been different, beautiful and, best of all, convenient.” Even “Coco, on whom he preferred not to dwell” passes muster as a “small, lithe, very pretty girl”. And the appearance of Strike’s current squeeze Lorelei ensures that “men’s eyes swivelled when she passes them in the street”. Unable to commit, he leaves her “sleep-tousled, sad and desirable in a short kimono”, only to later muse wistfully on how “erotically gifted” she was. Ellacott obligingly lines up as a contestant in this rather banal beauty pageant. It’s established on the first page that she is “a pre-Raphaelite angel”. And when she finally gets to wear the dress Strike has bought for her, it’s no surprise that “she looked stunning”. If Robert Galbraith really existed one could put all this down to the usual egocentric frailties of the middle-aged male crime writer, but given what we know it strikes a jarring note. Nevertheless, the Galbraith/Rowling persona does make for highly inventive storytelling and there is much here for mystery fans to enjoy. So many twists, turns, false leads and red herrings: seldom has a denouement been more worthy of its original meaning, literally the “unknotting”. It’s a Gordian task, undertaken in a 20-page climax. And as for the fate of our fictional star-crossed lovers? Well, that’s the real tangled web that may continue to snare many a reader. • Jake Arnott’s latest novel is The Fatal Tree (Sceptre). Lethal White is published by Sphere. To order a copy for £17.20 (RRP £20) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.