Ian Buruma, the former editor-in-chief of the New York Review of Books who was forced out of the job on Wednesday amid a row over his editorial judgment relating to #MeToo, has complained of being “publicly pilloried” and “convicted on Twitter”. A day after the announcement of Buruma’s departure from the literary magazine, the NYRB itself has yet to give an explanation for the rift with its chief editor – only the third person to hold the top post since the review was founded in 1963. The silence means Buruma has got his side of the story out first, portraying himself as a victim of social media bullying. In an interview with the Dutch magazine Vrij Nederland, the writer and academic said he had been “convicted on Twitter, without any due process”. He characterized his fate as “rather ironic”. “As editor of the New York Review of Books I published a theme issue about #MeToo-offenders who had not been convicted in a court of law but by social media. And now I myself am publicly pilloried.” The storm that toppled Buruma from one of the most prestigious journalistic seats in America erupted this month when he published a long article by the former Canadian broadcaster Jian Ghomeshi. The celebrity was acquitted in March, 2016, of sexual assault and choking relating to three women. At least a further 17 other women have also made serious allegations of improper sexual conduct against Ghomeshi. Yet in the essay, Ghomeshi tried to defend himself against the accusations, saying they were “inaccurate”. Ghomeshi said he wanted to give a more “nuanced” view of what had happened. The article prompted furious debate on social media and widespread criticism of Buruma’s decision to publish on the grounds that, though Ghomeshi had been acquitted, he remained subject to multiple claims of violent behavior from many women. The dispute was aggravated when Buruma gave an interview last week to Slate in which he said it was not “really my concern” to take a view on Ghomeshi’s allegedly violent behavior and argued that there were “undesirable, or at least unresolved, aspects” aspects to the way the Canadian star had been treated. Buruma commissioned the Ghomeshi article several months ago, and faced strong opposition to publication from members of the NYRB staff. The former editor-in-chief told Vrij Nederland: “The staff was initially not unanimously positive about publication, but once the decision to publish was made, we agreed. Also the publisher was initially positive.” He insisted that he had not been fired from the NYRB job but had been put in a position where he felt he had to step down because of a combination of social media hounding and pressure from academic advertisers to the magazine who were not happy about the Ghomeshi scandal. “University publishers, whose advertisements make publication of the New York Review of Books partly possible, were threatening a boycott,” Buruma said. “They are afraid of the reactions on the campuses, where this is an inflammatory topic. Because of this, I feel forced to resign – in fact it is a capitulation to social media and university presses.”