Apparently it was King Ferdinand I of Naples who introduced butter to Sicily. Having fled to Palermo on Nelson’s HMS Vanguard when French Revolutionary troops invaded Naples in 1798, and encouraged by his Austrian-born wife Queen Maria Carolina, King F constructed a crown dairy in the Palermo commune of Partinico. According to the writer and food historian Mary Taylor Simeti, this daily supply of cream and butter was vital when the rest of Ferdinand’s court, with its aspirations to French style, arrived in Sicily. They turned their backs on traditional Sicilian cooking, sending to Paris for their chefs, who became known as monzù – a corruption of monsieur. Bechamel, brioche, mousses, glazes, sauces, pastry enriched with butter and cream: the food of the extremely rich had virtually no influence on the food of most of the population, who were, for the most part, desperately poor. In time, though, even when the fashion for French cooking faded and the monzùs turned their attention to elaborating on traditional Sicilian recipes, certain dishes and habits persisted and seeped into popular cooking. Now, in much the same way as Sicilian dialect and proverbs are speckled with reminders of the Greek, Arab, Spanish and French legacies, modern Sicilian cuisine is, too. Olive oil and opaque pork fat may rule supreme, but pastry, the brioche filled with gelato in Catania, and the bechamel my olive-oil-loving Sicilian mother-in-law spreads cautiously in baked pasta are all buttery reminders of the French culinary influence. In her book Sicilian Food, Simeti notes Denti di Pirajno’s elaborate recipe for pasticcio di sostanza – roughly translated as “pie of substance” – a rich pastry crust stuffed with chicken, giblets, mince and sausage with red wine and spices, the very substantial grandfather of modern and popular pasticcio. She also has a (shorter) recipe for a straightforward crostata di mandorle – almond tart – that I like to make. There is butter in the pastry but not the filling, which means it isn’t as rich as the de rigueur frangipane. It is lovely, though – a jam tart with a thick blanket of egg-enriched marzipan, which, when baked, takes on a light golden crust, but – because of almond’s natural oils – remains soft and slightly gooey underneath. You could use a fresh fruit compote I suppose, or press fruit into the top, and any fruit jam would work, but plain, not-too-sweet apricot jam works particularly well in pastry that has a French accent and an almond top that speaks Sicilian. For the pastry175g cold butter or half butter/half lard, diced250g plain flour, sifted1 pinch salt50g icing sugar1 egg, beaten For the filling250g-300g apricot jam2 large eggs175g caster sugar250g ground almonds Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas 4, and put a baking tray in the oven to heat up. Rub the butter into the flour until it resembles fine breadcrumbs, add the salt, icing sugar and beaten egg and bring the ingredients together into a ball. Wrap in clingfilm and chill for at least an hour. Roll the chilled dough into a circle large enough to line a 28cm shallow tart tin – loop it over a rolling pin to lift it into place in the tin. Patch any tears and press the dough into the sides of the tin. Spread the jam over the base of the pastry. Whisk the eggs in a bowl with the sugar until soft and fluffy. Add the ground almonds, and then spread this over the jam – a knife or fork dipped in hot water is good for this. Bake for 30-40 minutes, until the top is firm and lightly golden.