everyone, look this way. Everyone. Hellooo…!” The Observer photographer is having difficulty getting the Skate Kitchen crew to concentrate. Casual in front of the dramatic backdrop of a soaring Brooklyn Bridge, the young women straggle and chat, drag their skateboards, scroll on their phones, discuss what they’re going to do after this. “I’m gonna skate across the bridge,” says Nina Moran, 20. “It’s too hot!” says Ardelia “Dede” Lovelace, 20. “It’s my birthday today,” says Rachelle Vinberg (she’s turning 20). “I forgot until my mom called me. What am I doing to celebrate? I want to go for a run.” “Oh, it’s always like herding cats,” says Crystal Moselle. Moselle is the director of the Sundance-breakout Skate Kitchen, a coming-of-age film about an all-female New York skateboarding collective so closely based on the lives of the girls it features that it seems more like documentary than fiction. The lines are very blurred. Moselle was drawn to the group initially because of how they looked. She spotted Moran and Vinberg on the subway and approached them because of Moran’s noisy charisma and because it was so unusual to see young women with skateboards. “I took them for coffee,” she says. “Which they were really excited about, because they’d never been to coffee with an adult before.” Moselle’s first feature, The Wolfpack, which won the Grand Jury prize at the Sundance festival in 2015, was a documentary about an extraordinary New York family of boys, the Angulo brothers, kept away from society by their father. In that case, too, Moselle just happened upon them: she saw the brothers walking on the street, and chased after them because they looked so unusual (they were dressed like the characters from Reservoir Dogs). The Wolfpack, as the title implies, was about the family group. Similarly, Skate Kitchen is about a crew: the friendship group of young women that Moselle met through Moran and Vinberg. “There’s something about the ensemble that I really love,” says Moselle. “How an individual works within that.” Moselle hung out with the girls for a year: Vinberg, Moran, Lovelace and their friends Kabrina Adams and Jules Lorenzo (plus Lorenzo’s sister, Brenn, and Ajani Russell, who aren’t here). They all spent a lot of time at Moselle’s house in Brooklyn – “it was a safe zone” – and she listened to their conversations, interviewed them and eventually got them to rehearse scenes. For each scene, she didn’t tell them what to say, but gave them what she calls “beats” – significant moments – that they had to get to. Most of the incidents were based on real life. In the film, Camille, played by Vinberg, is banned from skateboarding by her mum after she severely injures herself. She “credit cards” herself, which is exactly as leg-crossing as you imagine. (“She hurt her vagina,” deadpans Moran. “Yeah, I’ve done that twice in real life,” says Vinberg.) Lonely and bored in her Long Island home, Camille connects with a Lower East Side female skateboarding crew via Instagram. She’s quickly accepted and, after her mum and her argue irrevocably, moves in with Janay (Lovelace) and her family. Though she is welcomed by the crew, Camille isn’t always at ease. Early in the film, the girls are walking in the street and Kabrina Adams is playing music from a speaker that hangs around her neck (she has it on today). As Junior Senior’s Move Your Feet blasts out, she and Moran start dancing around. Vinberg holds back: she’s more inhibited, not a dancer. This happened in real life, and was the cue for Moselle to develop Camille’s story: “She was timid and that was when I thought: ‘This is the dynamic we need in the movie,’” says Moselle. Camille is an outsider who’s accepted, and can’t believe her luck. But then she messes up. She becomes friendly with a boy skater, Devon – played by actor/rapper/songwriter Jaden Smith, one of the film’s few experienced actors – and everything goes wrong. “Camille doesn’t really know the rules of friendship,” says Moselle. “She’s never really had friends before and this group of women is everything she’s ever wanted, but she doesn’t understand the codes. So she thinks [about Devon]: ‘We’re just skating, we’re just friends, it isn’t anything’ – but it is something. She breaks rules without meaning to.” Skate Kitchen’s strength is its intimacy. You are right inside its world, whether the women are talking about tampons and toxic shock syndrome, or they’re stoned and messed up at a party, or skating en masse around Manhattan streets. And that world is very true to life. “I’m obsessed with the idea of realism with film,” says Moselle. “I want to make films that feel real in every aspect. Even if it’s a period piece.” Originally, she wanted to do a documentary about the skate crew, but rejected that idea, partly because she was asked to make a short film for Miu Miu’s Women’s Tales series (That One Day – it features Vinberg, Moran and Lovelace and is akin to a Skate Kitchen precursor), but also because “with documentary, you have to stand back and observe. You can’t alter what’s going on. With this, I wanted to immerse myself, be a part of it.” Still, though the film is close to real life, there are differences. Despite the main plot point, all the girls are cool with the male skateboarders who feature in the film – “they’re our friends,” they say – and they already knew Smith, a fellow skateboarder, and whom they suggested for the part. (Moselle got him to move to New York and hang out with everyone for a few months.) But that’s not to deny that girls in skateboarding often get a tough time from their male counterparts, who vastly outnumber them in New York, as elsewhere. Moran has given a TEDx talk about the difficulties this can lead to. How when she started skateboarding, at 12, she was ridiculed by the boys she hoped to skate with. How when she worked in a skateboarding shop, she discovered she was being paid less than her male colleagues (she quit). How a boy she considered a friend told her that girls can never be good at skateboarding. Lorenzo, 20, who started doing tricks only a year ago, who only started doing tricks a year ago, says a lot of guys try to get involved: “They’re like: ‘Oh, do you need help with that?’ And I’m like: ‘Thanks, but I didn’t ask you!’ They just come over because you’re a girl. I already know how to do it, I’m just practising.” Moran: “It’s like when they say: ‘Oh, I didn’t realise you actually skated!’ I’m like: ‘Bro, really? You thought I carried the board like an accessory? Like it’s my purse?’” “It’s micro-aggressions,” says Adams, 25. “Everyone does it and we don’t even think about it, it’s just ingrained in society. Like when a guy talks to you when you’re clearly listening to music.” They all agree that it’s far easier to learn as a female skateboarder if you have other women to skate with. Though they come from different parts of the US, with varied family backgrounds, they all started skateboarding aged about 12, and spent hours on their own, just practising. “Did you ever do that thing where you wouldn’t drink water until you landed a trick?” says Vinberg. “I used to sleep in the skate park sometimes,” says Moran. “It was OK until it rained.” Skateboarding is a strange combination of efficient means-to-get-around and show-off tricks. It attracts outsiders, say the women, artistic types, into clothes and self-expression, sometimes with anger issues (Adams says she gave up doing tricks because when she was young because she used to get so mad: “I threw my board too many times.”). They all prefer the street-cruising aspect, “the freedom”. Some of the most warming scenes in the film show this: the group skating together, taking up space in a city in a way that most young women don’t. “Strength in numbers,” says Moran. “We’re more powerful as a group.” The film has brought the Skate Kitchen-ers to an international audience: they’ve travelled as far as Taipei, where Vinberg spent an afternoon skating around with a stranger, communicating simply by means of her skateboard (she let him share it). Their increased visibility has prompted other women to get in touch, wanting to learn “just simple stuff like what board to get, how to set it up”. Moran organises all-female skate meet-ups through Instagram, announcing a skate park, date and time: any woman that turns up wanting to have a gotry is welcomed. Some members of the group hope to do more acting, if they can fit it in with all their other projects. Lovelace paints, Adams dances and makes her own short films, Vinberg would like to direct. Moran likes acting too. “But really,” she says, “I just want to make an army of skateboarding women. Yeah. That’d be lit!” Skate Kitchen is out on Friday