I first arrived at university to find my whole flat was vegetarian or vegan. It was a surprise to see the fridge was full of Alpro desserts and homemade hummus. But perhaps I shouldn’t have been shocked: we students are six times more likely than our parents to avoid meat. Students are increasingly ditching animal products for environmental reasons, with four in 10 young people expressing sustainability concerns about their food: just under half (47%) of those who go vegan point to the environmental impact of meat production as a swaying factor. One of those students is Nikki Peach, who went vegan in her first year at university after trying Veganuary. “I was already a vegetarian for 13 years so it wasn’t a huge leap, but it did take a while to not want eggs for breakfast or a bit of chocolate.” She was convinced to stick with it after trying out the diet with two friends. She found the hardest adjustment was getting used to people’s questions. “How is it possible to not be tempted by bacon? Do I miss cheese? Do I still wear my leather trainers? It feels like they’re trying to catch you out.” But she’s learned to adapt. “It’s helped me become a more creative chef.” Peach makes “cheesy” leeks and vegan carbonara using oat milk and nutritional yeast, “which tastes better than it sounds”, and she keeps a bank of staples, like Vietnamese pho made of cheap vegetable stock and fresh vegetables. On nights out, Peach found most spirits to be acceptable, and there is also an ever-increasing range of vegan wines and beers. Comfort and fast food options are on the rise, too, with tofu scampi and seitan steaks on offer. “Vegan oven pizzas are coming to supermarkets, which is a dream,” she adds. A vegan diet can save you money. Food writer Jack Monroe, who has become something of an evangelist for cheap and healthy vegan eating, says: “Beans, pulses and lentils are easier and cheaper to store than joints of meat, since they can be stashed in a cupboard and have a long shelf life.” There are plenty of cheap, fresh options too; supermarkets such as Asda and Lidl now sell damaged veg in bulk at a discount. When going vegan, there are health factors to consider. While the benefits include lowered blood pressure and cholesterol and less risk of diabetes, an alternative source of B12 is needed to avoid anaemia. Diabetes UK recommends items fortified with the vitamin such as certain breakfast cereals, unsweetened soya drinks and yeast extracts like Marmite. Lily Fileen-Orchover, who is studying for a BA in nutrition, has been vegan for three years, and says her fortnightly food shop costs £20. She has no problem with maintaining a healthy diet, though she acknowledges the potential risks of disordered eating, for which vegetarianism and veganism are sometimes used as a cover. To some degree, “‘clean eating’ has blurred understanding of veganism and its ethical objectives,” she says. Vegan opportunities are not limited to your kitchen – most universities have vegan and veggie societies where students swap recipes and host potluck dinners. Cambridge University’s “green formals” host guest speakers on sustainability at a vegan feast. Jed Soleiman, student president of Downing college, helps organise them to gather environmentally conscious students. He hopes non-vegans will try foods they wouldn’t normally experience, and prove that vegans don’t just eat grass. Swap butter out for a mild vegetable oil such as sunflower or vegetable, and a tiny pinch of salt. My general rule of thumb is that a butter bean is a good hefty substitute for chicken in a soup or casserole, usually with a little carrot in it to sweeten it up. Kidney beans or black beans are a decent swap for beef in a chilli or curry, and cooked long enough they are soft and tender in a way that even the slowest-cooked joints of meat can never quite attain. Sub chorizo with small white beans like haricots or cannellinis, with a hefty dollop of garlic, salt and paprika to imitate the flavour. Tinned peas are cooked for longer, so they break down soft and are gorgeous in risottos. A can of mushy peas with a little stock and vegan cheese makes for instant soup. Onions and carrots tend to go in everything, so I buy them by the kilo (at the time of writing this, 1.5kg of Basics carrots are 75p, and 1.5kg Basics onions are 90p). If you don’t have any red wine for your casserole, use black tea. Pack soups with chickpeas and lentils, sling some veggie sausages in your stews, and find your way around one of my half-a-dozen veggie burger recipes, and you’ll wonder what all the fuss was about anyway.