Ferrari and Sebastian Vettel must have concerns about how they did not manage to return the win that had looked so likely as the Italian Grand Prix weekend progressed. Their cars had looked strong through practice and qualifying and, having locked out the front row, they held all the cards. Vettel will doubtless have a long talk with his team about why he was not given the best shot at pole, which might have kept him out of Lewis Hamilton’s reach at the start, given he is in the title fight. However, he must also look to his own part in hitting Hamilton and his resultant fourth place. It is his fourth race error this year, a count of which Ferrari will be more than aware, especially given they are in the best position in a decade to win the championship. Kimi Räikkönen was simply outmanoeuvred by a formidable Mercedes strategy and Hamilton’s skill but the real pressure is on Vettel, who must now deliver without any misjudgments in the remaining seven races. Much was made of the booing in Monza but it is nothing new. This crowd has always been passionate, indeed it is what imbues the venue with such atmosphere. They have been showing a healthy disregard for anyone not driving a red car for years – Vettel was booed after his wins for Red Bull – and it is in equal proportion to the devotion they show to anyone representing Ferrari. Should Hamilton ever drive for them, and return the wins they desire, it is to be expected they would take to him in the same way they have to many non-Italian drivers including Michael Schumacher, Niki Lauda, Jean Alesi and of course Nigel “Il Leone” Mansell. Hamilton admitted it did nothing but spur him on and both he and Valtteri Bottas accepted that it was a part of sport. Some may find it distasteful but it is a reflection of the fervour of these fans and in truth often at Monza little more than pantomime in nature. Hamilton rated the race as “up there” with his greatest drives. Should he go on to take the title he may feel this is was a decisive moment and this win may go even higher in his estimation. He certainly served notice in Monza that he will take some beating. His drive suggests he is exhibiting perhaps the best form of his career. It was a complete performance on many levels, his racecraft was exceptional, especially in the two passes on Vettel and Räikkönen. Opportunistic and inch perfect on the German, he saw a chance and took it and did leave Vettel enough room. On Räikkönen his judgment on late-braking round the outside into the chicane was nerveless. Conceding his place to Räikkönen when the Finn fought back at Roggia was an object lesson in playing the long game. Added to all of which was the calm tyre management that ultimately helped ensure an unlikely win. He was at the heart of a brilliant race. After coming out of his early season travails and seemingly vindicated in sticking to his guns by refusing to change his driving style, Max Verstappen was once again convinced he was in the right in Monza – except he was wasn’t. He was adamant he had given Bottas enough room as the pair vied going into the first chicane – except he hadn’t. He clearly moved to the left in the braking zone and, because he had not left a full car’s width, hit Bottas, forced him on to the grass and into missing the corner. When his team told him he had a five-second penalty his response was classic Verstappen. “Don’t worry about it? It’s fucked,” he said. “I gave him space. They’re doing a great job of killing racing, honestly.” He was bullish afterwards in denying he had been at fault and was defended by legions of his fans. His talent is undoubted and on this evidence he also shares the trait shown by some of the greatest champions in believing they can do no wrong – regardless of the evidence. Marcus Ericsson’s 220mph crash after his DRS failed to close as he applied the brakes heading into the first chicane was another salutary reminder of the dangers inherent in motor racing. It was all the more terrible because there was no warning nor any suggestion of driver error, he simply hit the brakes and veered left into the wall before cartwheeling three times. He walked away unharmed, and although this was not an incident in which the cockpit protection device, halo, played a part, the race director Charlie Whiting did have data on its role in Charles Leclerc’s crash in Spa. Whiting said the impact was equivalent to 5,000kg – half of the load the device is designed to withstand. “There was no distortion of the halo; there was no buckling,” Whiting said.