It was when I was walking to my office, trailed by three young people whose ages range from 16 to 25, flowing down the corridor behind me like the tail of a kite, that I thought it for the first time. Blimey, I seem to have kids. You’d think I would have noticed before now. My secondhand family, as my friend Luigo calls it. And, obviously, in the 10 years I have been with the children’s father, I have certainly been made more than acutely aware of their presence – and, by extension, the presence of their mothers (my husband, an Italian not given to moderation, has three children from two different women). But here now in London is the first time I have felt like a mother. This could be because, as you might reasonably suggest, I am not actually a mother. Until recently, I was not a “real” stepmother either. But I have been living with the man who is now my husband for 10 years and in those 10 years, not only have his younger daughters spent every other weekend and half of their school holiday with us (and let me tell you, Italian summer holidays last three very long months) but also his son has lived with us full-time. In fact, when Bernardo asked me to move in, he asked his son for permission first. It has been an adventure, and I mean that in the most euphemistic way possible. To tell the truth, a lot of it has been very tricky at best, pure hell at worst. Last week, the girls, the youngest now 16 and for Ryanair’s purposes, an adult, flew alone for the first time to London. I live in Tuscany most of the time with my husband, but my work and family ties bring me to London often. Their father was busy with work, but we had promised the girls a holiday in London to see their brother. Suddenly in sole charge of this group of proto adults, with their piercings, dreadlocks and Vans, I started to feel like a mother. You must remember that no matter how much you cook, clean, cuddle, soothe, comfort and discipline, you will never count I may be facing down 50 in a couple of years, but I do not feel my age. Having never managed to hit any deadline on time, I, rather carelessly, failed to notice the child-bearing window until it had slammed shut. I only got married last year, for goodness sake. Being an unofficial stepmother was an interesting position to be in. And by interesting, I mean really bloody difficult, the type of tear-your-hair-out-am-I-mad difficult that exceeds even the capabilities of that great word-of-our-times – challenge. Being a stepmum is hard enough but being a sort-of-step-mother is about the most awkward position a mature woman can find herself in. With my sort-of-steppies, I have occupied a place of influence, power and sometimes extreme resentment by turns. I have trod a delicate path between being a grown-up friend, a benign bridge of influence with their father, the woman of the house, and a figure of authority – but not too much. However cool or beloved I was by them, I should never ever do something that would make me cooler than that sanctified of all beings – their actual mother. Whether by her absence (the mother of my stepson) or by her much-too-close-for-comfort presence (the mother of the girls), The Mother is the shadow falling behind the children. Love the kids or loathe them (often both at the same time), you must always remember that no matter how much you cook, clean, cuddle, soothe, comfort and discipline, you will never actually count. You may be acknowledged, even recruited as an ally when it suits, but suggest that your influence might have had something to do with these children’s development, and the very earth on which everyone’s family values stand will shudder. This is not the natural order of things, booms the voice of God (or rather the first/second wife, which for the children is the same thing) and promptly enacts some scenario to make you understand unequivocally how very expendable you are. Like move the children to another country and change the date of “the last supper” for when you are safely away in London working. Just in case you might have misunderstood things and counted yourself as part of the family. To survive, I trained myself to love the stepkids as hard as I could, but not to care. It’s an oxymoron but a handy piece of good mental health trickery I recommend to anyone in my position (and there are many of you out there). I can help with homework, yes, but not be invested in the results of that homework. I can teach them good manners, but not care about the bad habits they learn at home. Semi-detached is the position. So imagine what a shock it was to the system to be escorting two nubile, fresh-faced, dewy-skinned glamazons around town, newly minted head-turners and recipients of wolf whistles? And yet, as duck to water, without a second thought, I abandoned my position of semi-detachment and, fixing a gold-toothed man who suggested running away with the youngest with a pointed finger, I called out, “Oiiiii, watch it, mate!” He laughed, his gold tooth glinting as he lolled away: “Don’t kill me, mum, please, mum, don’t kill me!” Over the bank holiday, I decamped to a forest in Sussex to speak at a festival. On Saturday morning, I was talking to two fellow festival-goers and, later, one of them told me the other had given her a lift – to the wrong festival in another forest. It made me wonder whether Britain had any actual woodland left that was simply being, you know, woodland. Byline is a festival run by people passionate about independent journalism and free speech. We discussed the state of the world – and how to change it – while having a drink and a dance in a verdant glade. I left feeling soggy but upbeat – a festival of hope. My stepson is half Italian, half Swedish. His girlfriend is half French, half Chinese. Their flatmates are Iranian-Swiss, Polish-Italian and British-Indian. They call themselves Londoners. Local not national – isn’t that the future right there?