Let’s be honest: if you fell out with Nicki Minaj you’d leave the country, go into hiding and swear off all forms of music and radio for ever. Which is why you have to feel sorry for any of the rapper’s laundry list of enemies right now. Nicki has her own radio show, and she’s airing everything out. The show, Queen (Apple Music’s Beats 1), was originally set up for Nicki to promote her album of the same name. The idea behind it seemed to be fairly standard for an artist-led show on the station: Nicki premieres new tracks, talks about them. Not so. She turned up late, invited a load of her famous mates and entourage into the studio, yelled a lot, rapped along to all the songs, swore 987 times and talked over a terrified-sounding Zane Lowe, who was desperately trying to ask questions about her “process”. Eight episodes in, she is now using her show to settle scores and take revenge on anyone who has crossed her. After her clash with Cardi B at New York fashion week (Cardi reportedly threw a shoe at Nicki at a party), Nicki addressed the feud on the show. Calling it “mortifying and humiliating”, she suggested her rivals pay for radio play and went on a shady rant about women who get cheated on because they don’t accompany their men to the strip club. Because Nicki never fully explains what she’s talking about or mentions Cardi’s name, listeners have to fill in the gaps with Google. Nicki’s zoo-radio style has nothing on mid-90s Chris Evans or Nick Grimshaw post-Brits: at some points up to 10 people are all shouting at once while Nicki screams: “SHUT UP, LET ME SPEAK!” and plays several sound effects at the same time. At one point, Nicki walks out of the studio mid-sentence as she has seen someone she knows who works in the building. She gets distracted by her phone and forgets to speak. Nothing is planned, aside from the features Cocksucker of the Week and Dick Rider of the Year (recipients include Travis Scott, his baby Stormi and a woman who took a picture of a Cosby Show actor working in a supermarket). At one point, she wants to hear her track Barbie Dreams so screams for it as her team fumble around for agonising seconds until they finally press Play. Her interview tactics are – in former guest Ariana Grande’s words – “intimidating”, and she gets bored as Funkmaster Flex tells an emotional story from his past and interrupts with the words: “I’M TALKING NOW!” Tekashi 6ix9ine calls in but hangs up mid-chat so he can get on a plane. And it’s fair to say that Queen Radio doesn’t have the most varied playlist; in fact, Nicki mainly just plays her own album on repeat, and tells listeners how good it is. But it is strangely addictive: one second Nicki is boring on about her album, the next she’s sharing A-list gossip. It’s deliciously chaotic, never dull and basically what a night out with Nicki would be like. She screams, shouts, brings up old feuds, starts new ones, talks about oral sex and one-night stands, shouts out Margaret Thatcher, shades famous people, gets into conspiracy theories, jokes around and cackles with laughter. Next up: Nicki replaces Chris Evans on Radio 2’s breakfast show. Warn your mum.