Adil Rashid looks set to re-commit to Yorkshire as an all-format cricketer and bring to an end to a summer-long impasse after turning down approaches from rival counties. The 30-year-old leg-spinner’s future at Headingley was shrouded in doubt following his controversial recall to England’s Test team in July, one that came despite having renegotiated his county contract to play as a white-ball specialist at the start of the year. Those terms only ran up to the end of the current season and with Yorkshire making public their disappointment at the call-up, Rashid responded by telling the BBC: “If they treat me like they have done I have to think about the future in terms of which county I play for.” While Rashid is yet to put pen to paper on a new contract – further talks were due to take place with the director of cricket, Martyn Moxon, on Tuesday – he is understood to have now set his mind on remaining at the club where he began his first-class career in 2006. Rashid is expected to make himself available for red-ball cricket once more – it will be conditional to his continuation as a Test cricketer from next season – although Yorkshire are unlikely to see much of him in early 2019. England’s World Cup preparations begin in early May with a limited overs series at home to Pakistan but the club have already signed another leg-spinner in Josh Poysden from Warwickshire. The news comes after Rashid declined a recent approach from Worcestershire, with the newly crowned T20 Blast champions on Saturday having hoped to unite Rashid with his close friend and England team-mate, Moeen Ali, at New Road. Durham’s chairman, Sir Ian Botham, had also made public his interest in a deal. But the previous problems between Rashid and Yorkshire – including issues with the head coach, Andrew Gale, that date back to the latter’s time as captain – look to have been smoothed over, while he is also said to be reluctant to leave his home town of Bradford. Yorkshire’s disgruntlement at the time of Rashid’s Test return revolved chiefly around the communication leading up to the decision by Ed Smith, the national selector, to name a player who had previously appeared intent on pursing a limited overs career. Rashid went on to play a reduced role in the seam-dominated 4-1 victory over India, claiming 10 wickets at 30 apiece, but lit up the final day at the Oval with an astonishing leg-break out of the footmarks to bowl centurion KL Rahul. He will doubtless play a more significant hand during the upcoming Test series in Sri Lanka this winter. As a key member of England’s white-ball side – only Afghanistan’s Rashid Khan can match his 110 ODI wickets since the last World Cup – Rashid will also be among the names when Eoin Morgan’s squad for the upcoming limited overs leg of the tour is published on Wednesday. Sam Curran, who made his ODI debut at the end of the 5-0 whitewash over Australia, is also expected to be among the touring party after the left-arm all-rounder’s player of the series performance during the recent Test victory India. The first of five one-dayers is in Dambulla on 10 October, before a single Twenty20 and the three-match Test series that begins in Galle on 6 November.