Hundreds of thousands of Catalans will rally on the streets of Barcelona on Tuesday to renew their calls for independence almost a year after the unilateral referendum that triggered Spain’s worst political crisis since its return to democracy after the death of Franco. The issue of independence remains divisive in the region, however, with polls suggesting that Catalans are almost evenly split on whether to remain part of Spain. The annual Diada celebrations commemorate the fall of Barcelona during the Spanish war of succession on 11 September 1714, but in recent years they have been used by pro-independence groups as a show of strength. Two of the main anti-independence parties boycotted Tuesday morning’s wreath-laying ceremony at the statue of Rafael Casanova, hero of the siege of Barcelona in 1714 when the city fell to Spanish forces led by the Duke of Berwick, illegitimate son of James II. Citizens, the single largest party in the Catalan parliament, and the smaller People’s party stayed away on the grounds that it was sectarian. The Catalan Socialist party (PSC) has also withdrawn from the Diada’s institutional events for the first time this year. The opposition parties argue it has become a celebration that excludes half the population. Barcelona’s mayor, Ada Colau, attended the ceremony but said she would not take part in the march later in the day because it explicitly demanded independence and therefore only represented half the Catalan population. “As mayor I have a duty to seek consensus,” she said. Organisers say 460,000 people have registered to take part in the rally, which was attended by up to one million people last year. On the eve of the Diada, Catalonia’s president, Quim Torra, said he intended to press on with plans to deliver the sovereign republic that was unilaterally declared last October by the government of his predecessor, Carles Puigdemont. The unilateral declaration prompted the Spanish government to sack Puigdemont – who fled to Belgium – take direct control of Catalonia and call a snap regional election. Several Catalan politicians, including Puigdemont, remain in self-imposed exile; others are in prison in Spain awaiting trial for their roles in the push for independence. “As you already know, out government has committed itself to bringing about the republic,” Torra said in a speech on Monday night. “A shared republic that must be for all Catalans. We will do it for the political prisoners and exiles and all those who are persecuted for defending the freedom of Catalonia and because we gave our word to the people in the self-determination referendum of 1 October.” While the socialist government of Pedro Sánchez has taken a less confrontational line on the Catalan crisis than the conservative administration it replaced in June, it has said negotiations must be conducted in accordance with the constitution. Sánchez, who met with Torra in July, has offered a vote on greater Catalan self-government, but has firmly ruled out a referendum on either self-determination or independence. He has also given warning that any unilateral attempts to create an independent Catalonia will result in the re-application of direct rule from Madrid. The pro-independence parties retained their parliamentary majority in last December’s election, taking 47.7% of the vote and 70 seats in the 135-seat regional parliament. But the centre-right – and staunchly anti-independence – Citizens party was the biggest single winner in the vote, winning 37 seats. Inés Arrimadas, the party’s leader in Catalonia, has repeatedly criticised Torra and Puigdemont for ignoring the views of those Catalans who wish to remain part of Spain. “Like half of Catalans, we are excluded from the Diada, as we are on a daily basis,” she said on Tuesday morning.