A convicted murderer with a history of prison breaks was recaptured on Tuesday, ending a five-day manhunt. Arnold Nash escaped from Mountain View correctional facility in Charleston, Maine on Thursday evening, where he was serving out the final months of a 45-year sentence. It was third time Nash has managed to successfully managed to break out of prison, and the third time he has been caught. In 1973, at age 19, he broke out of the Maine correctional center where he was serving time for larceny, although there is little public information about how Nash was found or how long he evaded authorities. In 1981, he was involved in a more high-profile break, after he escaped from Maine state prison. Nash and another prisoner, Milton Wallace, who was found guilty of the rape and murder of an eight-year-old, escaped while doing supervised labour on a farm near the prison. Authorities searched for the men for 22 days, eventually finding them camped out in the woods, trying to make their way to the Canadian border. They had burgled a number of properties for supplies and were armed, at one point holding the sheriff who discovered them at gunpoint. Nash received an additional two years to his prison sentence following the escape, and spent more time in jail in the mid-1980s after another burglary conviction, but his current sentence was the result of his 1992 conviction for murdering a former neighbour, Wilbur Gibeault. Nash was sentenced to a maximum of 45 years in prison, of which he has so far served 26 years. He was due to be released as soon as next December because of credits earned from good behaviour. It’s not clear why Nash wanted to escape so close to a potential release although Maine’s corrections commissioner, Joseph Fitzpatrick, has suggested that 65-year-old Nash may not have wanted to leave to prison, having spent most of his life there. When Nash was found this morning he appeared to be heading back to the facility from which he had escaped. But on Tuesday, Piscataquis county sheriff Robert Young said that Nash “wasn’t trying to run, but he wasn’t trying to be caught.” He said his apprehension was a case of a deputy “being in the right place at the right time”. Nash has been taken to Piscataquis county jail, but it’s not yet clear where he has been since Thursday. In the early 1990s, prison breaks were more common, reaching a peak of 2,660 in 1991. Over the past 20 years as prisons have gained more advanced security solutions, they are far less frequent, but those that do occur are often more ingenious and dramatic, because of the difficulty of escaping.