A blue plaque celebrating a woman described as “the first modern lesbian” is to be changed after complaints that it “erased” her sexuality. The tribute to 19th-century diarist Anne Lister described her as “gender-nonconforming”, but did not explicitly say she was a lesbian. The plaque was unveiled on 24 July at Holy Trinity church in York, marking the location where Lister received communion with her girlfriend after exchanging rings at home almost 200 years ago. The original plaque read: “Gender-nonconforming entrepreneur. Celebrated marital commitment, without legal recognition, to Ann Walker in this church. Easter, 1834.” A draft of the new wording will be proposed and opened for public comment in the coming weeks. An online petition calling on York Civic Trust to change the wording attracted more than 2,500 signatures. The petition said: “Anne Lister was, most definitely, gender non-conforming all her life. She was also, however, a lesbian. Don’t let them erase this iconic woman from our history.” Julie Furlong, who started the petition, told the BBC she was pleased the wording was to change: “I am very happy that they have realised that lesbian erasure is not acceptable, but I will wait to hear on the final wording before expressing opinion as to that.” The trust said following a meeting with the Churches Conservation Trust, York LGBT Forum and York LGBT History Month, a joint decision was made to change the wording on the plaque. It added: “The plaque is intended to be a positive celebration of the union of Anne Lister and Ann Walker, and this remains the case. The last thing we wanted to do was to cause offence or upset to any community.” It is the first blue plaque in the UK to be bordered with rainbow colours in recognition of lesbian, gay and transgender history. But the trust said it would change the rainbow in the new version after complaints that the colours were upside down, starting with purple rather than red. Reacting to the announcement, Kit Heyam, a former committee member of York LGBT History Month, said: “I am really, really pleased that we’ve got a permanent plaque to Anne Lister in York. It’s incredibly important to have visible memorials to LGBT people. “It is clear that we made a mistake with the wording. It was made with absolutely the best of intentions, but it is clear that we made a mistake by not consulting on the final wording before casting the plaque.” Lister, who died aged 49 in 1840, was a well-off Yorkshire landowner and traveller, who kept diaries throughout her life. The parts of her 27-volume journal that talk about her romantic relationships were written in a code derived from algebra and ancient Greek. The code was deciphered in the 1980s and revealed a clear understanding and acceptance of her sexuality. Next year the BBC will screen an eight-part TV drama about Lister’s life called Gentleman Jack – Lister’s nickname – written and directed by Sally Wainwright, who created Happy Valley and Last Tango in Halifax.