Joe Denly experienced an eight‑year gap between the last of 14 white-ball caps and his recent call-up for England’s Test tour to Sri Lanka. By his own admission he went missing for too much of it. But now 32 and revelling in a two-year purple patch that has seen him end the summer with a cheque for £10,000 as county cricket’s most valuable player, this elegant Kent right-hander and self‑taught leg-spinner has a second chance to live out a dream that at one stage was detrimentally all‑encompassing. “I feel much better equipped and have a much better understanding, not just technically but also of the pressures that come with playing for England,” says Denly, who after a couple of ODI half-centuries in 2009 was dropped on the eve of the World Twenty20 the next year and seldom considered thereafter. “Before I was worried about what people thought of me and how I looked. The belief wasn’t quite there. When I got dropped by England, everything was about getting back in the team, putting a lot of pressure on myself. “I went missing really for two or three years. Performances and my love of the game dropped quite a bit. It got to a point where I had to start enjoying it again because my career was almost fading away. Now I’m at ease with my game.” During this spell in the wilderness Denly upped sticks from Kent to Middlesex in search of a fresh start. But after three dry years at Lord’s, it was in fact the return to his home city of Canterbury in 2015, while making peace with his England ambitions, that led to him striking a rich and lasting vein of form. “In the past, if I didn’t score runs, I didn’t switch off from thinking about it, whereas now failure is part of the game. There’s always one with your name on but keep improving and always look on the positive side,” says Denly less than an hour after his season – in which Kent were promoted to Division One – ended, as if to illustrate his point, with a duck. That score was not indicative of the past 24 months, with 14 centuries flowing from his blade across the three formats, including nine in first-class cricket. The leg‑spin that removed South Africa’s Graeme Smith with his first ball in international cricket has matured, too, to the extent that he can be considered more than a part‑timer. Denly is a batsman first and foremost, however, and after hearing he was on the radar of Ed Smith, his former Kent teammate who is now the national selector, this one-time opener pushed himself back up a spot to No 3 to get nearer to the new Dukes ball in a summer where others were trying desperately to get away from it. “When your name’s spoken around the circuit your ears prick up a bit and you begin to think it could happen,” says Denly. “I didn’t hear anything until the day I got picked but I’d had the odd text from Paul Farbrace [England’s assistant coach] to say congratulations on the runs I was scoring. I started at No 4 this year as I was captaining and bowling, a bit like Joe Root. But then I thought I wouldn’t do myself any harm at No 3 with the talk going around. In terms of where I see myself batting for England, to bat 1, 2 or 3 would be amazing.” The retirement of Alastair Cook means Denly, Rory Burns, Keaton Jennings and Moeen Ali will now be vying for three spots in November’s three‑Test series. While the case for Burns was compelling, Denly’s slightly more left‑field inclusion has the finger prints of Smith all over it for two reasons. The first is Smith’s belief that some players require longer to blossom; not all talent is best hot-housed from a young age. Secondly Smith is putting greater stock in Twenty20 leagues as he looks to repeat some of the alchemy that led to Jos Buttler’s stunning Test return. Denly thrived in this regard last winter, bouncing from the Bangladesh Premier League into similarly positive stints in Australia’s Big Bash (where he has since been retained by the Sydney Sixers) and the Pakistan Super League. “If you’re not involved in international cricket and the pressures that come with that,” Denly says, “the next best thing is not only to perform on the county stage but to get your name in big competitions around the world. That’s been a massive thing for my confidence and belief – a great stepping stone into international cricket.” Relaxed, confident and still blessed with the athleticism that saw him play football for Charlton’s academy as a teenager, this late bloomer from the Garden of England now appears well placed to make up for lost time.