A weekend that had begun with such optimism for Sebastian Vettel and Ferrari ended with the team and driver bearing the demeanour of the defeated. They should have done better. Vettel had hit the wall in FP2, ending his session. He insisted it made no difference to his preparation but crucially second practice was the only one run in exactly the same night conditions as qualifying. Lewis Hamilton pointedly noted that small events have ramifications and he was right. The race might have been different had Vettel been on pole but, forced to go aggressive, Ferrari’s strategy failed. The undercut did not work, he hit traffic and he was on the wrong tyre – losing second to Max Verstappen. The title looks as if it has gone and the Scuderia increasingly appear to need a comprehensive overhaul. Vettel can deliver but he needs the car and sharp minds on the pit wall that have been missing of late. Hamilton has put in some extraordinary performances to take the 40-point lead he now enjoys over Vettel. He has been open in his desire to improve his qualifying and he proved in the wet in Hungary and Belgium just how well it has gone. But nothing has quite demonstrated his mastery of the single lap as the run in Singapore. Mercedes had done well to improve their car’s performance on what was considered a bogey track for the team but nothing prepared them for where Hamilton took their machinery. Pete Bonnington, his race engineer, summed up the remarkable reaction in the garage as Hamilton pumped in a series of unprecedented sector times. “You were impressed by the silence,” he said. “There wasn’t a lot of jumping. It was a lot of jaws hitting the floor, to see a gap like that.” The superlatives flowed deservedly and bear repeating – this was a driver on a different level altogether. Force India’s Esteban Ocon can be forgiven for questioning the slings and arrows as he contemplates what is looking almost certain to be a future out of F1 next season, while his teammate Sergio Pérez retains his drive. On the evidence of Singapore, a ride justified largely by the backing he brings. Pérez opened poorly, squeezing his teammate into the wall at turn three. The Mexican protested his innocence and the stewards deemed it a racing incident. The team principal, Otmar Szafnauer, however squarely blamed Pérez. “There wasn’t any room, Checo [Pérez] should have given him room and Checo had plenty of room,” he said. Worse followed as, frustrated at being held up by the Williams of Sergey Sirotkin, he swerved into the Russian between turns 17 and 18. He was given a drive through penalty but it could have been worse. As a showcase for the “pinnacle of motorsport” this was a pitiful display. Perhaps overshadowed by Hamilton’s superlative weekend, Max Verstappen put in a performance to remind everyone of just how good he can be when his judgment is spot on. He was suffering with engine mapping problems all weekend but drove an exceptional lap to take second on the grid, three-tenths up on Vettel. In the race he matched it. Vettel came at him off the start and, when the German made a superb move round the outside of turn seven on the opening lap, there was no clumsy defence. Verstappen gave him just enough room to make it and to Vettel’s credit he did. The Dutchman stayed focused, however, and pumped in the laps to ensure he was in front again after his pitstop. With track position he flew ahead and secured a fine second place. This was the performance that underlines his potential future world champion credentials and a world away from biffing Valtteri Bottas at Monza. F1’s sporting director, Ross Brawn, made the schoolboy error of showing the proposed designs for 2021’s new cars to a behind closed-doors seminar in Singapore, forgetting of course that the pictures would be captured on phones and posted all over social media soon after. The concepts were promptly expanded on to give the pictures some context, with Brawn emphasising the aim of allowing the cars to race. The designs he believed would enable cars to lose only 20% of downforce when in proximity to one another. One featured the 18-inch wheels that are part of the future tyre tender for F1. The front wings are simpler and the sidepods less complicated. More simply, they were also designed to look more exciting. Hamilton approved, suggesting if this is the future he may well race on past 2020. “This shit looks dope,” he wrote on Instagram. “I’m definitely going to be driving if cars look like this.”