There will be fraught negotiations on both sides of the Swedish political spectrum, as the main parliamentary blocs on the left and right have staked rival claims to form the next government. Sunday’s election left them almost tied and far short of a majority. And while the far-right Sweden Democrats solidified their position as the country’s third-biggest party, it was with a lower result than they had expected. We asked supporters of all parties what the election result means in the long run, and what lies in store for the immediate future of Swedish politics. Andre Declercq, 29, Stockholm – voted for the Social Democrats “If you like the political values of a traditional Sweden and understand what made the foundation on which today’s Sweden is resting, there is only one party which makes sense. And that is the Social Democrats, who have been the biggest party in Sweden for 100 years and are to thank for making Sweden one of the most progressive democracies in the world. “In the coming weeks I expect plenty of political turbulence. I think a responsible government should consist of the Social Democrats, Liberals and the Centre party, which would give them a solid enough foundation to build future policies on. “The possible dismantling of the Swedish welfare state and an increase in populist policies are real concerns of mine. But I do hope that the social democratic values, which are ingrained in the Swedish mentality, will prevail in the end.” Josefina Bergsten, 46, Gotland – voted for the Green party No crisis in the world today is more threatening than the climate and environmental crisis. All other perceived and real issues – the economy, migration, justice, equality – will only become worse if the world fails to stop degrading our environment and halt the climate crisis. I think that either there will be some jumping across the aisle by the Centre party and/or Liberals over to the left block in order to secure a left majority (my preferred option) or the Moderates will start making deals with the Sweden Democrats – and ensure a slow slide towards fascism. We’ve seen what happens when you abandon your principles and start making deals with the devil – appease the Tea Party, get Trump). It is of course still possible that the Green party will fail to get the required 4% (once the last votes are counted on Wednesday), in which case the right block will form the new government. What I fail to understand – not just in Sweden but across the western world – is that despite approaching the point of no return in the climate crisis green parties are not doing any better in the elections than a decade or two ago. Dana Mohseni, 34, Gothenburg – voted for Left party “I voted for the Left party due to lack of options – they were one of the few parties who focus on things important to me, such as the working class, issues around feminism and LGBTQ communities and rights for disabled people. For me the downside with Left party is their anti-EU sentiment. “I fear nothing good will come of negotiations. We have Moderates who treat sick people, poor people and refugees very poorly, we have Christian Democrats who are anti-women and anti-abortion and then last but not least Sweden Democrats, whose history is tied to the Nazis. They remain anti-democratic, anti-women’s rights, anti-immigrants, anti-environment and anti-LGBTQ. These are scary times for many marginalised people “The worst scenario would be a coalition with Moderates, SD and Christian Democrats. That’s my main fear for the future. I wish I could leave this country, despite the fact that I was born here and grew up here all my life, but Iran (I am Iranian-Swedish) is still a dictatorship and I cannot move back there, so where can I go?” Peter Sanderson, 40, UK (recently moved from Stockholm) – voted for Moderates “I’m half-Swedish half-British and this is the fist time I have chosen to vote from overseas in a Swedish election (I have previously only voted during the years that I lived in Sweden). The main motivation was to vote for a centre-minded party with a positive attitude towards immigration and integration, so as to send the clear signal that nationalism is not helpful nor welcome in Sweden. I think that the high turnout and the lower than expected vote share for the Swedish Democrats shows that a number of people have realised the importance of voting (motivated by Brexit and Trump), and to stop the rise of nationalism in Europe. “I think that the most likely outcome is a minority centre-right government, with confidence support from the Sweden Democrats. I would prefer to see a centre coalition of Social Democrats, Centre party, and Moderates; but the political blocks in Sweden are quite entrenched and it is hard to see this happening. “My hope is that Sweden will continue to be the good model for moderate and inclusive polities that is has been for many years. To achieve this, Sweden will need to adapt in order to integrate the many new arrivals into Swedish society. This is a challenge for many reasons including partly language and culture, but also the high- skilled and high-taxed nature of Swedish society.” Linda, Skåne – voted for the Sweden Democrats “As a middle-aged women in Sweden my concern is the further increase of violence, the economy hitting rock bottom and people living on benefits. I believe Sweden has faced too much violence and this is linked to the time mass immigration began.” “Unfortunately, politicians act like kindergarten children and it will take a long time before all is in place: this is wasted time in a country in need of attention. Politicians are not answering questions like: will immigrants receive as much contribution towards their pension as a person who has worked his entire adult life? Or why is it more beneficial to be on social welfare than to actually work?” Jonathan East, 48, Stockholm – voted for Christian Democrats “I am hopeful that the red-green alliance will end in favour of a broader centre-based alliance, anything to keep the Sweden Democrats away from having a say. “The biggest concern I have is that many immigrants will never enter the job market. I work with this group of people (I am a teacher) and I see the daily struggle they have. Integration is a must for this group.” Daniel, 30 – voted for the Liberals “I voted for Liberalerna because I believe a strong European Union is a fundamental precondition for Sweden’s economic growth – the basis for our welfare system, free education, social security etc, which makes Sweden one of the best countries in the world to live in. I believe it is in Sweden’s best interest to become a full member by entering the banking union, adopting the euro, and joining other responsible eurozone members in advocating financial common sense and taking up the fight against the fact-denying, power-hungry, self-styled champions of “the people” that threaten freedom of speech, independent judiciary, tolerance and other sources stability and progress.” “I expect that when all the votes are counted on Wednesday (including our expat votes!) there will be a very slight lead for the centre-right Alliance. This will give them the parliamentary mandate to form a minority government, which will then have to bargain with mainly the Social Democrats and Greens but maybe sometimes also with the Sweden Democrats. “In an ideal (and highly improbable) world, I’d like to see a grand coalition government with ministers from the Liberals, Social Democrats, Centre, Moderates, Christian Democrats, Greens ... and maybe even the two remaining parties. That may be a weak government in terms of left or right direction, but all of Sweden would have a voice represented and the important political action – finding solutions to our problems – could take place in the parliament through compromises.” Elisabeth, voted for Feministiskt Initiativ “I voted for Feministiskt Initiativ because I believe it’s the only political party in Sweden actively working from an inclusive, intersectional standpoint in all areas of politics. “We will see if the rightwing parties will fall for the alt-right nationalists’ demands in order to get a majority in parliament or if they will stick to democratic ideals and work across bloc party lines. “My fear is that the Sweden democrats will get a lot of influence if a rightwing parliament is formed. In the long run that could mean Sweden having the same type of development seen in countries such as Poland and Hungary, since these are inspirational countries for the Sweden Democrats.”