Tottenham’s decision to stage this tie in Milton Keynes may not have been universally popular but the makeshift hosts sure delivered drama, complete with an ending that unfolded as if scripted by Dele Alli himself. On his return to his home town, and the ground where he began his career before leaving to become a bright light at Spurs three years ago, Alli wore the captain’s armband and scored twice from the penalty spot, including the decisive strike in the shootout. “He was inspired by the occasion,” said Mauricio Pochettino. “He was so excited beforehand, his energy was amazing. For him it was an experience that he will remember for all of his life. To be Tottenham captain and score two goals! I gave him the armband because he was so excited about playing in his home town and I wanted to provide him with a very good feeling. I hope he appreciated the gesture.” It took several twists for the tie to reach its remarkable denouement after a start that was misleadingly dull. After a humdrum first half Isaac Success put Tottenham’s mission on course for failure by scoring within 40 seconds of the restart. It was an excellent goal by the Nigerian, whose Watford career has been hampered by injury since he joined them two years ago. There was no sign of that when he collected a pass from Kiko Femenía before showing tremendous strength to shrug off Serge Aurier and wallop a shot into the net from 12 yards. Spurs gradually found intensity and began to apply heavy pressure, Pochettino showing his determination to progress in this tournament by making a trio of substitutions after starting with a lineup that included eight alterations to the side who began against Brighton in the Premier League. Javi Gracia had made even more changes, with Craig Cathcart the only survivor from the lineup that has started all six of Watford’s league games this season. But Watford, too, were eager to advance and Gracia introduced Christian Kabasele from the bench in the 77th minute to help protect their lead. Three minutes later the Belgian was on his way back off again, shown a red card after his challenge led to Alli tumbling to the floor. Alli got up to score from the penalty spot. Gracia was dismayed by the sending off – “I cannot understand this decision,” he said, before indicating that Watford would appeal against it. Tottenham did not enjoy a numerical advantage for long, however, as Aurier limped off with a quadriceps strain and Spurs could not replace him because they had already made three substitutions. That did not seem to matter when Érik Lamela put them 2-1 up in the 84th minute, rounding off a lightning counterattack by poking the ball into the net from the edge of the area as Heurelho Gomes rushed out to confront him. The story was not yet told. A former Spurs midfielder, Étienne Capoue, ratcheted up the suspense another notch in the last minute by scoring from 18 yards, albeit courtesy of a deflection off Ben Davies. Capoue then saw his spot-kick saved in the shootout by Paulo Gazzaniga, who also denied Domingos Quina, one of two 18-year-old midfielders featuring for Watford. That set the scene for Alli, the Milton Keynes native, to deliver victory and he did not miss his cue, firing low into the net. Home, sweet home for Alli. And the way the others Spurs players and fans celebrated suggested they did not care where this spectacle was taking place. Stadium MK was a little over two‑thirds full and although it felt incongruous at first – with Tottenham branding unable to conceal the giant MK Dons lettering exposed by empty seats – the atmosphere suggested the fans who turned up were keen to embrace the occasion, as well as to celebrate a local boy made good: Alli’s name drew a special cheer when read out before the game. “We could feel the love people here have for him and that was fantastic,” said Pochettino, who was in the mood to spread the love. “I want to say thank you to our fans on behalf of myself, the players, the staff and all the club. They came here to offer their support and made a massive effort. It’s important for us to show our gratitude. We also have to say thank you to Milton Keynes, the club and the town, because they welcomed us in a very good way.”