There was always a lot to like about Agustín Pichot during his career as Argentina’s scrum-half. His outrageous flair, his tenacious captaincy, the fact he refused to wear an alice band. And now, unlike most players-turned-administrators – sorry, Lord Coe and Rob Andrew, but you know it’s true – Pichot is arguably becoming even more likeable in his post as the vice-chairman of World Rugby. Sharply groomed and excellently tailored, Pichot is the Justin Trudeau of sports governance, posting feminist messages on his Instagram feed, flinging himself through the air in martial arts poses while on an official tour of Japan, balancing things on his nose at a board meeting while Bill Beaumont looks on in bovine bemusement. All the while maintaining the renegade spirit that made him such a handful on the pitch. This week he made the drastic and off-brand revelation that the sport he helps oversee is unsustainable in its current form. “The business side of it is not working,” said Pichot. “Is the international game under threat? I think it is.” He signed off with a flourish as dramatic as a Stephen Donald show-and-go. “I’m not going to be an accomplice to rugby’s ruin.” It was typically, irrepressibly honest of Pichot to sever the party line. But it’s no surprise to any contemporary sports fan to hear that the game’s various vested financial interests are encircling the goose that lays the golden eggs with a fistful of cutlery and a greedy look. Or, indeed, that the sport that they love is, quite possibly, doomed. Let’s face it, it’s a rare sport that hasn’t been through an existential crisis in recent years. From athletics to cycling and tennis to Formula One, we’ve seen almost every major sport display some pretty ugly cracks as the direct and indirect result of the massive financial pressures that now dominate the global games. Corruption, doping, match-fixing, exploitation: these are what happens when everyone wants a piece of the action, when victory is so rewarding yet increasingly costly to achieve. Even as the worldwide sports industry has expanded beyond CC Pyle and Kerry Packer’s wildest fantasies, the fight to stake a claim in it has becoming increasingly fraught. The bid for attention and funding – not to mention that all-important “shareholder value” – is as competitive an endeavour as kicking a ball or crossing a finish line. Everyone is desperate to make themselves more attractive to the twin sugar daddies of broadcast rights and brand sponsorship. Cricket, in particular, has been reinventing itself ever since football started cannibalising its traditional summer audience. From the Test championship to day-night games to Twenty 20, the sport has willingly undergone all sorts of cosmetic surgery to keep it young and attractive. It is constantly lopping bits of itself off, making itself leaner, shorter, less intimidating to potential partners. From the alarming messages that both the cricket authorities and some fans like to emit, you could infer that the game was in imminent danger of ceasing to exist altogether – of disappearing into the ether like, say, bar billiards or jousting. Perhaps they picture an apocalyptic horror where players and umpires are suddenly raptured away. And all that is left are a gaggle of groundsmen, memories wiped, drifting slowly around the greensward on their zombie rotavators. This panic doesn’t exist because the sport is running out of money – it’s richer than it ever has been But this panic doesn’t exist because the sport is running out of money – it’s richer than it ever has been. And the fact that other sports are undergoing similar, simultaneous identity crises is an intriguing one. Not least, of course, because many have only had pretensions to professionalism in the last half-century. And yet, in that brief time, capitalism’s growth imperative has become central to their self-worth and their perceived value. If a sport is not winning more converts, or at the very least holding on to those it already has, then it is de facto failing. It does make you wonder what all this says about what sport represents in the 21st century. Organised sport has meant a great deal of different things throughout history. In ancient Greece it taught its adherents physical discipline and promoted the concept of excellence. In medieval times sports were war games, preparing soldiers with the skills they’d need for battle. The Victorians used them to spread the gospel of fair play; Pierre de Coubertin inaugurated the modern Olympic Games to promote world peace. Modern-day sport doesn’t need to drill us for combat, and this generation has probably seen too much to believe in fair play. But if it is educating its followers in anything, it’s how to manage resources and interpret a balance sheet. It would certainly explain why fantasy leagues are so popular, and why football’s transfer deadline day, and the NFL draft, are as much-hyped as the games they precede. And those aren’t necessarily bad things. It just seems a little ironic that this coincides with a time when sports are contorting themselves in any and every direction to make themselves more appealing and relevant (and, in cricket’s case, more comprehensible) to new “markets”. Because, at times, it can feel like you need a business degree to really understand what’s going on with your team. And that might just be the most offputting factor of all.