It was just one night in Madrid but at the end of it, Real’s fans left the Bernabéu wondering if this side might be better than the one that won three European Cups in a row. Zinedine Zidane has gone, Cristiano Ronaldo has gone too, sent off 400km away in Valencia, but the rest of that team remain. It may even have been reborn; it has certainly been redefined and perhaps no one looks set to benefit quite like Gareth Bale, withdrawn to a standing ovation here. At the final whistle, that applause was extended to everyone. Afterwards, Madrid’s manager, Julen Lopetegui, sidestepped suggestions that Bale is better without Ronaldo, insisting “I’m not going to get into that, it’s surreal”, but the Welshman does appear liberated this season, fit, strong and enjoying the responsibility. Not that it was just him – or Isco or Asensio, who were breathtaking at times. “We also have to talk about Luka, Toni, the full-backs, all of them,” Lopetegui rightly said. Eusebio Di Francesco, his Roma counterpart, could not help admiring the midfield: “They don’t lose a ball,” he said. This Madrid is different, and it was good before. One thing that has not changed is this club’s sense that this competition belongs to them. By the time the final comes, they will have held the trophy for 1,100 days and they began a journey they hope will end there with this destruction of Roma. Bale scored the second in a 3-0 win after Isco opened the scoring and Mariano, on as a sub for his first appearance since returning from Lyon, added an exceptional third in the final minute. “I told him to stick it in the top corner and he did what I said,” Lopetegui joked. As the ball rocketed through the air, it completed a result that comes as a warning, not least because it stopped some way short of Madrid’s dominance. It had started early, Toni Kroos delivering a wonderful pass into the run of Bale, who controlled smoothly on the chest before hitting it hard and low from 18 yards. The ball flashed past a post but it did not feel like it would matter much. With just three minutes gone, there was time still and it was quickly apparent that there would be other opportunities. “We had innumerable chances,” Lopetegui said; the list certainly would be long. The question was already not if Madrid would score but when. The surprise was that it took a further 42 minutes. It was all Roma could do to occasionally run up the pitch and then have to run back again, space momentarily inviting them in only for Madrid to take possession back. Cengiz Ünder thumped wide from 25 yards; Steven N’Zonzi could only muster a weak effort, and Fazio headed over, but mostly Roma watched white shirts coming. Marcelo hit over, Dani Carvajal headed wide, Kroos went too high, and Karim Benzema was blocked. Kroos and Bale bent shots wide, one either side, and so it went on: Bale, Marcelo, Ramos and Isco were next. Yet 45 minutes passed before Madrid got the goal, Isco delicately dropping a free kick into the corner, a touch so soft he could have been wearing slippers. It was Madrid’s 17th shot, for just one goal and the risk was underlined when Keylor Navas flew to save from Ünder, dashing through early in the second half. Navas has lost his place in the league to Thibaut Courtois and his inclusion here felt like an act of justice as much as sporting selection, but he had repeated what he did often over three years of winning this competition – another decisive intervention in another decisive moment. Soon after he drew more applause diving across his six-yard box. And then Madrid ended it. Luka Modric’s wonderful pass sent Bale sprinting away, the power and pace irresistible. The shot he unleashed was hard and true into the far corner. He had already hit the bar since Navas’s save; now, answering the call to lead this team, he had the goal. The game opened up at both ends, Patrik Schik passing up Roma’s best chance and Navas making another save late. But any concern had long since been swept away and they were playing for fun now, Isco’s touch drawing appreciative noises from the stands. Asensio almost scored a wonderful goal, looking away as he took aim. Isco, Modric and Dani Ceballos all tried and with their 30th shot Mariano bent in a fabulous third. He was the only new signing out there, but the whole team seemed new. Improved, too.