Furious ministers rounded on Boris Johnson for suggesting the UK renege on its Brexit agreements over the Irish border, calling it unworkable and criticising the former foreign secretary for denouncing agreements made while he was a cabinet minister. The Department for Exiting the European Union issued a defiant statement rejecting Johnson’s alternative, laid out in a 4,000-word Telegraph article, saying it was “not a workable or negotiable plan,” less that two days before the start of the Conservative party conference. Government sources mocked Johnson’s disavowal of the December withdrawal agreement, when he had been part of the cabinet that approved it, dismissing his intervention as “another very lengthy article which doesn’t offer any answers”. Speaking ahead of the conference, May said the government was on the verge of a Brexit deal, despite admitting after the EU summit in Salzburg that the two sides remained some distance apart on customs and the Northern Irish border. “The right deal is close – and with it the opportunity to make life better for ordinary working people,” she said. In turn, Johnson continued his public intervention with a series of TV interviews criticising the prime minister, warning May that she risked betraying the wishes of leave voters if she persisted with the Chequers deal but stopping short of calling her to go. In his first round of television interviews since quitting over Chequers, Johnson told the BBC. “If you stick with Chequers the electorate of this country will look at what we have produced, and think how on Earth was that the outcome of voting leave.” The former foreign secretary was then asked if he would challenge for the leadership if he failed to persuade May to change course. “My job is to speak up for what I believe in and the vision that I’ve set out today and I believe in it very, very sincerely. I’m going to keep going for as long as it takes.” He told Sky News that he thought the EU would be delighted to accept a Brexit deal based on Chequers, which proposes that the UK stays in a customs union for food and goods after finally leaving the EU. “The Chequers deal, were it to be agreed with the EU, would be a political triumph for Brussels,” he told Sky News. “I think there’s people on my side of the argument who think ‘oh well Brussels will never wear it’ but I fear Brussels may go for it.” Johnson also told Sky he “stood by” what he had said in his previous columns when he compared fully veiled Muslim women looking like “letter boxes” and “bank robbers” and said that people should read his articles in full. In his article on Friday, Johnson said Theresa May should now renege on the December agreement, which included the Irish “backstop”, keeping Northern Ireland in the customs union and parts of the single market in order to avoid a hard border. Johnson said instead the UK should pursue a “super Canada trade deal” aiming for zero tariffs and quotas, with investment in new technology to ease customs at the border. Chris Heaton-Harris, the Brexit minister, hit back at Johnson on Friday evening, saying: “This is not a workable or negotiable plan for Brexit – as both sides have made clear on several occasions, no deal is available without a guarantee that there would be no hard border in Northern Ireland in any eventuality, the so-called Irish backstop. “The government is united behind the prime minister’s efforts to negotiate a good deal that works in the interests of the whole United Kingdom.” A government source also dismissed Johnson’s criticism of the December agreement. “Boris was a member of the cabinet that agreed the December Joint Report – and praised the PM for doing so – and was part of the committee that agreed the customs backstop,” the source said. “The truth is that reneging on those two things would simply guarantee no deal. So this is just another very lengthy article which doesn’t offer any answers, rather, it regurgitates ideas which would damage our union of nations and put jobs at risk.” Foreign minister Alan Duncan also took aim at his old boss on Friday, saying the Foreign Office had to “invest an enormous amount of time handling” Johnson. “His supposed solution is neither workable nor on offer. If he thinks he can go into the conference and undermine [Mrs May] I think he’s kidding himself. I think the party will be for her and not for him,” he told the Times. “He thinks he can be Britain’s Trump. It ain’t gonna fly. We don’t buy those sorts of phenomenon. He had enormous electoral appeal but sadly he’s spent it.” Johnson’s article did not challenge May’s leadership directly, though he called her plan “a moral and intellectual humiliation for this country”, but the intervention is likely to fuel speculation that he may move against the prime minister before the negotiations have been concluded. He is set to attend a rally on the night before May’s conference speech, an appearance likely to dominate any preview of her address. The prime minister is understood to be determined that cabinet ministers put on a disciplined united front at the conference in Birmingham, which begins this weekend. May has shown a willingness to robustly defend her Chequers-brokered Brexit plan in recent weeks, emphasised in a punchy televised response to EU leaders after they criticised the plan at a summit in Salzburg earlier this month. Downing Street chiefs have underlined to MPs that they do not believe a Canada-style free trade agreement is on the table, given the risks to peace in Northern Ireland, and that the only options they say remain are May’s plans for a common rulebook on goods and agrifoods to avoid customs checks, or no deal. May said the conference theme was “opportunity” and that the party would set out a vision for a post-Brexit Britain, after a fractious few days where senior Tories have publicly cast doubt on the party’s message after a strong offer from Jeremy Corbyn at Labour conference to voters on childcare, high street renewal and housing. “We’re now at a crucial moment,” May said. “So at this conference, we will be setting out how we will provide opportunity for all – a stronger, fairer country with real opportunity for people who work hard and do the right thing. “The contrast with Labour could hardly be greater. Jeremy Corbyn’s ideas have all failed before and would leave the country struggling with more debt, more waste and ordinary working people paying for it.” Ahead of the conference, Downing Street announced May would back a bid to host the 2030 Fifa World Cup in the UK and Ireland, saying the UK would be a “strong contender”. London and Glasgow are already set to host 11 games in the Uefa European Championships in 2020, with Wembley hosting the semi-finals and the final. May said the decision was spurred by the “excitement of this summer’s World Cup” where England reached the semi-finals in Russia. “The decision on whether to bid is, of course, for the football associations to make. But if they decide to go forward, they can count on this government’s full support,” she said. Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here
and listen https://flex.acast.com/audio.guim.co.uk/2018/09/26-51111-gdn.pol.180926.podcast.mp3