Nicola Adams has come straight from training camp, and in her bespoke “Nicola Adams” hoodie and trainers, she looks as if she has just ducked under the ropes of the boxing ring for a water break. She is at first watchful, shy, and looks so diminutive in her sports gear that she could be mistaken for a woman of delicate build. She is anything but delicate, of course. Aged 35, she is a two-time Olympic gold-medal winner – once in London’s 2012 Games, in the flyweight division, and again in 2016, at Rio de Janeiro. She is now preparing for her first world-title professional fight on 6 October and has been up since 6am, travelling from her home in Leeds, where she was born, to train at full tilt at a gym in Sheffield alongside elite pros. She is the only woman there, she says, but “I’m used to that now”. She keeps a steely eye on the fight, even in her downtime. Here, later, in the Rotherham hotel where we meet, she stares past the cheese and bread platters piled in front of her and orders lamb because no carbs must be eaten after 7pm, and then she must be tucked up in bed by 9pm so she can be fully rested for camp the next day. She is tired right now, she says, though her eyes are alive and her smile is a beam that lights up her face. Jade Anouka is in a hoodie and a pair of trainers too when she turns up but she is taller than Adams and less taciturn. An actor and poet from south-east London, Anouka has appeared at the National Theatre, worked with the RSC and won acclaim for star parts in the all-female Shakespeare trilogy at the Donmar Warehouse, London, directed by Phyllida Lloyd, in which she played Mark Anthony (Julius Caesar), Hotspur (Henry IV) and Ariel (The Tempest). Hailed as a rising star by the London Evening Standard and a star of tomorrow by Screen International, she has also starred in Mike Bartlett’s TV drama Trauma, and alongside Sheridan Smith in the forthcoming ITV series Clean Break. All at 28, or that is the age she is reported to be – she refuses to confirm it: “I have lost parts because of my age. So now I feel my playing age,” she says with a glint. She has come from her own training camp, of sorts. She is in rehearsals for Queen Margaret, which brings an ancillary female character from four Shakespeare history plays to the fore, and which opens in mid-September at Manchester’s Royal Exchange theatre. There is a fizzing excitement between them when they meet and they seem lit up in each other’s presence: Anouka is excitable and animated while Adams is thoughtful and earnest. Her shyness melts away so that they are speaking over each other, laughing, sparring with their words. Their professional identities seem far removed from each other at first glance: Adams the boxer; Anouka the actor. But affinities are found quickly. Before Adams became an Olympic boxer, she partly funded her training by working as a TV extra (on Coronation Street and Emmerdale, among other soaps, but “once I got into the Olympics it took away my extra work because I couldn’t blend into the background any more”). She would like to take up acting in all seriousness after hanging up her gloves. Anouka, for her part, has learned how to throw a credible punch on stage. They are inquisitive about each other’s practice in all its minutiae – training regimes, learning lines, hours spent honing their craft through repetition. As they talk, the similarities between boxing and acting become striking, as well as the preparation that leads up to a live show. Perhaps because both are currently in preparation for a performance, this hiatus in their training schedules carries an intensity; their focus on each other is unwavering and the conversation feels weighed with mutual learning, as well as genuine awe. Nicola Adams So what got you into boxing? Jade Anouka It was my acting. I was playing a Shakespeare role in Henry IV. It was set in a women’s prison and I was playing the part of Hotspur, who is known as a sort of hot-head who goes out to war, and we imagined him as having all this extra energy that he didn’t know what to do with in prison. We were thinking of how he would release the energy and thought of him in a gym. So we had a boxing match on stage, and I had to learn to box. NA What was that like, acting it out? JA Kind of weird. I was doing Shakespeare and learning to do press-ups and routines on a punchbag. The scene starts as a boxing match, but it becomes a proper fight. I just loved it. NA You talked about [Hotspur’s] energy and I’ve got crazy amounts of energy too. I’ve got ADHD so I’m, like, everywhere. JA Is boxing good for using that? NA Yeah. It gets rid of it all. JA That’s why I went into acting. I just wanted to do stuff when I was little, and I was doing athletics, but then we moved house and the athletics team that used to be our arch rivals became my local team. My mum said I needed to do something at the weekend and acting was exactly that – a good way to expel that extra energy. NA That’s cool. I got into boxing by accident as well. My mum used to do an aerobics class and she couldn’t get a babysitter one night so she took us [Nicola and her brother, Kurtis] down to the gym, which had a boxing class on at the same time. So it’s kind of her fault I got into it! JA Actually, my mum made me go to Saturday school – a performing arts school in Dartford – which first got me interested in drama. It had just opened for local kids and she was like: “For three hours you’re not in my hair. Just go.” But I didn’t think it would ever be a job. You don’t grow up to become an actor in my world. My mum was a maths teacher and my dad’s last job was as a financial adviser [they are now retired]. I didn’t know anyone who acted. At school, I was joining in but wasn’t getting any parts. Then, at sixth form college, my drama teacher said “I think you should apply for national youth theatre” and I got a scholarship. [She went on to train at the Guildford School of Acting.] It was there that I saw people my age who were saying: “I’m going to be an actor.” What about you? NA I started training when I was 12, and it was after I had my first match when I was 13 that I felt that this is what I wanted to do. I said to myself: “I want to be a boxer. I want to go to the Olympics.” I used to watch a lot of reruns of Muhammad Ali and Sugar Ray Leonard going to the Olympics and winning medals. JA It’s funny, what you say about watching Muhammad Ali. When I was training for the part of Hotspur, I spent so many hours watching videos of you. I needed a reference point in the boxing world to the character I was playing. All I knew of boxing came from staying up until 2am to watch Mike Tyson fight, but that was different, so I began watching videos of you and I remember in one video you did the Muhammad Ali shuffle. NA Yeah! JA It looked like it was so hard to do. But I loved the idea of the lightness of it, and the quickness, so I put it into the show. I liked the confidence of that shuffle, that swagger almost, it was so infectious. When I was watching it, I thought: “What did she just do?” NA In the middle of competing, you get these moments where you’re just feeling so good. The crowd hypes you up, you hear the cheering and you feed off it. JA It makes me think of the performance of it. NA Yeah, totally. JA I was thinking about the similarities in the prep between our work. How long do you train for before a fight? NA I’ve been in training camp now for 15 weeks and I’ve got eight weeks left. Training means practising the moves constantly over and over again so that it becomes muscle memory, and when I get into the ring I do it automatically. JA There are things like that in theatre – the lines, for a start. You need to learn them so you don’t have to think about them on stage. That’s a kind of muscle memory. If you spend too much time thinking about the lines when you’re performing, you’re not in the moment. You want the lines to just come, so if a fellow actor gives something different to what was expected, you can just respond. NA It’s almost the same thing with me. You never know what your opponent is going to do to you. You have to be in the moment and react; they might do something and you think: “Wait a minute, you weren’t supposed to do that”. JA But even before I start learning lines, I research. I’m rehearsing for Queen Margaret at the moment, which retells the Wars of the Roses from the Shakespeare plays, Henry VI Parts I, II and III and Richard III, but from Queen Margaret’s point of view. People don’t know much about her, but she was awesome. I’m playing her, but before I started learning the lines I researched her and the plays, trying to work out who this person was. I don’t know if you research your opponent? NA We do. We watch videos and go way back to see if there are bad habits or things that they do so we can pick up on them. JA What’s training like? Do you have any fights during training camp? NA No, we only spar. But normally the training is a lot harder than the fights. JA That’s the same for me. Rehearsals are hard. What you live for is to be on the stage, and that’s only hard if you haven’t done enough prep. NA Same. You come unstuck. It has only happened to me once but that was enough. I went to a tournament in Poland and I boxed a Russian girl in the finals; she was the type of boxer that doesn’t stop coming forward and throwing punches. At the time, I wasn’t that fit and I thought I might just be able to weave my way round it but it was the hardest match I have ever had in my life. I won it, but it was hard. She was swinging me around, I was looking at my corner thinking “Somebody save me!” When you’re not fit and someone keeps throwing punches there’s nowhere to go. It’s just you up there. JA When you’re acting, you’re hoping that if you’re having a “moment” your fellow cast-mates will hold you up. But if you’re on your own… I did a one-woman play called Chef [by Sabrina Mahfouz, at the Edinburgh fringe and at Soho theatre in London]. There was one night when all lines went. I walked up and down the stage and it came back because I had done the prep but it shouldn’t have gone in the first place. And time can slow down on stage – I don’t know if it does in the ring… NA Definitely. Boxing rounds are only two minutes, but they feel like for ever, whereas the one-minute break goes in a flash. Both women are British, born with Caribbean heritage. They have, in their professional lives, entered spaces traditionally defined as “male” – that have either excluded women, black women, or both. Adams became the first woman to win an Olympic boxing gold in 2012, but long before that, a path had to be created to allow her even to train and be taken seriously in a sport that for centuries had been the preserve of men. Anouka, meanwhile, has felt the right to take on roles formerly restricted to white, male actors. She does not think she is standing on a level playing field, but does feel degrees of levelling, and both women talk about the need to forge opportunities for new generation of women. NA It was hard coming up in a career that was so male-dominated. Sexism has been the biggest issue. It’s changed a lot compared to how it used to be – some of my friends would go to boxing gyms and get told that they didn’t have the facilities or didn’t accept women boxers. Female boxers had to create the path so that the girls coming up now don’t have to struggle. It’s great to see that there’s a process now: they know they can go to a club, to the national championships, box for England and then go on to the Olympics. When we were coming up, there wasn’t that path. We had to create it by knocking down the doors. We’d say “Hey, we want to box” and people would say “Why don’t you go and play tennis?” All the stuff about being in the kitchen – it was hard to fight through it. JA For me, I’ve been in roles that have reclaimed history and told old stories from a new perspective. But still, they say that more women apply for drama school, yet there are more parts for men at the end, and that goes for race as well. If I think about actors who are role models for me, a lot of them are American and not as many British. You find role models in aspects of people but you ultimately find your own way. When we did the trilogy [at the Donmar], we had an all-female cast. There are ways of creating those roles even though the industry is still male-dominated. It’s still not equal or fair but it’s definitely changing. Some of the roles I’ve played would not be played by women or by black women a generation before me, so I feel very much like I’m reaping benefits of their hard work – black women who have not have the same opportunities. In terms of theatre, I’ve always wanted to play Hamlet. I’ve played Ophelia, but the Hamlet part says so much more about humanity and about being a young person than it does about being a guy. I wonder how many black women have played the role. I’m sure the generation after me will take it even further. It makes things so much easier when you can see what’s possible. It’s so hard to pave the way. What you’ve done, Nicola, is incredible, because there was literally nothing there. You had to knock down walls. Not many people can do that. NA It was tough. Once we got into the Olympics in London, it cemented women’s boxing. JA Do you think it had an effect on women’s boxing in Britain more than other countries? NA Yeah, definitely. I remember the coach saying to me that two of the other girls hadn’t managed a medal and that it was all about me now. I felt like women’s boxing would be back in the corner if I didn’t get one. JA What pressure! NA But I like the pressure, it makes me perform better. JA There’s always a moment for me in rehearsals when I think: “Why do I do this?” But I feel like the doubt is there because I’ve taken on something scary, and when you come through that and feel the confidence on the other side of it you feel so much stronger. NA Yes, that’s why I do it. My mum has been one of my role models. She was a single parent bringing up two kids with two jobs. She taught me to work hard, stay dedicated and that way you can achieve whatever you want. I saw her working those jobs [as a retail manager and a hairdresser] and that got me thinking “I can do this – I can be a boxer.” As they talk, more surprising affinities emerge. Both love action and superhero films. “Who is your favourite superhero?” asks Anouka, and then nods approvingly when Adams picks Spider-Man, though they differ in their choice of X-Men (it is Wolverine for Adams and Iceman for Anouka). And if the debates around Idris Elba’s possible casting as the next James Bond have been hotly contested, Anouka has staked her own claim, telling the Daily Mail earlier this year: “I’d love to have a crack at James Bond.” When Black Panther was released in Britain, she saw it as a groundbreaking moment for black actors and launched a crowdfunding campaign so that underprivileged members of the community in south London could see it. JA I don’t know whether you heard about the Black Panther Challenge? [The American actor] Viola Davis organised a screening for people to see it so I thought, I’m a south-east London girl, and I know there are people in the area who don’t have the money to go to the cinema and there’s a lot of black kids there. I felt they had to see this film. It’s ground-breaking. You don’t get to see this on TV. I really felt that Black Panther was important for the next generation to see that there’s a way, to say: “Look, you can get there, those openings are available, although we need to make them more so.” So I crowdfunded the money and we got 200 young people to watch it in Peckham. They were all in there together and it was so alive. It was incredible, as an actor myself, seeing the impact a film can have on people. We did a Q&A afterwards with one of the stunt girls in Black Panther. She’s been my body double before and she is one of the army in the film. NA It’s funny you should say that. I went to be a stunt double for the film but I couldn’t do it because it would have taken too much time out of the boxing training. I went just for a day to see what the training would be like and it looked intense. I do boxing but I don’t really do any kicking or swimming, or know the different weapons to fight with. I’d love to be in an action film. Rocky needs to have a daughter in Creed. JA Yeah! Creed 3: The Daughters. NA Have you got any tips for me, for acting? JA No, you’ve got it all. Knowing what it’s like to train, to prep, to have all the pressure on the night of the performance. The basics of both our worlds are the same. You prep, you get scared, but ultimately, there’s no magic trick. You’ve got to put the work in and then just go out there and perform. Queen Margaret runs at Manchester’s Royal Exchange from 14 September until 6 October. Believe: Boxing, Olympics and My Life Outside the Ring by Nicola Adams has just been published in paperback (Penguin, £9.99). To order a copy for £8.49 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846