Remember the date movie? The perky, brightly lit, undemandingly entertaining romantic comedy – once churned out by studios as optimum unisex viewing to ease an evening’s flirtation between two people still unsure of each other’s tastes? It was always a needlessly specific term – a horror film can be an effective prelude to a kiss, as can an austere arthouse experiment – but it’s one the industry once vigorously traded in, making box-office queens of Meg Ryan and Julia Roberts at its zenith. If you’re struggling to think of a 2018 Meg Ryan equivalent, that’s because Hollywood has rather lost heart in the date movie, along with most other forms of character-driven mainstream storytelling: amorous cinemagoers can make out against the crashing spectacle of superhero adventures instead, while frothy exceptions like Jon M Chu’s Crazy Rich Asians are hailed as special events. Yet a flurry of “return of the romcom” headlines has hit the entertainment media of late, and notwithstanding the success of Chu’s film, they aren’t being fuelled by cinema releases: rather, Netflix has been hailed as the genre’s saviour, after a run of slick romantic comedies that have popped up under their Netflix Originals banner. They haven’t all been hits, even by the debatable terms of what constitutes a hit in the figureless world of film streaming: The Kissing Booth has already become a punchline denoting the paltriest of the network’s creative instincts, while the perfectly pleasant gay teen romance Alex Strangelove played like an accidental Aldi knockoff of modest cinema success Love, Simon. Yet two such efforts – one released to Netflix in June, the other in late August – have achieved what few of the streaming giant’s more flashy attempts at multiplex movie-making (from Bright to Mute) managed: genuine pop-cultural interest. Set It Up and To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before, both sweet, light, high-concept romcoms that would easily have been in cinemas a decade ago, have swiftly become objects of mass internet affection, inspiring sundry dedicated tweets and memes and BuzzFeed tributes, and raising the celebrity stock of their adorable young stars. Following two harried corporate PAs who fancy themselves workplace cupids, Set It Up is essentially one extended meet-cute powered by the sparky, wholesome chemistry between Zoey Deutch and Glen Powell; it’s amiable and a little thin, but was quickly tagged the year’s best romantic comedy in multiple outlets. They spoke too soon. Button-cute but also surprisingly complex and compassionate in its exploration of adolescent desire, To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before feels genuinely revelatory. Charting the tangled fallout when a shy teenage girl’s unsent juvenile love letters belatedly find their way to their recipients, it earns and even exceeds its now-mandatory John Hughes references. Its teenagers are vulnerably imperfect and inconsistent in ways that rarely survive the studio lacquer; casually centred on a modern mixed-race household, it feels wholly made in 2018 without a hint of down-with-the-kids contrivance. It may well be the best Netflix Original to have first premiered on the platform, rather than being snapped up at a festival. Netflix has more such projects lined up on their “coming soon” list – including Sierra Burgess Is a Loser, a high-school spin on Cyrano de Bergerac, the trailer for which is also tracking well on social media. It seems the network, after trying the genre blockbuster form with minimal success, has spotted a cheaper, more-needed gap in the market: the small, human commercial movies crowded out of the cinemas by franchised fantasy. The date movie lives on – but it’s now for those staying in, not going out. Avengers: Infinity War (Disney, 12)It feels about as endless as that title implies, but if you’ve stuck with Marvel’s sprawling superhero network thus far, this bulk-buy blockbuster is lumbering good value. Custody (Spirit, 15)Xavier Legrand’s terrific debut feature is the year’s most unexpected white-knuckler. What begins as a Kramer vs Kramer-style divorce drama escalates into a startling exercise in human terror of fanatical jealousy and paranoia. The Rape of Recy Taylor (Modern Films, 15)Nancy Buirski’s straightforward, lapel-grabbing documentary account of horrifying sexual violence in the Jim Crow south slightly overdoes the emotive urging – its power needs no amplification – but it’s still hard to shake. How to Talk to Girls at Parties (Studiocanal, 15)A peculiar disappointment from director John Cameron Mitchell, this adaptation of a Neil Gaiman short story merges sci-fi punk-era nostalgia and shaggy Britcom to hyper-quirky, oil-on-water effect.