Billy Vunipola has a reputation as one of the most disarmingly honest players around, but even by his standards his latest admission is startling. The Saracens and England No 8 has revealed he has played for club or country “easily 10 times” while harbouring serious doubts over his fitness and believes that rugby union is “almost in NFL territory” because players hide injuries for fear of not having their contracts renewed. “I can tell you a lot of people still have injuries and try to hide it,” says Vunipola. “We saw it with the high turnover of players being released, it’s almost like we’re into NFL territory. Not yet, but we’re getting to a stage where competition for places is really hard and you can still have players masking pain, trying to earn that extra contract. It’s something that’s always in the back of my mind.” At a time when World Rugby is expressing fears the international game is facing ruin and when the Premiership is seeking outside investment which would inevitably mean changes to the domestic landscape, rugby undoubtedly stands at a crossroads. Accordingly, Vunipola’s revelation is timely and the hope must be that the power brokers listen. For it was only 12 months ago that the 25-year-old warned of potential strike action because of the demands placed upon modern day players. At the time he said his “body could not handle it”; then came a season in which he underwent major knee surgery, broke his arm twice and managed only nine appearances. To a large extent Vunipola blames himself. He says that whenever he made his comeback he tried too hard to “be a hero” and it must be said he is not pointing the finger at either Saracens or England for rushing him back too quickly. “For me the biggest thing was, do the coaches or the players think that I’m taking them for a ride?” he adds. “That’s why I never wanted to say no if I was sore – that was my mindset, no one else’s, but I’ve learned now I’ve just to be up front.” Misses remainder of England's doomed World Cup campaign after damaging his knee against Wales Vunipola tears cartilage against Argentina and misses most of the 2017 Six Nations campaign The No8 is selected for British & Irish Lions duty but has to withdraw to have treatment on a shoulder strain Returns for the domestic season with Saracens but damages his meniscus and requires surgery on his right knee Vunipola breaks his right forearm in just his second game after returning Returns for England, but re-fractures his right arm in the second Test against South Africa Nonetheless, the picture he paints of an environment where players feel compelled to play is alarming. So too the fact that Vunipola intends to make significant changes to his game to prolong his career at a time when Sam Warburton has had to retire before reaching 30. “As rugby players we need to get smarter, not bigger,” he says. [The latest lay-off] gave me time to think about how to play my game better, smarter as well and hopefully safer, as in knowing there are 14 other players out on the pitch and to pick my moments. I got to a stage where I was just trying to be a hero, putting myself in situations where I was vulnerable. I was trying to be a hero, putting myself in situations where I was vulnerable “I came back against Wasps [in May], maybe it wasn’t the smartest idea to tell the coaches that I was ready, it was almost like trying to show them I am tough when I wasn’t, and it’s no one else’s fault but mine. I was almost showing a mask that wasn’t me and now I’m just up front with everything – if I’m sore, I’m sore – not letting my ego dictate what my body’s telling me.” The timeline of Vunipola’s injuries last season chimes with an overeagerness to make an impact upon his return. His missed the 2017 British and Irish Lions tour after shoulder surgery and suffered his knee injury on his second appearance of the new season. In January he broke his arm against the Ospreys, again on his second match back. Despite a niggling hamstring problem, his next start was against Wasps in the Premiership semi-final and three matches later he re-fractured his right arm in England’s second summer Test against South Africa. “I should have said I would play but maybe without the pressure,” he says. “People expect you to perform to the levels you played before. That is more pressure than winning or losing. I remember I played all right in that game [against Wasps] and then the following week [in the Premiership final], I was trying to back it up and it didn’t go my way. When you are playing a lot you realise that is just how it flows but when you are out for a long time you want to make an impact and you want to be the star of the show.” Reflecting on the first time he broke his arm against the Ospreys, Vunipola adds: “Again, if I had been smarter when I went into the tackle I would have been fine but I was trying to impact the game. I have thoughts in my head that people doubt me so I have to go the extra mile but now I’m less insecure about myself.” Vunipola even expresses a sense of guilt during those long injury lay-offs, going as far as turning down sponsorship appearances at Twickenham before England matches. “What was more important to me was my pride and that is not very smart,” he says. “With social media and that kind of stuff, over the last year and a half I was guilty of almost listening to it. “I got to the stage where I wasn’t doing appearances at Twickenham because I felt embarrassed. It was like people would be: ‘Oh, this guy is living off two years of his work.’ I know no one was thinking that, but that was my mindset and that translated over to training and playing. But now I’m more than comfortable knowing that when I’m ready I’ll play, and when I’m not I’ll flag it.” Vunipola makes his first start of the season on Saturday at Northampton, having come on as a replacement last weekend. To demonstrate a wiser approach, his right arm will be strapped, having opted against doing so previously because “I get this weird thing in my head that if I’m strapped, I’m injured”. He adds: “I wore it once and I didn’t like it but not wearing it wasn’t the smartest decision when I came back before. I guess you learn lessons on the way in terms of recovery.” Vunipola has done so more than most.