Holidaymakers Phil and Jean, in their 70s and from the Midlands, were recovering on the beach. They had spent the morning viewing Damien Hirst’s statue Verity, which looms over the waterfront at Ilfracombe in north Devon, before heading to the artist’s restaurant for a cup of coffee amid vivid butterfly, dot and pickled fish pieces. “To be honest, the whole experience has been pretty overwhelming,” said Phil. “It’s not the sort of thing you expect on a visit to the seaside.” Jean said the pair did not consider themselves art fans. “But I wouldn’t have missed it,” she added. “It’s really given us something to think and talk about.” Phil and Jean, however, are among the last who will be able to enjoy or endure – depending on your point of view – the full Hirst experience in Ilfracombe. Shortly after their visit, Hirst’s company, Science, unexpectedly revealed that he was closing the Quay restaurant and selling off or renting out three neighbouring buildings that he owns, one of which until recently housed his gallery and shop Other Criteria. Hirst’s people also made clear that he was no longer pursuing a plan to build an eco town on the edge of Ilfracombe. The message was that the artist, reputed to be the richest in the UK, would be focusing on working in his studio rather than his other business interests. Hirst and the 20m-high, 25-tonne Verity, with her exposed skull and foetus, have become as central to Ilfracombe as the fishing boats bobbing in front of his restaurant. Georgina Carlo-Paat, the harbourmaster, admitted to reservations when Verity was erected in 2012. “I didn’t like her. I remember thinking: ‘What is she all about? I don’t get it.’ But she has grown on me. I love her now. The impact on the town has been immense. So many people come and see her from all over the world and she starts so many conversations. Visitors ask me what she means. I say she’s about rebirth and regeneration.” Mike Marsh, a land train driver who picks up passengers from the base of Verity and takes them on tours of the town, conceded that he didn’t quite know how to explain the statue. “But she does bring people in. Some like her, some don’t but not many are indifferent.” Shane Gooch, who was born and bred in Ilfracombe, was sitting in the sunshine on one of the benches in front of Verity. “Art is subjective. You like it or you don’t. But I do believe Verity and Hirst have changed expectations in the town. They’ve encouraged investment. We’ve got smart restaurants and more galleries. Not so long ago the town used to feel a little downtrodden but there’s a new optimism now. Hirst has been a catalyst for that.” There are some – particularly media critics of the artist - who have called Ilfracombe “Hirst-on-Sea” and equated the artist’s impact with that of the chef Rick Stein on another west country harbour town, Padstow in Cornwall. A tale of locals complaining about the celebrity chef or bad boy artist is hard to resist. But most people in Padstow would say the profile and jobs Stein has brought has been positive, and most residents and business people in Ilfracombe say Hirst, who has a home and workshop near the town, has been a good thing. At the newly opened contemporary art gallery Fleek, the director, Dan Martin, is a big Hirst fan. “I’ve followed him for years. I remember being blown away by the Sensation show [the 1997 blockbuster that included his pickled shark] and it’s great to be based in a town associated with him.” Martin doesn’t stock any Hirst works, but some of the pieces he does sell may have been influenced by the Turner prize winner, including a brightly coloured skull by an artist called Martin Burton who has just resettled in Ilfracombe. Also on display are pictures made up of brightly coloured bottles by the west country artist Emma Gibbons. The pieces have echoes of Hirst works such as his medicine cabinets and spot paintings – and it turns out that Gibbons used to work for him. “I feel very positive about the direction town is going in,” said Martin. “It’s a shame to hear that the Quay will be closing down but having been a fan of Damien’s for a while, I know he is full of surprises so I’m keen to keep an eye out for any other projects he might have in store.” It is not just the art scene that has benefited from Hirst’s presence. At the Quay Value Holiday Shop visitors can buy postcards, suncream and souvenirs. But the owner, Steve, has also done good business selling swords, models of dragons and skulls as a different kind of crowd has arrived in Ilfracombe. “My skulls were £40, Hirst’s were £4,000. I think I sold more,” said Steve. “He may not be my cup of tea but overall he’s been good for the place.” Naturally, Hirst has his detractors. This week a publican, Nick Waters, lambasted Hirst for not doing anything with the three buildings next to the Quay that he owned. But Hirst’s people made clear that it wasn’t Waters’ criticism that had prompted the decision to close down and sell up, and that he wasn’t completely cutting ties with Ilfracombe: his home and workshop will stay. “Damien is making changes at his company and has made the difficult decision to close the Quay and sell or rent all the properties he owns on the seafront, finding the right people to take them on,” a spokesperson said. “Damien has a long history with Ilfracombe and loves the people and the area.” Crucially, the spokesperson also made clear that Verity, which is on long-term loan from the artist to north Devon council, would not be going anywhere. And so the conversations about it will continue.