Cornell du Preez, the Worcester and Scotland back-row, has revealed he is unable to talk and must remain in hospital for the next four weeks as a result of the serious throat injury he sustained on the opening weekend of the Premiership season. Du Preez has undergone multiple operations after he was taken to hospital in Birmingham following the injury suffered in Worcester’s defeat by Wasps on 1 September. The 27-year-old had been on the pitch for barely five minutes when the injury occurred as the result of a collision with the Wasps captain, Joe Launchbury. While it was initially suspected he had suffered a broken larynx, Worcester said on Thursday that the South African-born Du Preez had sustained a fractured cricoid (the cartilage just below the Adam’s apple) as well as a damaged voice box. The Worcester director of rugby, Alan Solomons, said Du Preez is “making good progress” but there is no time frame set on his return for the club he joined from Edinburgh in the summer. Du Preez added on his Instagram page that he cannot speak for the duration of his stay in hospital. He wrote: “On the 1st of September I fractured my cricoid [Adam’s apple]. I also damaged my voice box so I won’t be able to speak at all for the next 4 or so weeks. I will be in hospital until then. We really want to thank @worcswarriors, friends and family from all over the world for the unbelievable support that have been received. It’s been overwhelming.” It is unclear whether Du Preez, who has six Scotland caps, will require further surgery but Solomons added: “Cornell is making good progress and is receiving the best treatment in hospital. Everyone at the club sends him their best wishes and we will continue to support him at this difficult time. We wish him a speedy recovery.” Last season, the Harlequins fly-half Demetri Catrakilis also suffered a serious throat injury and was sidelined for almost six months. He was unable to talk for a week and regularly saw a speech therapist during his rehabilitation. He said: “To get back to playing you have to overcome quite a few negative thoughts, and injuries can happen to any part of your body. This has changed my perception of life because there was a stage when I didn’t know if I was going to survive.”