The BBC has been widely criticised over its decision to cast a non-disabled person in its remake of The Elephant Man. The role of Joseph Merrick – who had severe physical deformities – will be played by the Stranger Things actor Charlie Heaton. Notably, actor Adam Pearson – who has neurofibromatosis type 1, a condition which was once thought to affect Merrick – has said he wasn’t even given the opportunity to audition. As Pearson told LBC, it’s part of a culture of exclusion for disabled actors. “It’s a systemic problem, not only in the BBC but industry-wide.” From Dustin Hoffman in Rain Man to Eddie Redmayne in The Theory of Everything, it’s routine for non-disabled actors to play disabled characters, often gaining critical acclaim in the process. At best, it takes work and exposure from talented disabled actors and further adds to an arts and culture that pushes disability representation – much like race, sex and class – to the sidelines. At worst, it sees non-disabled actors mimic the characteristics of a minority group without any involvement from the community it depicts. It’s not only disabled people highlighting such problems. In July Scarlett Johansson dropped out of her role playing the crime kingpin Dante “Tex” Gill – who was born Lois Jean Gill but identified as a man – in the upcoming film Rub & Tug after what she called “ethical questions” were raised by the trans community. And disabled people have long spoken about the issues Pearson raises. Actor Jamie Beddard recently wrote in the Guardian that actors “cripping up” turns disability into a defining feature, disrupts the story and makes the audience become voyeurs of difference. It’s remarkable, then, that pointing these concerns out is still seen as contentious. Pearson’s comments have received support online from disabled and non-disabled people alike, but they have also evoked much negativity. The common criticism is that being an actor requires “acting” – as if all this time, disabled people believed Star Wars was a true-life story. If the logic of disabled people playing disabled characters is extended, these critics posit, we will soon reach a point where only surgeons can play surgeons or the next sci-fi blockbuster will require finding a cast of aliens. These are facetious claims, especially when it comes to a part such as Merrick, which has been played countless times by non-disabled actors (perhaps it might add something to yet another retelling of this story to have someone with some experiences in common play the lead). But they do serve to highlight the backlash minorities often face simply by speaking out. It can feel particularly jarring for disabled people, who have a long cultural history of being infantilised, to have some non-disabled people slowly explaining why their thinking about their own lives is muddled. Those who find it difficult to understand Pearson’s call for representation have generally been the same people – white, non-disabled men – who have spent their life in a culture that represents them everywhere, all the time. When you have grown up with the luxury of always seeing people who look like you on the cinema screen, it’s easy to dismiss concerns from those who never have – or less favourably, to respond defensively when your dominance of mainstream culture feels threatened.  Diversity in fiction feels particularly important when you’re from a group that is still widely unrepresented, be it in politics, business or the media. Society is have this ready to have this conversation – and to start listening to the voices of the people affected None of this is to say that non-disabled actors should be somehow banned from ever playing disabled parts. Rather, it’s time to consider why it seems so uncomfortable to question the fact that they currently always do. Disability is an identity, just like race or sex, and yet it is still widely acceptable for non-disabled people to be at the forefront of our depiction in the arts. That disabled actors are ignored to such a degree that they are not even given the chance to play disabled characters is testament to how normalised this exclusion is. Significant progress will come when disabled actors aren’t only given the chance to play disabled roles but to play any character who may or may not happen to have a disability – as a person, just like any other. And everyone will win when the industry widens the talent pool and hires more disabled producers, scriptwriters and directors, so that disabled people can tell their own stories. Society is ready to have this conversation – and to start listening to the voices of the people affected. For many, disability is not a costume to put on but their lives, and they deserve to be represented. • Frances Ryan writes the Guardian’s Hardworking Britain column