Arabesque is the first of Claudia Roden’s books I bought, and the one I cook from the most. It has dog-eared corners where I’ve marked recipes and the pages are stained. It covers the food of Lebanon, Morocco, Turkey, countries with different culinary traditions, but threads of commonality. Roden sheds light on the distinct richness of each place. She meets people, asks about their favourite recipe, and the conversation segues into who they are, their parents, their grandparents ... Food is the starting point, a lens through which to see the world, its history, its places and, crucially, its people. People talk today about “Middle-Eastern food” as though it is one thing. We’d never do that about Europe, because it’s a given that German cooking is so different from the food of, say, Spain that it bears no comparison. My work is all about challenging those stereotypes about the Middle East, about understanding its nuances. Claudia Roden was at the forefront of this. On a practical level, the recipes are designed for the home. It feels like she’s right next to you in the kitchen, with her instructions to, for example, grab a handful of parsley in your right hand, then hold it with a cloth. All the recipes use just a handful of ingredients – there are no long lists, which appeals to the busy or thrifty cook – but she makes up for this modesty with great generosity in portion size. She talks a lot about how to do dishes we think we knew, like tabbouleh, properly; not with an excess of bulgur wheat, but to make the dish a celebration of its soft, fragrant green herbs, mint and parsley. There’s also a huge focus on vegetable dishes which, when the book came out in 2005, was ahead of its time. There’s a recipe for black-eyed beans with spinach and caramelised onions that I really love, also a fettuccine with lentils, and so many aubergine dishes with the likes of tahini sauce and pomegranate – stuff that’s everywhere now, but which back then was really pioneering. My mother is Iranian and my dad Pakistani, and when I was growing up we travelled the Middle East quite a bit. When I first bought Arabesque, I was familiar with the flavours and places Roden evokes. When you read her, you actually feel like you’re walking down the street in Marrakech, or are staring out to sea in Beirut, or in one of Istanbul’s markets. Coming from the Iranian tradition, it was perhaps the Moroccan food section, with all its combinations of meat with fruit and nuts, that spoke to me most. I’ve probably made her tagine of lamb with prunes and almonds more than any other recipe in there. At the beginning of the book, Roden says: “The spirit of these cuisines is that they have no absolute rules, are rich in variation and poor in precision. In essence, trust your taste and allow yourself certain freedoms in the kitchen.” This is the spirit of homecooking: unfussy, accessible, relaxed. Her work is as relevant as it ever was – it humanises people and celebrates the best that the Middle East has to offer. And today, what could be more important? Yasmin Khan is the author of Palestinian cookbook Zaitoun