The Fifa series has been adhering to one clear philosophy over the past two decades. Let’s call it “Hollywood authenticity”. Matches look and feel realistic, the animation is astonishingly accurate, the presentation has all the swooshing graphic wizardry we’ve come to expect in the Sky TV era. Squint and you can almost imagine you’re watching a real game. Yet beneath those overhead kicks that rocket into the top corner, those last-minute goals from set pieces, every match feels somehow authored – as if, hidden away somewhere and secretly controlling every action is a sinister cabal of Roy of the Rovers writers. But that’s OK, because playing Fifa 19 is a joy: the control, the fluidity, the sense of possibility from every graceful character animation. More so than the last few instalments, the action is balletic and refined. A boost of speed, a well-timed pass, a shimmy to the left, and the pitch opens up like a theatrical stage. It’s thrilling. At the same time, tackling is hard, there’s more uncertainty to 50/50 balls (you can actually win some above the professional skill level), and there’s a nice sturdy physics engine which means overhit passes and ricocheting balls can often act unpredictably, spinning off your player’s shin, however skilled he or she may be. Outfield play is open and when you get into the penalty area, you find that shooting has been tweaked too. Now there is the chance to make a well-timed second tap of the shoot button to launch a more decisive strike. It’s tough to get right .Most of the time you’ll want to just go with a basic blast-and-hope approach, but it’s important for Fifa to keep providing more options in front of goal, especially with the ever-improving AI of defenders. From these intertwining systems of physics, animation and attacking scope, great goals are possible. There are the overhead kicks, of course, but also swooping headers from the edge of the box. Somehow, I’ve made Andy Carroll score at the near post, using the outside of his foot to curl it around a flailing keeper with all the poise and refinement of a young Baryshnikov. That was one to treasure – and that is what “Hollywood authenticity” is all about. The unreal real. And of course, Fifa is also about its huge array of options. There is the latest instalment of The Journey, the game’s interactive TV box-set series, now following Alex Hunter, his sister Kim and his laddish pal Danny Williams through their winding careers and giving players control over life-changing moments and decisions. It’s still silly and histrionic, like a Channel 5 drama, but fun while it lasts. Career Mode has barely changed, but the basic multiplayer match option now lets you choose from a number of fun playground options including Headers and Volleys and No Rules, where there is no ref and no decisions – sort of post-apocalyptic football. EA has also brought in the Champions League, so you can take a side to European glory while getting heartily sick of the competition’s operatic theme tune. Then there’s Ultimate Team. The online team-creation mode, which lets you build a fantasy side and pitch it against others around the globe, returns with cosmetic and interface improvements and a bunch of new player cards. It’s still a compelling live-action Panini sticker album with a problematic loot-box element that allows real-world cash transactions for randomised rewards. But really, this remains a game about the fantasy of elite-level football. It feels as though some of the pernickity augmentations to ball control and jostling that were forced on us between Fifas 15 and 18 have been toned back, or at least superseded by systems that are actually fun. Fifa 19 is a game that flatters without being sycophantic, and gives attackers and defenders chances to look amazing in equal measure. It lets you run at centre-backs with joie de vivre, dinking the ball around them, but it also lets you glide in with a monstrous sliding tackle like Paolo Maldini in his prime. Fifa 19 is a true simulation of modern football: brash and bloated yet also slickly professional; sometimes it drives you crazy with its cynicism, others it almost makes you weep with its beauty. And it truly knows how mixed-up and daft it is. After I scored one particularly outrageous goal with Cristiano Ronaldo, commentator Lee Dixon yelled: “It’s just like he’s playing Fifa.” So meta. So obvious. So true.