Jürgen Klopp has no plans to rotate goalkeepers in the Champions League group stage, with Alisson – the £65m summer signing from Roma – assured of the No 1 role in Europe and the Premier League. The Liverpool manager rotated in the group phase last season when Loris Karius started all six games against Sevilla, Spartak Moscow and Maribor, while Simon Mignolet was the confirmed first choice. Karius remained Liverpool’s Champions League keeper after usurping Mignolet on a regular basis, as Klopp kept a settled team through the knockout rounds. Mignolet, who started only in the play-off against Hoffenheim last season, was looking at Champions League group games plus domestic cup matches as opportunities for first-team football having become Alisson’s reluctant deputy in the aftermath of Karius’s move to Besiktas. However, in a further setback for the 30-year-old Belgium international, who was last week reprimanded by Klopp for airing his transfer frustrations in public, the manager has abandoned his policy of rotating goalkeepers. Klopp has decided Alisson will remain in goal for the Group C fixtures against Paris Saint-Germain, Napoli and Red Star Belgrade as he establishes himself at Liverpool. Meanwhile, Jordan Henderson has signed a new long-term contract with Liverpool. The club captain arrived from Sunderland in 2011 and has been described by Klopp as the “embodiment of what it means to be a Liverpool player”. He added: “It is fantastic news but should not be a surprise to anyone – he is perfect for us and we for him. “You can tell through his actions he treats representing our badge and our shirt as a privilege. He takes nothing for granted and strives to learn and be better for his team at all times. He is our ‘General’ and I trust him completely. “The best thing is, he will get even better in these coming years. And this improvement will come from a very high base already.” Henderson, who made his first start of the season in Saturday’s 2-1 win at Leicester City, said: “There is no other place in the world I would rather play football. I want to be here for as long as I can be. “I’m so privileged to have been a part of this club for so long, and hopefully even longer now.”