When Simon Yates won the gold medal in the points race at the world track championships in Minsk in 2013, two things stood out besides the fact no one outside the immediate confines of the Great Britain team saw the result coming until it all happened in the final 30 laps of the 160-lap event. What impressed was the Bury rider’s discipline in sticking to the plan agreed with his then coach Chris Newton and the unstinting efficiency with which he went about winning when the time came. The pair had agreed he should ride a lower gear and bide his time until the final laps, because the track was “heavy” and would tell on the legs of his bigger-geared rivals. The tactic worked to perfection but it relied on immense patience while other riders accumulated points for three-quarters of the race. Six months later, in the Tour of Britain stage finish at Haytor, Yates – still an amateur riding for Great Britain – bided his time again before destroying the strongest climbers in the professional field in the final kilometre. A similar approach seems to have worked in the last three weeks at the Vuelta a España, where Yates should – barring accidents – ride to the biggest win of his career on Sunday. Before the race, Yates’s directeur sportif, Matt White, said the goal was for his rider to finish the race strongly, no matter what the result, so as to put behind him the experience of the Giro d’Italia, where the 26-year-old dominated the first two weeks only to fall apart in the final four days. That approach called for Yates to curb his racing instincts, watch and wait, which he did until eight days out, when he took the race lead at Alto las Praeres. Yates’s Vuelta win will mark an unprecedented Grand Tour slam for Great Britain, coming as it does after victories in the Giro d’Italia for Chris Froome and the Tour de France for Geraint Thomas, but the Bury racer’s achievement has a significantly different background.Unlike Thomas and Froome, Yates was earmarked as a Grand Tour contender before he even turned professional, thanks partly to the Haytor result, but mainly to his stage wins in the Tour de l’Avenir, the Tour de France for under-25 riders. The first of those came in 2011, when he was barely 19 years old, in a sprint finish ahead of a select group containing riders who figure in the hierarchy of Grand Tour favourites, names such as Nairo Quintana, Tom Dumoulin, Warren Barguil and Romain Bardet. It was the point at which Yates began to stand out, eight years after he and his twin brother Adam – prominent on team duty in this final week of the Vuelta – were taken to watch the Bury Clarion club riding at the Manchester velodrome by their father, who had come to the sport, as so many do, after an injury caused by running. The other major difference is that Yates’s entire career as a senior has taken place in what could be termed the Team Sky era; the flagship British squad were formed in 2010, when he was 17. How ironic that the Yates brothers were overlooked by a team expressly set up to find and develop British Tour de France winners. With Sky only interested in Simon, and not Adam, the pair developed with the Australian Mitchelton-Scott squad, who have transformed themselves as they have matured. They have gone from a team largely built around sprinters to one who can sustain three Grand Tour campaigns in a season. While Yates’s talents on the bike have been obvious for five years, his character remains obscure. In interviews, he is polite, deferential, giving little away. He has become still less inclined to open up since the leaking of a positive drugs test for the asthma inhaler terbutaline in 2016. The test was punished with a slap on the wrist – a four-month ban – given it was owing to a clerical error on the part of his team, Yates having declared its use at Paris-Nice that year. A precocious talent then, who looked completely at home when thrown into the 2014 Tour de France at a couple of days’ notice, described by Newton in one interview as, “a racer not just a climber”, with the instinctive knowledge of when to make a move that comes with repeated distance racing on a velodrome. He is also, Newton observed, a rider capable of snapping occasionally when pushed, in a little outburst of aggression that is neither bravado nor rudeness but the natural reaction of a man at his limit. There has been little sign of that in the past three weeks, apart from an emphatic gesture at a non-working Quintana last Sunday at Lagos de Covadonga, but that figures, for if ever there was a victory born of cold-blooded restraint, it is this one.