That Ruth Davidson does not want to be prime minister ought not to make headlines, she says. “I have been asked it so many times and said it in so many ways, this isn’t actually new,” insists the Scottish Conservatives’ leader, who has been regarded with increasingly breathless fervour as a silver bullet to quell party disunity, renew Tory support across the UK and perhaps even solve Brexit, ever since David Cameron tipped her as a possible successor in 2013. But she cannot be unaware that context is all. The first openly lesbian party leader anywhere in the UK, Davidson, 39, is less than five weeks away from giving birth to her first child, conceived with her partner, Jen, following IVF treatment. A state-educated woman with a working-class background in a party overwhelmingly controlled by privately schooled men, she has delivered previously unthinkable electoral success for the Scottish Tories at both Holyrood and Westminster. She is one of two politicians in Scotland with whom the electorate is on first-name terms – the other being the first minister and SNP leader, Nicola Sturgeon, whose job (as first minister) Davidson says she very much does want. With her penchant for unusual photo opportunities – Davidson has variously been snapped driving a tank, playing bagpipes and riding a buffalo – and the divertingly jolly persona, one might also venture a comparison with Boris Johnson, though ideally not while she is in the room. But if some observers have read this as a calculated attempt to stop voters connecting her with Thatcher’s still-toxic legacy north of the border, it seems this front may have been an attempt to distract from something altogether more personal. Last week Davidson published her first book, Yes She Can, a collection of unexpectedly revealing interviews with “mould-breaking women”, from the American philanthropist Melinda Gates to the Indian commando trainer Seema Rao. This optimistic volume also includes an intimate memoir from Davidson herself, in which she reveals that she was diagnosed with clinical depression as a teenager. That “suffocating” episode, at the age of 18, found her cutting her arms with blades and broken glass, drinking heavily and considering suicide, and appears to have been treated with minimal insight by her university GP. She discusses the ongoing management of her mental health in very practical terms, relying on structure, exercise and measurable outcomes to her day, as well as her fears “of going back to the place I once inhabited”, especially in the crucible of the Scottish independence campaign. With publication comes publicity, and headlines such as “Ruth Davidson: PM job would risk my mental health”. While her honesty has been widely praised, some have questioned the implication that mental illness precludes a person from high office. “That’s not what I said,” Davidson is adamant. “That is the conflation, and that would be a shame because I think I’d have done a disservice to people.” She is likewise clear that she did not mean that the role of first minister of Scotland is lesser than that of prime minister: “I’ve been saying for a very long time that I’ve built a home in Edinburgh, I bought my first house last year, I’m getting married, I’m having a child.” In the 2016 Holyrood elections, Davidson won the seat of Edinburgh Central, which includes the city’s affluent Georgian new town and the first minister’s residence, Bute House, from the SNP. “I’m already the MSP for Bute House, I’d quite like to be the MSP in Bute House, thanks very much. “I’ve been saying all this stuff, but now there’s been some conflation [with her depression diagnosis], everyone’s going: ‘Oh, she must mean it now.’ Well, actually, why? Maybe we’re not as far enough along in the conversation about mental health as we think we are, if suddenly everybody is saying that has to be a full stop.” So does she anticipate a queue of wistful activists trying to change her mind when she arrives at the Conservative party conference in Birmingham this weekend? She asserts with the vigorous sincerity of a hockey captain that delegates will be “very keen to support the prime minister, because they can see that this is the real tough end of the negotiations”. OK. In her book, one of her messages to her younger self was “do not be intimidated by posh blowhards”. So what is her message to Boris Johnson for the weekend? Our conversation takes place before Johnson’s 4,000-word intervention in the Telegraph on Friday, calling again for Theresa May to “chuck Chequers”, but it is not an altogether flip question, given Davidson’s history with the former foreign secretary. During her stellar performance at the Wembley arena debate just before the EU referendum, a formidably well-briefed Davidson repeatedly challenged Johnson’s lazy assertions about the benefits of a leave vote, and since then she has regularly called out his disruptive behaviour over Brexit. “I was talking about a very specific time in my life,” she corrects me, “but one of the things that it helped me learn was that just because someone talks louder and brays a bit doesn’t mean that they know what they’re talking about, and I think I’ve got quite a good radar for people of substance.” Then, in terms of knowledge or ignorance, does she consider the likes of Johnson, Jacob Rees-Mogg and David Davis sufficiently conscious of the potential threat to the union posed by Brexit? “We’re more attuned to it in Scotland because we’ve lived it so long. I argued at the time to David Cameron that one of the lessons from Scotland was you can’t have a referendum campaign where statements of free unicorns get knocked down within six months. What we learned in Scotland was that it takes 18 months to dismantle arguments. “And because it was such a short [EU referendum] campaign, we never had the discussion about Northern Ireland. There’s a whole part of the UK about which the debate happened after the result was known, not before. That is a great sadness.” Of course, for Davidson to acknowledge something is a potential threat to the union also involved her potentially acknowledging that the SNP might have a case for independence after Brexit, and so, inevitably, she offers a bright side: “Brexit has absolutely knocked on the head the idea that you can have big constitutional change and it will be seamless. So in terms of dismissing legitimate concerns as ‘project fear’, which is what we saw prior to 2014, I think it will be much harder to do.” Is she angry with the Brexiters at what they have done to her party? She sighs theatrically – “How to answer this without getting myself into trouble?” – then explains in the most roundabout way she can muster how she respects the Eurosceptic view but profoundly disagrees with it. She adds, with an indirect swipe at Johnson: “I did have a particular issue sitting in a political cabinet one day where somebody who may have written two articles [for the Telegraph], one backing Brexit and one backing remain, decided to stand on his honour about why he should be the voice of the conscience of the room, when actually the rest of us had come to it from a place of genuine belief. I remember feeling angry that day.” Davidson’s loyalty to May is absolute and not untested, given the specific difficulties arising in a country where the majority voted to remain, that remains heavily dependent on migrant labour and is run by an SNP government ready to seize on every stumble to bolster the case for independence. May’s resilience is “astonishing”, she says; Salzberg was “a falling-out that had to happen to clear the air”; Chequers “will be the basis around which there will be a negotiated deal and I do believe there will be a deal. “I know that right now there are UK and Irish officials sitting down trying to work out some of the impasse on the Irish problem, which will then go to the EU,” she says, adding that she believes there is “a willingness to be more flexible than we’ve seen in public”. Given Davidson’s current exalted status, it is easy to forget that she was considered a wildcard when she was narrowly elected leader in 2011, months after being first elected to Holyrood. Through one prism, Davidson is the very model of a modern Tory, and yet she boasts a thoroughly traditional Conservative background: a committed Christian who served as a signaller in the Territorial Army and cares deeply for the values of family and home, speaking the language of self-reliance and social mobility that has always appealed to a section of blue-collar Scottish voters. But it is a credit to Davidson – and perhaps a shared credit to Scotland, a country where, as she points out, homosexuality was only decriminalised within her lifetime and 13 years after it was in England and Wales – that she has made this all so unremarkable. It has become quite normal to see Davidson, who will be the first serving UK party leader to give birth, around Holyrood with her burgeoning bump. She says she discussed talking publicly about her diagnosis with the Scottish mental health charity SAMH several years ago, “but my big fear has always been that it’s distorted”. She explains: “If I left this job and had never talked about it, I feel like I would have let myself down. I would have hidden a little bit. I don’t know if it’s because I spent a number of years in the closet before I came out, but I just know it would have helped me to have had someone talk about this, and 22 years ago people didn’t.” I am struck by this reference to her sexuality, and remind her of her previous reticence in discussing that, too. “I had to learn how to be gay in public,” she agrees, “I didn’t know how to do it and I didn’t have anyone to learn from.” In 2014, she told the Guardian about the responsibility she felt around being the first openly lesbian political leader at Holyrood, and likewise now the thread of public service runs through her replies about mental health. “If I’d had someone say [when I was ill]: ‘Look, it’s not a full stop, all of those dreams that you have for yourself, you can still do them.’ And also this idea that it’s binary: you have a mental health issue or you don’t, or you had one and now it’s fixed. It’s not like that. It’s about ongoing management, and you do a chaotic job that doesn’t have regular hours, that has periods of incredibly high pressure, and it is doable.” Could another explanation for her good cheer – Davidson laughs a lot – be the serendipitous exit from the political stage she is about to make, avoiding worsening Brexit dramas, to return in the spring with clean hands? “I did have it in my head that I’d quite like to be off for the World Cup … But realistically, the timing of this wasn’t really in my hands. I’ve been leader for seven years, I’ve fought six elections and two referenda in that time. I’ve got a period when there isn’t an election for a couple of years: I’m 39 years old and I’ve a family history of early menopause. There wasn’t really another time.” Yes She Can: Why Women Own the Future by Ruth Davidson is out now, published by Hodder & Stoughton Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here
and listen https://flex.acast.com/audio.guim.co.uk/2018/09/26-51111-gdn.pol.180926.podcast.mp3