I’m aware of the consequences for women who go off-script. When I published a book earlier this year – six personal essays about all the things we’re not meant to say – I was fearful of the public response, afraid of being labelled disruptive. And I have been – but mostly in a good way. Every day I get emails from readers thanking me for talking about alcoholism, infertility and sexual violence. One of the few negative reactions came from a radio journalist, who questioned how –not why – I’d chosen to write about having been raped when I was 15. Why hadn’t I put the description of the rape at the beginning of the book, he asked, to “hit people between the eyes”? I was taken aback by his question, and after the interview I found I couldn’t let it go. Why had he asked me that? And why had he asked me live on air? His question suggested that the only reason I could possibly have to describe being raped was so I could use it as a weapon. All the emotions I had – fury, sadness, regret and fear – were reduced to one: anger. It’s as if there’s a new script: the angry woman script. And I’m not sure that I like this one, either. When I was 11, I read Little Women by Louisa May Alcott. Like every girl who wants to be a writer, I idolised Jo. Rereading it recently, I re-encountered so many things I’d loved, from Jo’s exuberant character to her ability to make an independent living from writing. But I stumbled when I came to these words from Marmee: “I am angry nearly every day of my life, Jo; but I have learned not to show it … I’ve learned to check the hasty words that rise to my lips; and when I feel that they mean to break out against my will, I just go away a minute, and give myself a little shake for being so weak and wicked.” Marmee’s advice to Jo is: repress your anger, because the cause is not the problem – it’s you. When I was asked by that interviewer to justify how I had written about being raped, I was not angry. I so wanted to be likable that I only said it was “my life and my story” and left it at that. Did I check myself because as a child I had internalised Marmee’s advice? Should I have reacted with fury? As we find ourselves in the age of #MeToo, when women’s anger – so long seen as a problem – has been rebranded as a solution, do all women have a duty to be a little bit angry, all the time? This moment seems to demand our individual and collective fury – as Rebecca Traister puts it, “the anger window is open”. Yet it’s complicated, this anger. I find myself dwelling on it, reflecting on its sudden scale, wondering how long the window will be open, whether there’s a right kind of anger, or a right way to express it. And I wonder, too, how I can write and speak into this window without throwing myself out of it. Where once women’s emotional labour was invested in suppressing anger, now we work to display our pain for a public gaze Perhaps I need a more up-to-date literary model than the dutiful Jo, who tries to please her mother by quietening her temper. So I looked to my bookshelves to consider how anger pays off for women in 21st-century novels. So often, they feature women who get angry – strong and inspiring, exasperating and joyfully disobedient women. But these women also get punished for their anger. From Nora in Claire Messud’s The Woman Upstairs, whose first lines seem to promise a brilliant explosion of anger (“How angry am I? You don’t want to know”), but who foments only her own pain; to Lila in Elena Ferrante’s Neapolitan novels, repeatedly punished for her passionate self-direction by poverty, violence and the loss of a child – it seems the trajectory of anger brings only negative consequences. This is a paradox that I struggle to reconcile – that the fictional characters we love because they dare to say or do the things we won’t are also made to bear the harshest penalties. The forms of anger may vary – from the global feminist uprising in Naomi Alderman’s The Power to the quiet, private fury of Elizabeth Strout’s Olive Kitteridge – but punishment remains consistent. Though these are electrifying characters to read, the dividends of their words and actions are, at best, alienation and loneliness. At worst, it is rape and death. Even when a narrative is reimagined for the social media generation – as in Kamila Shamsie’s reworking of the Antigone myth in Home Fire – the heroine still dies at the end. I wonder why female characters still seem fated to plot lines that compel their punishment and death. Have we really not moved on from Antigone, or Hedda Gabler, or The Awakening? My disappointment that the subversive power of women’s anger does not result in utopian finales is not because I hold women writers to an unreasonable or impossible standard. My dismay is that their diagnoses seem so cuttingly accurate. For it’s not only on the page that women are punished for their anger – these novels are mirrors to the trolling and abuse we see in life and online every day. Does society have to transform before these plots do? Do novels lead change, or only reflect it in hindsight? Rage is beginning to feel like a permanent state of being. The cultural turn towards listening to women’s anger is, obviously, a good thing. But there are times when it feels as if being vocally angry has become a requirement, rather than an option. Where once women’s emotional labour was invested in suppressing anger, now we work to display our pain for a public gaze that is often unsympathetic. Think of all the hashtags: #MeToo, #TimesUp, #WhyIStayed or #WhyIDidn’tReport. A lot is being asked of women – not only that they identify and labour to fix the problems of gender inequality, but also that they absorb the emotional and social consequences of protest. Protest is necessary. But it is also exhausting. I thought about all these questions as I watched Hannah Gadsby’s standup show Nanette, a call to action to angry women. Gadsby reveals the damage done by the self-deprecating scripts gay women are forced into by our homophobic culture. She demands that the narrative changes – both her own, and ours – to accommodate her fury. But then, in the show’s final moments, Gadsby declares that she is wary of anger. Anger, she says, is a way to unite people, but ultimately it only serves to spread “blind hate”. It’s a double bind. We need anger to call out inequality and violence, we need anger to provoke a reaction, and we need anger to drive us towards change. But anger will scar and consume us. It’s a salutary warning. Gadsby’s invocation to tell our stories, but to resist anger, is worlds away from Marmee’s advice to Jo. No longer are women expected to shake themselves; instead, we are being asked to shake the world. But giving permission to women to be angry does not mean that we have divested ourselves entirely of 19th-century attitudes to women and power. When I am told that I am “brave” for writing about all the things I shouldn’t say, I want to say: “I’m not brave – I’m angry.” Too often, though, I say nothing – because I know the risks of being labelled angry, and because, like Gadsby, and perhaps a little like Marmee too, I am distrustful of the restless energies of anger. And I am distrustful, too, of the way that a woman expressing a strong opinion, or being honest about painful experiences, is now identified only with anger, rather than any other emotional or intellectual capacity. And so, while I relish reading angry women on the page and am grateful for those angry women leading campaigns against inequality and violence, most of all I hope for something else. I hope that this moment is about much more than anger. I hope that we can create a permanent space for women to be more than just one thing at a time. We have so many stories to tell. Let’s go off the script entirely. • Notes to Self: Essays by Emilie Pine is published by Tramp Press. Pine is an associate professor at University College Dublin.