Three years after going bankrupt Parma returned to winning ways in Serie A with a shock 1-0 win over Internazionale at San Siro thanks to a spectacular strike from Federico Dimarco, who is on loan from the Milan club. The full-back had already appeared to handle the ball off the line and 11 minutes from time he hit a stunning 30-yard shot into the top corner, celebrating wildly. Inter open their Champions League campaign against Tottenham at San Siro on Tuesday. Elsewhere in Italy a well-taken late goal from Lorenzo Insigne secured a 1-0 win for Napoli against Fiorentina and Sampdoria cruised to a 5-0 win at Frosinone. In Spain, Real Madrid were held to a 1-1 draw at Athletic Bilbao. Iker Muniain put the hosts ahead after half an hour, tapping home to finish a well-worked move, before Isco nodded home a looping Gareth Bale cross to equalise midway through the second half. The Basques were later denied a penalty when the ball struck Casemiro on the arm while the Brazilian was on the floor. The decision enraged their supporters in a hostile atmosphere at San Mamés, which was mirrored on the pitch as the referee handed out eight yellow cards, six to Athletic players. Second-half goals from Luis Suárez and Ousmane Dembélé earned Barcelona a 2-1 win at Real Sociedad. Aritz Elustondo opened the scoring with a powerful left-foot strike before Suárez equalised in the 63rd minute, a corner falling kindly for him to tap in. Three minutes later, from another poorly defended corner, Dembélé fired in his third league goal of the season. “I think you have to see a game like this to see how tough La Liga is,” said Suarez. “Last year we also came from behind to win here and eight or nine years ago we wouldn’t win any games here. It’s a huge win for our confidence.” Atlético Madrid salvaged a 1-1 draw at home to Eibar, the 19-year-old debutant Borja Garcés scoring with the final kick of the match after Sergi Enrich had scrambled home in the 87th minute. In Germany, Corentin Tolisso scored and was then injured in Bayern Munich’s 3-1 win against Bayer Leverkusen. He equalised after Wendell had put the visitors ahead with a retaken penalty before Bayern sealed the win goals from Arjen Robben and James Rodríguez Hertha Berlin were denied a win as Ondrej Duda’s injury-time free-kick was answered by Wolfsburg’s Admir Mehmedi in a 2-2 draw. RB Leipzig defeated Hannover 3-2, Mainz beat Augsburg 2-1 and Fortuna Düsseldorf claimed their first win since promotion with a 2-1 win over Hoffenheim, for whom the Arsenal loanee Reiss Nelson scored on his Bundesliga debut.