We will come to the rights and wrongs shortly but imagine for a moment you are a rugby player in a packed defensive line. The opposition are moving the ball at pace towards your side of the field and you have to make a split-second judgment. Is the ball destined to reach the individual you are marking or will it disappear out the back to someone else? You are a forward, paid to tackle hard for a living. Missing is unthinkable. You wait … and then launch yourself. Uh, oh. The ball has gone and your target’s head has slightly dipped. Damn it. Too late now. Thoughts of a similar nature will have flashed through Will Spencer’s mind in Coventry on Sunday shortly before his shoulder caught the head and neck of Wasps’ Tommy Taylor and prompted a red card that has split opinion. On one side are old pros who saw it as an occupational hazard, part of rugby, one of those unfortunate things. On the other are lawmakers and concussion experts, for whom even a glancing blow to the head is cause for concern. Rugby’s increasingly worrying problem is that both camps are entirely correct. Take the reaction of Bath’s Freddie Burns who, admittedly, used to play for Leicester and, as such, is not an entirely neutral bystander. “Not blaming the referees and I know it’s being done to protect us players but can we go back to red cards being issued only for deliberate acts of bad foul play/ violence, not unfortunate incidents that happen as a result of playing a contact sport?” tweeted the fly-half. “It’s ruining the game.” His former Leicester teammate and now acting head coach, Geordan Murphy, went on TV to make the same point. “I think the game’s gone a little bit too PC,” he said. “That for me is crazy. It’s rugby.” Anyone who knows Burns and Murphy even slightly will testify the pair absolutely love the game and, tactically speaking, are sharper than most. Both are (or were in Murphy’s case) precisely the kind of skilful players who should theoretically be supporting moves to make the giant-strewn game safer and more fun for the little guy. Neither is an Old Testament type, contrary to some of the insults floating on the Sargasso Sea of social media. They are simply speaking from the heart, which is not yet a crime. So let us give Murphy, in particular, some respite, cease the endless replays of Spencer’s tackle and consider the really important issue: where does rugby go from here? By the letter of the law – not always a sexy phrase but there we go – the big man had to see red. Match officials now have a checklist of items – high tackle, direct to the head, active shoulder, accelerating tackler – which increase the possible risk of concussion. Spencer’s misjudgment ticked all those boxes, which is why the advice to the referee, Ian Tempest, was to reach for red not yellow. Absolutely no one, though, has accused Spencer of deliberate foul play. We have entered an awkward new world – not so new, actually, as the tighter strictures have been in place for over 18 months but not everyone seems to have noticed – in which it is enough to hit someone accidentally a centimetre high and incur the same on-day punishment as deliberately punching someone’s lights out. And what are you supposed to do as a 6ft 7in forward if a smaller player ducks into your intended legal tackle? Stand aside and wave him through? Rugby has got itself in a muddle. In any top-level game you are liable to see any number of dangerous ruck clearances and so-called crocodile rolls go unpenalised; often they cause far more serious knee or ligament injuries. The stooping “jackal” at the breakdown, with his neck and back exposed, is a nasty accident waiting to happen, particularly at schoolboy level. It is not merely the head that needs protecting. A return to old-school rucking – boots on bodies used to have a miraculous effect on players’ appetites for killing the ball on the floor – is not going to happen, which leaves one realistic solution: changing behaviour. The time has come for referees to be issued with a black card for use at their discretion in the event of non-intentional, dangerous or reckless blows to the head or when an aerial challenge is mistimed. The player would still leave the field for the rest of the game but a substitute would be permitted. Serious foul play or abusing the referee would continue to merit a red but more margin for error would exist for all. Something has to change to heal modern rugby’s increasingly split personality. South Africa’s exciting 36-34 win over New Zealand has caused inevitable ripples in Europe, with both nations due to visit Twickenham in November’s internationals. This week Eddie Jones will name his latest training squad. Based on the early rounds of the Premiership season here are half a dozen outsiders worthy of consideration: Matt Kvesic (Exeter) Jones has yet to pick Kvesic for any of his squads but if England want to beat the All Blacks they will need to compete hard in and around the breakdown. The 26-year-old is vying with Sam Underhill and Tom Curry but, along with Gloucester’s Italian-qualified Jake Polledri, has been an influential back-row presence for the leaders. Val Rapava Ruskin (Gloucester) England’s first Tbilisi-born player? He will have to get past Mako Vunipola, Joe Marler and Alec Hepburn but, with Ellis Genge injured, the 25-year-old is an increasing force to be reckoned with. Michael Rhodes (Saracens) The hard-tackling 30-year-old is now qualified for England on residential grounds and fit again following four operations to reconstruct his collarbone. A good bet for inclusion. Zach Mercer (Bath) Already one of Jones’s apprentices but now starting to deliver on his considerable athletic promise. Should anything happen to Billy Vunipola or Nathan Hughes, Jones will need another No 8 capable of making good metres. Joe Cokanasiga (Bath) England have a clutch of good wingers, with Jack Nowell fit again and hungry for re-inclusion. It is probably too soon for the 20-year-old but his strength, power and pace will have caught Jones’s eye. Billy Twelvetrees (Gloucester) Not a rookie but England have yet to nail down their best midfield. If Danny Cipriani is going to play a significant role, and Manu Tuilagi and Ben Te’o are not quite fully fit, there is a case for having a fresh look at the in-form Twelvetrees at 12. By offering 28 full-time contracts to England’s best female XVs players, the Rugby Football Union is indicating it sees a viable future for professional women’s rugby. For the women’s game to progress it is the logical next step, particularly as New Zealand have already started offering pro Black Ferns contracts. The only caveat is that the new structure has to be given proper time to develop; pulling the plug after a couple of years on short-term cost grounds would be disastrous.