Donald Trump has made a personal rapprochement to Hassan Rouhani, saying he was sure that the Iranian president was an “absolutely lovely man”. In a move that has become a hallmark of the Trump presidency, the US president sought to make waves with an early morning tweet. A few minutes before 7am on the first day of a UN general assembly summit, Trump claimed to have been asked to meet Rouhani, but politely declined. “Despite requests, I have no plans to meet Iranian president Hassan Rouhani. Maybe someday in the future. I am sure he is an absolutely lovely man!” Trump wrote, in stark contrast to unceasingly hostile rhetoric directed towards the Iranian leadership up to now by the president and his administration. The Iranian mission to the UN quickly issued a statement insisting: “Iran has not requested a meeting.” Shortly before he was due to address the UN general assembly, Trump said: “I’m not meeting with them until they change their tune. It will happen. I believe they have no choice. We look forward to having a great relationship with Iran, but it won’t happen now.” Foreign policy analysts suggested that the purpose of the tweet was to send the message that Trump was seeking a personal rapprochement with Rouhani, along the lines with his diplomacy with North Korea’s Kim Jong-un. “Trump used to occasionally sneak some less aggressive personal rhetoric toward Kim in: saying in 2017 that he would “be honored” to meet. I think this is the first such example with the Iranians,” Jarrett Blanc, a former senior state department official involved in Iran policy, now a senior fellow at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. Randa Slim, director of conflict resolution at the Middle East Institute, said: “For Trump, negotiations are about personal relations and personal deals. He also believes that by the sheer force of his personality he could convince anyone to negotiate with him. Ideological considerations do not affect his negotiation calculus. “As he did with the North Korean leader, he has been trying to establish a personal rapport with President Rouhani,” Slim added. “What Trump fails to understand is that in the case of Iran, Rouhani is not the decision maker about whether or not to negotiate with the US. [Supreme Leader Ali] Khamenei is.” In May, Trump abrogated the 2015 multilateral nuclear deal with Iran, known as the Joint Comprehensive Programme of Action (JCPOA), defying European allies, Russia and China, the agreement’s co-signatories. The issue has become one of the sharpest rifts in transatlantic relations. In the course of discussions with Washington, many European diplomats became convinced that Trump was so determined to kill off the JCPOA because it was the main foreign policy legacy of his predecessor, Barack Obama. “If we called it the Trump Comprehensive Programme of Action, we wouldn’t be having these problems,” one diplomat remarked sourly.