The playwright Stephen Jeffreys, who has died aged 68 of a brain tumour, was a key figure at the Royal Court theatre in London, where he was a literary associate for 10 years, then a member of its council. His best known play, The Libertine (1994), about the decadent Restoration poet John Wilmot, Earl of Rochester, was produced and directed on the Sloane Square stage by Max Stafford-Clark for the Out of Joint touring company in tandem with George Etherege’s The Man of Mode, whose leading character, Dorimant, was based on Rochester. John Malkovich played Rochester in the US with his Chicago-based company Steppenwolf and eventually produced the film in 2004. By then he was too old to repeat his stage performance (Rochester died young) so he played a silently malicious King Charles II instead, while Johnny Depp turned in one of his most mesmerising performances as the debauched poet. A short documentary, Capturing the Libertine (2006), recounted the story of translating the play to the screen, a process fraught with financial and logistical difficulties; finally, the much delayed movie was shot on the Isle of Man because Depp was making another film there at the time. In contrast to this saga, Jeffreys operated quietly and efficiently in the theatre for 40 years, producing a stream of well-reviewed work until he hit the buffers with his screenplay for the biopic of the people’s princess, Diana (2013), which, despite a luminous performance from Naomi Watts, was poorly received by critics. This was an unlucky setback for a man who had achieved so much. Jeffreys’ early comedy, Valued Friends (1989), starring Jane Horrocks, Tim McInnerny and Martin Clunes, about flat sharers blindsided by a property dealer, and his brilliant reclamation of the forgotten Richard Brome’s A Jovial Crew for Stafford-Clark at the Royal Shakespeare Company in 1992, a 17th-century Jonsonian comedy on the vogue for vagrancy, were sharp and pertinent studies of a nation on the streets, in transit. He inspired others, too, and was renowned as both teacher and facilitator. His Royal Court colleague, the director Stephen Daldry, said: “What he doesn’t know about playwriting isn’t worth knowing.” When the Guardian’s Michael Billington took issue with Jeffreys, as a white British playwright, for questioning the authenticity of white men singing the blues and misunderstanding black soul music in his Royal Court play I Just Stopped By to See the Man (2000), he paid the critic the considerable compliment of a powerful, well-reasoned riposte in these pages. Jeffreys was a man of great charm and considerable height, with a mass of old rocker-style curly hair and a ready, toothy smile. He was born in London and educated at Rokesly primary school in Crouch End and the Stationers’ grammar school in Hornsey. He decided to be a writer at the age of 12, rather than succeed his father at the head of the family firm, the Jeffreys billiard table company, although he worked there for a short time after graduating with an English literature degree from Southampton University in 1972. He abandoned his master’s to start teaching in Upton House comprehensive school in London. His Royal Court connection began when he worked there briefly as an assistant electrician in 1975. While teaching at the Cumbria College of Art and Design, his first produced play, Like Dolls or Angels (1977), about a female stunt artist and her dodgy manager, won an award at the National Student Drama festival and opened at the King’s Head in London, starring Prunella Gee and Rupert Frazer. Jeffreys helped set up (with the Scottish actors Gerry Mulgrew and Alison Peebles), and wrote for, the Pocket Theatre of Cumbria before serving as resident writer with the Brewery Arts Centre (1978-80) in the Lake District and the “new writing” touring company Paines Plough (1987-89). He established his credentials as a dab hand at “period” contemporary satire with The Clink (1990), an Elizabethan low-life romp with sidelights on Thatcher’s Britain. Now established at the Court of Daldry and Stafford-Clark, he made a proper balls-up, you might say, of his family business in A Going Concern (1993) at Hampstead theatre: the wrangles between three generations of green baize bozos cued an argument over expanding into the American pool table market. Here, no less than in Alan Ayckbourn’s masterpiece, A Small Family Business, was a dramatic metaphor of a nation’s industrial and social evolution: a double-edged comedy of progress and decline. Nothing topped The Libertine but, in consort with the Royal Court’s international director, Elyse Dodgson, Jeffreys was busy writing, editing and running workshops in Uganda, Palestine and Cuba and he also worked with his wife, the director Annabel Arden, co-founder of Complicite with Simon McBurney, on a trilogy of plays that were premiered in California and Sydney in 2001 and 2007. Stafford-Clark directed his re-working of John Gay’s The Beggar’s Opera as The Convicts’ Opera for the Sydney Theatre Company in 2008 – Gay’s collection of folk songs was expanded to include Rod Stewart’s Sailing, Gene Raskin’s Those Were the Days, My Friend, and Carly Simon’s You’re So Vain. Perhaps his most accomplished achievement as writer/adaptor – and Jeffreys often cited Shakespeare as the great non-originator of plots – was Backbeat (2011) at the Duke of York’s, one of the best ever rock and roll shows in the West End, which told the story of how the Quarrymen became the Beatles in the low dives of Hamburg at the start of the 1960s. It was based on Ian Softley’s 1994 movie and threw a spotlight on the tortuous demise of John Lennon’s art college pal Stuart Sutcliffe and the replacement of Pete Best with Ringo Starr; it ended with the only Beatles song in the show, Love Me Do. With others, including Amit Gupta, Abi Morgan, David Edgar and David Greig, he contributed to the Tricycle theatre’s The Great Game: Afghanistan in 2010, a cycle of short plays about that troubled and disputed territory directed by Nicolas Kent and Indhu Rubasingham; Jeffreys’ Bugles At the Gates of Jalalabad was a delightful curtain-raiser featuring a high-society Victorian diarist played by Jemma Redgrave. His well-turned and erudite translation of The Magic Flute for the ENO, directed by McBurney, has been performed all over Europe. In 2016 he made a carefully considered overhaul – cutting 20% of the original text – of Ben Jonson’s The Alchemist for the RSC and his reputation was enhanced in the same year by a revival of The Libertine, starring Dominic Cooper, at the Haymarket. Jeffreys married Arden in 1999. She and their two sons, Ralph and Jack, survive him. • Stephen Jeffreys, playwright, born 22 April 1950; died 17 September 2018