A stash of 180 letters from Hunter S Thompson to a childhood friend, recording how a struggling writer unable to pay his bills became the gonzo journalist who would declare that “I am not going to be either the Fitzgerald or the Hemingway of this generation … I am going to be the Thompson of this generation”, is to be sold at auction. Spanning hundreds of pages, the letters were written to Thompson’s friend Paul Semonin, beginning in February 1955 when Thompson was 17 and ending in 1974. The letters are set to be sold by Nate D Sanders Auctions in Los Angeles on 27 September, with bidding set to open at $110,000 (£84,000). The letters cover the period when Thompson was writing his novel The Rum Diary – which he describes in one letter to Semonin as “a beastly thing, full of hell and humping and slander”. They also detail what Thompson endured while writing his first book, Hell’s Angels, about the motorcycle gang: from the pressure he felt after the initial commission (“the awful shadow of the book – not even begun as yet – hangs on me like a pending shitrain”) to the beating he received after criticising one gang member for physically abusing his wife. “Just coming back from a six-day flip on the bike – booze, drugs, no mufflers, burglary, the works … trying to stay alive … I think maybe I am about to be snuffed,” he writes. And then shortly afterwards: “Pills, 24 hr-writing, no sleep, packing, fear, etc … Am badly beaten here – the Angels turned on me.” Thompson would publish Hell’s Angels in 1967. In June 1965, he tells Semonin of the contract he has just signed to write it – “$6,000 guarantee against royalties for a paperback on Cycle gangs … Incredible. I’ve been drunk for two weeks.” By July, he is steaming ahead, telling Semonin: “I warn you that you are going to find me a much tougher and shittier person than the one you left in Louisville 2 years ago … It has finally come home to me that I am not going to be either the Fitzgerald or the Hemingway of this generation … I am going to be the Thompson of this generation, and that makes me more nervous than anything else I can think of.” In earlier letters, he frequently records his inability to pay his bills – how he “stave[s] off the dogs” of eviction. “I fester … Queers have taken me in … I am destitute,” he wrote to Semonin in November 1960. Later, he would describe his declining mental state while working as a caretaker at a hot spring in Big Sur, including a supposed rampage. “This is the 13th consecutive day of jabbering whiskeythink … I sense another orgy of destruction, the second in 10 days,” he wrote in March 1961. “Last Friday I beat down a door with the riding crop and hurled several bed-size benches down the cliff to the sea, drove a horde of queers from the baths, denounced all the sick fuckers in Big Sur, and generally fouled my image in this area. The smell of eviction is in the air … I seriously feel my sanity slipping.” In May 1962, he would leave for South America as a reporter, writing to his friend from Ecuador that July that “it is late as hell and I am in a shitty town, writing on pills … I am so starved for a sane soul to punch at that I would sit up all night on nails if I thought it would mean a contact … the massive lonliness [sic] is my only real bitch.” Only 25 of the letters have previously been published, in the collection The Proud Highway. The lot of 182 documents also includes a telegram from Thompson to the author Tom Wolfe, and a letter to an unnamed friend. Nate D Sanders called the collection “rare” and “highly personal”, with “nearly every sentence” featuring Thompson’s gonzo style. The auction house identifies how, by April 1966, “shades of Fear and Loathing are starting to emerge”, with Thompson writing of “a 2-week battle of wills, desperation and LSD”. The author would not publish Fear and Loathing in Las Vegas until 1971, but he uses the phrase to Semonin in a letter from the 1968 Democratic convention in Chicago, in which he writes of an attack on protesters by Chicago police and the national guard in Grant Park. “I came & watched it happen – & it’s true. Are you ready for the crunch? A redistribution of the cattle-prods. Fear & loathing. Beware,” he says.