It’s fair to say a striking disparity exists between Pale Waves’ appearance and the way they sound. Singer Heather Baron-Gracie and drummer Ciara Doran look like goths. Not a bit goth, as in a liking for black clothes, not goth in the tasteful latterday fashion-magazine sense, but goth as in Whitby-weekender, pint-of-snakebite-and-black-please, off-to-a-club-called-Cobwebz-to-wave-your-arms-around-to-Bela-Lugosi’s-Dead goth: a riot of black lipstick, white foundation and fishnet. You might reasonably expect their music to reflect that, but no. There is, very occasionally, the vaguest hint of the Cure about Pale Waves’ guitar sound: that’s the Cure of Just Like Heaven and Friday I’m in Love, rather than Faith and Pornography. Keen students of early 90s sturm-und-drang might note a curious similarity between Baron-Gracie’s vocals and those of the late Cranberries singer Dolores O’Riordan. She has a penchant for expressing emotion by punctuating the lines with little gasping swoops in pitch, like a toned-down version of O’Riordan’s yodelling on the chorus of Zombie. But what Pale Waves really sound like is Taylor Swift in 80s retro mode: expansive synths, chugging John-Hughes-movie-soundtrack guitars, unabashedly pop songwriting. It’s a peculiar combination, but you can see why the Manchester quartet figured highly in a lot of “tips for 2018” lists, and not just because they boast the patronage of the 1975’s Matty Healy, who’s co-produced their singles and appeared on magazine covers with Baron-Gracie. In an era when most alt-rock bands most closely resemble student teachers, Doran and Baron-Gracie are striking and fabulous. Furthermore, theirs is a look that fans can copy with ease: it’s no stretch to imagine the front rows of their gigs filling up with clones. The lyrics on their debut album, meanwhile, are nothing if not relatable – to a certain audience. They deal in a very teenage brand of angst, where no one seems to understand – they literally say “no one seems to understand” at one point – and the vicissitudes of romance, no matter how minor, are larded with earth-shattering significance. Here is a world in which the news that someone’s changed their haircut can provoke a bout of existential agony, and where a certain kind of self-conscious performative brooding is evidence of great profundity, rather than evidence that the person doing the self-conscious performative brooding might be an insufferable twerp. On Came in Close, we encounter a character who may have been theatrically ignoring everyone else at the party in order to sit in the corner pretending to read Sartre’s Nausea: “I knew from the very first time I saw you, you liked crying in your room for something to do.” This sounds like as good a reason as any to give them a wide berth, but nope, it would appear their luck’s in: “Your hands on my body, tell me what we just started.” If you’re not the target market – ie you’re not writing something similar every night in a diary with a photo of a dreamy goth stuck to the front – then this approach yields mixed results. Sometimes it’s touching and carries a tang of authenticity: “Are you getting off with someone else?” bellows She, inconsolably, while there’s something shudder-inducingly recognisable about the depiction of blowing-hot-and-cold romantic indecision on When Did I Lose it All. Occasionally, it just seems a bit much, the outpourings of someone for whom the melodramatics of emo aren’t a passing phase, but an ongoing lifestyle: “I’m 23, I still feel the same,” concedes Drive. Either way, if its lyrical excesses are easy to mock, it’s worth noting that such excesses often create ride-or-die fans. In fact, the real problem with My Mind Makes Noises isn’t lyrical, but musical. Not the first ostensibly “alternative” band more interested in inhabiting the Top 40 than in old-fashioned notions of indie credibility, Pale Waves don’t yet have the facility to craft a knockout pop song to take on the Swedish songwriting factories. There are nice melodic touches here and there, the choruses of Television Romance and There’s a Honey are pretty strong, but there’s nothing here as robust and undeniable as, say, Paramore’s Hard Times or the 1975’s The Sound. Furthermore, the other thing Pale Waves don’t have yet is enough solid material to support an album that lasts the best part of an hour. As a band, their idiosyncrasies are currently all visual, rather than musical: after a while, the songs start to blur into each other, Baron-Gracie’s vocal affectations become grating, and the sense that Pale Waves might be writing to a formula becomes difficult to shake. You’re left with an album with ambitions bigger than its abilities. You wouldn’t bet against it garnering an audience of teenage disciples for whom its lyrics chime and Baron-Gracie’s image is a novelty, but the kind of world domination Pale Waves clearly crave seems out of their reach. Daniel Avery – Visible Gravity 48 minutes of beautiful, slowly-unfolding ambience that works as well as a focal point as it does a background mood-enhancer.