Born in West Yorkshire, Jodie Whittaker, 36, graduated from the Guildhall School of Music and Drama in 2005. The same year, she made her professional stage debut at Shakespeare’s Globe in The Storm; in 2006 she earned best newcomer nominations for her performance in the film Venus. She appeared in the critically acclaimed ITV drama Broadchurch and is the first female Doctor, in the new series of Doctor Who, starting on 7 October. She is married with a daughter and lives in London. What is your earliest memory?I fell into a pool in Benidorm when I was about three, and in the panic I was convinced a mysterious giant got me out: it was my father. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Crippling paranoia. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Passive aggressiveness. If you’re annoyed, be annoyed – don’t just save it up. What was your most embarrassing moment?My brother read out my diary on the school bus when I was 14. He’s two years older than me, and it was about a boy I fancied who was on the bus. If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose?My nephew, Harry Whittaker. What is your most treasured possession?Two sets of his pyjamas. Who would play you in the film of your life?Depending on the budget, either Kerry Katona or Emily Mortimer. What is your favourite smell?Wine. What is your guiltiest pleasure?Drinking wine every day. I have half a bottle a day. There’s a lot of pleasure in it and a lot of guilt, so it ticks both boxes. What do you most dislike about your appearance?I’ve got a confused frown line between my eyes. It’s so deep, it’s like a bum. I wouldn’t change it for the world, but do I like it? No. What does love feel like?A tumble dryer. What was the best kiss of your life?On a balcony in Hackney on a New Year’s Eve in the 2000s. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party?Heston Blumenthal to cook, Will Champion (the drummer in Coldplay: I love Coldplay), my five lifers (best friends), Michelle Obama and Beyoncé. Which words or phrases do you most overuse?“I’m really sorry, it’s taken me ages to get back to you.” What is the worst job you’ve done?Working in a soap factory in Huddersfield. I was in my late teens, so I was basically hungover every day. If you could edit your past, what would you change?Getting my tongue pierced aged 15, when I had train-track braces on both my top and bottom teeth. Huge error. How often do you have sex?Whenever I want. What do you consider your greatest achievement?My friendships. Tell us a secretI used to have the best-kept secret, which was that I’m the 13th Doctor. I know what happens at the end of season one.