As band origin stories go, it’s hard to beat the one Crime singer Johnny Strike made up for his band: “A curious, black, oblong object, the size of a 1959 Buick Special, was dug up outside of Rome on 6 June 1975. By ship it was transported to Oakland and then by truck to a laboratory in the Berkeley hills. Since it could not be penetrated by X-rays, it was set upon with a jeweller’s drill. But suddenly the huge egg vibrated and then cracked open. The air was filled with a foul stench. There was wild screeching from each of the emerging creatures’ obscene, gaping mouths. They all had eight arms too, and razor claws and electric guitars.” Strike – born Gary John Bassett – died earlier this week, aged 70, a forever peripheral figure in the history of punk, but also among its most fascinating. Crime were one of the earliest punk bands to form in the United States, one of the earliest to release music (certainly the first on the west coast), one of the most brutally original. But because they were based in San Francisco – thousands of miles from the signing frenzy of New York – their imprint was faint, and they became a footnote, rather than the bold opening paragraph they deserved to be. Their first single, 1976’s Hot Wire My Heart, still sounds – depending on your point of view – like something unearthly, or an awful mess. The band are barely in control, sometimes sounding as if they are playing different songs, somehow all just about making it to the same place for the chorus. It’s punk rock not as a faster, louder version of Chuck Berry riffs, but as rock music dissected, then sewn back together with its innards hanging out. We're antagonists. We're the ones that keep everybody awake. We stick pins in people Despite having been the first San Francisco punk band, and having helped establish the city’s nascent punk scene around the Mabuhay Gardens club (later depicted in Jennifer Egan’s Pulitzer-winning novel A Visit From the Goon Squad), Crime remained outsiders. Naturally, a band who dressed in police uniforms and pronounced themselves “crime wave rockers with the deadly sound” were not highly regarded by pop radio; but they became outcasts from the city’s punk scene, too, after refusing to play a benefit for striking miners, describing the beneficiaries as “just assholes who drive around in Cadillacs”. As Strike told an interviewer for New York Rocker: “We’re antagonists. We’re the ones that keep everybody awake. We stick pins in people.” But they had magic, too. You can see that most clearly in the brief snippets of footage that still exist, especially the single clip of their show in the exercise yard at San Quentin prison on Labor Day, 1978. The band look fantastic, and they sound magnificently shambolic; there’s the crazily surreal fact of their playing in broad daylight, dressed as police officers, in front of inmates. Oh, and the song? It’s called Piss On Your Dog. Crime only released three singles in their lifetime – Hot Wire My Heart, Murder by Guitar, and Gangster Funk – with their assorted recordings compiled and recompiled (as San Francisco’s Doomed, San Francisco’s Still Doomed, and Murder By Guitar), though there were various reunions down the years. But Strike’s post-musical life displayed a man who was far from the reductive caricature of the punk rocker one might have suspected. He was a devotee of Burroughs and the Beats, and became a writer and novelist. He travelled to Tangier to meet Paul Bowles, and interviewed some of his other literary heroes. But he always remained Johnny Strike, from Crime, periodically tracked down by interviewers who wanted to know what it had really been like to be the only punks in San Francisco in 1976.