David Millar’s candidacy for president of the professional riders’ union, the CPA, may have the support of Geraint Thomas and Chris Froome but his suitability to lead the professional peloton has been questioned by his former teammate, Lance Armstrong. “Millar is probably the last person that would come to mind for this role,” Armstrong told the Guardian of the CPA presidency election on Thursday. The American’s scepticism follows a whispering campaign against the Scot’s past character and his efforts to oust the long-standing CPA president, Gianni Bugno. Armstrong, who recently visited the 1997 Tour champion Jan Ullrich as he underwent rehab for alcohol and drug addiction in Germany, has long described the peloton as downtrodden and lacking a voice, but was equally dismissive of Millar’s agenda for change and of the riders’ union itself. “I wouldn’t even call it change because there’s nothing really there to even consider changing,” the American said. “I’d propose creating a real union for the riders, not the window dressing that is the CPA.” Millar, however, believes that the power of the peloton to achieve change is real. “I wouldn’t be interested in doing this if I didn’t think it had potential, and the potential now is bigger because of the lack of unification within the sport,” he said. “The one common denominator is the peloton.” Millar and Armstrong were briefly teammates at Cofidis in the late 1990s. Since then the American has been stripped of all seven Tour de France wins for doping offences while Millar, now a writer, broadcaster and clothing designer, served a two-year ban for doping between 2004 and 2006. Millar accepts that pointing out his history is an easy card for critics to play and it has been readily dealt against him during his campaign. “My history isn’t the point, though,” he said. “This election isn’t about the past.” Although his campaign focuses around greater advocacy, job security and wealth sharing within the professional peloton, he acknowledges that his own experiences of doping and recovery from depression and humiliation have influenced his candidacy. “The CPA has never confronted the fact that the mental-health track record for cycling is horrific,” Millar said. “The Ullrich case was one of my motivations. Nobody in cycling does very much about it, or recognises it for what it is, or calls it what it is. It was as if people were, ‘Oh well, there goes another one from the 1990s.’ I felt that was just bullshit. It was a tipping point for me. “I had an awakening to the duty of care aspect when I was invited to a Rugby Players’ Association (RPA) dinner last year. The RPA has two really strong messages – if an athlete is injured it helps support them. Post-career, it also acknowledges that retired athletes can suffer depression.” Armstrong shares Millar’s view that psychiatric care of humiliated or disgraced riders – such as Ullrich, the 1998 Giro d’Italia and Tour de France winner, Marco Pantani, who died in 2004, the Belgian prodigy Frank Vandenbroucke, who suffered addiction problems and died in 2009 and Spain’s José María Jiménez, who battled with depression and died in a clinic in 2003 – has been chronically poor. “Those riders were all ‘disgraced’ by their countries and the press, while their countrymen, who weren’t nearly as legendary as them, were given complete passes,” Armstrong said. “This can feel really hypocritical and unfair. Throw in some guys who don’t have the mental strength to manage it all and it’s a recipe for disaster.” But Armstrong denies the suggestion that there is a connection between a culture of doping as an athlete and a reliance on recreational drugs in retirement. “I don’t think there is,” he said. “The sample size of cyclists that took performance enhancing drugs is massive — in the tens of thousands — so if the tendency was to become an addict then we’d have hundreds if not thousands of addicts, which we don’t. It’s like the question I used to always get, did drugs cause my cancer? Same scenario — we’d have hundreds of guys with testicular cancer and we don’t. We have two — Ivan Basso and me.” Carywn Jones, a professor in sports ethics at Cardiff Metropolitan University, said that professional cycling is a “paradigmatic example” of a sport peopled by athletes who are predisposed to addictive behaviours. “In elite sport, where you have to spend a lot of time obsessing about performance, tiny margins of improvement, your diet, your weight, body fat – all things that allow you to latch on to obsessive compulsive traits – cycling exemplifies that. Cycling is pretty much perfect if you’re obsessive compulsive. That may lead you to search for other means to improve, or control, your performance.” Jones acknowledges that the prevailing narrative is that when vulnerable elites retire they develop an addiction, but he feels this may already have been present. “I think they may have had this obsessive compulsive behaviour all through their career, but then they retire and need to find another fix.” Jones says that Ullrich’s decline follows a miserable but familiar trajectory. “An addict is looking for a solution to a problem outside of himself. If they are relying on sport to fix them, then it’s likely that this will spill out when they are no longer able to use this sport.” It is speculative to suggest what triggered Ullrich’s problems but the shame and humiliation of the Operación Puerto scandal in 2006 and the subsequent vilification of his sporting achievements in Germany almost certainly contributed. “Shaming can go in two ways,” Jones says. “Addicts have a sense of self and self-worth. To some extent what they are doing is presenting to the outside world a kind of lie.” But Jones added that the specific demands of elite endurance cycling is akin to working in the military. “We want soldiers to do a particularly difficult and dangerous thing. “ In the same way we want Tour de France riders to do things that are really unreasonable. We need to have a conversation about what elite sport entails, but what I would advocate is that we consider ‘red flags’ – certain types of behaviours that we need to deal with.” Millar, meanwhile, accepts that he is unlikely to win Thursday’s vote but he remains happy to be seen as an agent provocateur. “This has been an undemocratic process,” he said of the CPA elections. “It’s not martyrdom on my side. Whatever happens I think the peloton will eventually win.”