It’s a rare documentary that features a running conversation about whether the subject is too dangerous to shoot. That’s true for big-wave surfing, wingsuit flying, free-diving, extreme skiing and ultralight alpinism. Deadly pursuits all – pass the popcorn. Free Solo, a new film about rock climber Alex Honnold, is different. The movie tells the story of Honnold’s unprecedented ropeless ascent in June 2017 of El Capitan, the great granite cliff in Yosemite Valley, California. It’s a scary movie to watch – even if, according to Honnold, the climb was not scary at the time. “I think a big part of the film is showing the long process to get to that point where it wasn’t scary anymore,” said Honnold, 33, in a phone interview from a rooftop during the Toronto film festival, where it picked up the people’s choice award for best documentary. “Because I had been dreaming about soloing El Cap for so many years.” Most of the film plays out in the lead-up to the climb, during which Honnold (whom you might recognize from 60 Minutes; he is the most accomplished “free solo” or ropeless rock climber in history) is seriously injured, twice, and the mojo gets wonky. Jimmy Chin, a co-director, tells Honnold that it’s OK if he does not want to go through with it. “Obviously I don’t want to hose everybody,” the climber replies. We know how the movie ends, because we read about it in the papers last year: Honnold summits, climbing from bottom to top in one perfect push, 3,000 feet in just under four hours, becoming the first person ever to climb the mountain that way, maybe the only person who will ever climb it that way. But as we watch the transcendent act unfold on-screen, that knowledge of how the movie ends feels about as useful as the unicorn suit that Honnold encounters en route (true story). In dozens of minutes of footage never before seen, Honnold climbs without a rope through awkward and difficult positions on minuscule holds in which one wrong move would mean death. Beyond each immediate physical challenge lies another, and then another, stacked to the sky. Meanwhile the trees below shrink to dots. “It’s so wild,” Honnold said on the phone, recalling a particular spot near the top. “And the footage is amazing, but I don’t know if it quite gives the full feel of a 2,500-foot drop on all sides around you. It’s nothing but air.” It seems at any moment – at every moment – that he must slip. The suspenseful climax of the film, a close-up view of Honnold unlocking a delicate granite puzzle at 2,000 feet, can best be described as precluding respiration. It’s hard to eat popcorn when you can’t exhale. “This climb is really about the process of moving through fear,” said co-director E Chai Vasarhelyi, whose works includes 2015’s Meru, which won an audience award at the Sundance film festival. “How methodical he is about it, how studied it is, and how we all could probably do that – hopefully it inspires people.” It’s a National Geographic documentary, and that film-making muscle flexes upon Honnold’s topout, with horns blaring and kettle drums booming as a helicopter-mounted camera zooms away from the cliff edge, leaving the climber behind in exchange for a gorgeous full-length view of the monolith. What was remarkable in the headlines is revolutionary on-screen – and the bigger the screen in this case, the better. “I’m so delighted,” Honnold says, sitting on the summit with a stupefied grin. “I’m so delighted. I’m so delighted.” Audiences will be, too. Hitting theaters almost simultaneously is another astounding documentary, The Dawn Wall, which follows Tommy Caldwell and Kevin Jorgeson’s 2015 ascent of the route by that name, also on El Capitan. To have two feature-length climbing films land at once is a remarkable treat for the enthusiast, and a sign of boom times for the sport, which will make its Olympics debut in 2020. Jorgeson, a balletic boulderer whose struggle on the Dawn Wall supplies the film’s main suspense, came to the project after years of reconnaissance work by Caldwell. Once again, we know how it ends: with a happy topout, a media scrum and a Barack Obama thumbs up. But once again, in the moment, it looks grim. The pair are using safety ropes – everyone except Honnold uses ropes to climb El Capitan – but the physical difficulty of the route far exceeds the line Honnold took. Caldwell gets through the key challenge first and decides to suspend his ascent to wait for Jorgeson. In one of the film’s lighter moments – it has a more playful feel than Free Solo – the cameras roll as Caldwell, a climbing wizard but not a virtuoso communicator, fumblingly tells Jorgeson that he will stick with him for as long as it takes. There is no “I” in bro. “I didn’t want to put the pressure on him,” said Caldwell in an interview last week in Manhattan. “I felt like, ‘This is not how I want to end this thing’.” Has any film better captured life on the wall? Directors Josh Lowell and Peter Mortimer, with director of photography Brett Lowell, show Caldwell and Jorgeson on their floating ledges sleeping, cooking, getting battered by a storm, howling, pooping, and executing amazingly intricate skin care routines involving razor blades, neosporin and cloth tape. The climbing footage is primo, with miles of sunny granite, ninja lunges and swooping falls. The route is usually called the hardest big wall anywhere, and for the first time flatlanders get a glimpse of why, as Jorgeson conquers one section with the dexterity of a blackjack dealer and the strength of a cobalt magnet. “It felt amazing,” said Jorgeson of his breakthrough moment. “There’s just this feeling that your feet are creeping off your holds in all the previous attempts. But they just felt a little more solid that time. Just solid enough to make it work.” Caldwell has a central role in Free Solo, too, as Honnold’s training partner and a friend who harbors no illusions about the risks, at one point referring to Honnold as “most likely to die”. The truth of that assessment hits home with footage in Free Solo of Honnold’s original, abortive try at his ropeless ascent, which happened eight months before the successful effort. “This sucks,” he tells a cameraman who catches up with him on a ledge, still in the dark because he has started so early. “I don’t want to be here. I’m over it.” Back on the ground, Honnold walks over to Peter Croft, one of the few legendary ropeless climbers to make it to age 60. “I failed,” Honnold says. “Good for you,” Croft replies. “Yep. Nope. Too many folks about.” “You made the perfect decision.” “Now it all has to drag on longer. I just need it to end, you know.” “You never have to go for it.” At which Honnold walks away. He clearly felt that he did have to go for it, for reasons that Free Solo goes impressively far in exploring. “I don’t believe you guys actually can watch it,” film-maker and Honnold friend Mikey Schaefer says during the climb, turning his back to the cliff. It makes for a fantastic movie. But the kind of fantastic movie where it would be just fine not to have a sequel. “I’m done – this is it,” says Schaefer. “We don’t need to do this again.” The Dawn Wall is out now in the US and Free Solo will be released on 28 September with both films awaiting a UK release date