Sergio García will compete at the Ryder Cup in France later this month after Thomas Bjørn named the Spaniard among his captain’s picks. It was widely expected that García would get the nod alongside Henrik Stenson, Paul Casey and Ian Poulter and Bjørn confirmed that was indeed the case during a press conference on Wednesday. Bjørn called García “the heartbeat of a team”. “It would be like a football team going without its captain … He makes everyone around him better.” Bjørn said of Casey: “He is world-class … he is a wonderful matchplayer. It’s great to have him back.” Poulter “is all about doing it on the big stage”, Bjørn said. “The way he kept talking about this being his main focus … that was the most important thing.” Bjørn said he spoke to Stenson after he was injured just before the Open. “Henrik’s focus changed from his personal achievement to being wanting to be ready for the Ryder Cup. As soon as we had those conversations and I knew where his focus was, it really wasn’t a big problem for me to pick him.” García’s selection is a controversial one given the 38-year-old’s poor form ever since he won the Masters last year. He has missed the cut in his last five major appearances, slipped to 30th in the world rankings and was not one of the 125 players exempt for the PGA Tour’s end-of-series FedEx Cup play-offs. García’s compatriot Rafa Cabrera Bello and the in-form Englishman Matt Wallace can count themselves unlucky not to have been selected over the veteran. In García’s defence, he has featured in eight previous Ryder Cups, amassing 22.5 points in the process, making him one of the most successful European players in the history of the tournament and, as such, someone Bjørn clearly feels will be of benefit to the team at Le Golf National near Paris. Alongside the four wildcard picks, Europe’s lineup against the United States from 28-30 September will feature the eight automatic qualifiers: Tommy Fleetwood, Tyrrell Hatton, Rory McIlroy, Francesco Molinari, Alex Noren, Thorbjørn Olesen, Jon Rahm and Justin Rose. Jim Furyk, the United States captain, announced Tiger Woods as one of his wildcard selections on Tuesday.