Early on this final day, when it looked as if the fifth Test would drift rather than sprint towards its likely outcome, the idea of filing a column with some series awards had begun to take shape. Adil Rashid was up for at least one. Perhaps Rashid might get Best Walking Around for his “invisible” game at Lord’s, where he walked close to 10 miles from midwicket to deep fine-leg without taking a catch, bowling a ball or batting. He might even have been an outside shot for the coveted Strangest Selection, given his recurrent inactivity and the rage generated in Yorkshire by the acceptance of an England Test call. That changed here at 4.20pm, with India on 325 for five, both batsmen past their hundreds, and the day just starting to get away from England. When bowling, Rashid had been running wide of the crease all afternoon, occasionally ending up almost outside the tramlines from around the wicket. He jumped wide here again for his first ball of a new over. It was a hard-spun leg-break, a little flatter than he usually bowls. It dipped just a little. KL Rahul might have kicked it away. But he was on 149 and romping along. Instead he tried to glide it for a single, bringing the bat across his body towards a ball that pitched so far outside the stumps Johnny Bairstow was already skipping off down the leg side. At which point the world turned on its side just a little. The ball spat sideways, zinging across the face of Rahul’s bat and taking the flight path vacated by his attempt at a leg-glide. Finally it clipped the outside of the off-stump, displacing a single bail. Rahul whirled round and stood for a second looking baffled, as well he might. This was a ball that had been heading towards Tower Hamlets, then set off without warning in the direction of Battersea, like a cabbie throwing a U-turn on the Harleyford Road. Rashid leapt up and punched the air at a moment conjured out of an old ball and a dead, brown September pitch. Such is the hunger for superlatives there will be a willingness to anoint this as yet another Ball of the Decade candidate. But Rahul was attempting to score and was not deceived in the manner of, say, Mike Gatting who wandered off at Old Trafford 25 years ago shaking his head like a man who had just had his shoes stolen while he nodded off on the tube. It was, though, a supremely well-timed piece of work from Rashid, not least because England needed it. Rahul and the sensational 20-year-old Rishabh Pant had carved and driven the bowling round the outfield like a pair of lords on a spree. And really this was the story of the day, a partnership of 204 in 44 overs between two brilliantly pure batting talents that elevated this final day of a five-month Test match summer to a piece of gloriously pure entertainment. For a while it was a joy simply to be there watching it happen. Did you see Rahul spanking that short ball from Ben Stokes over cover for six before lunch, the kind of shot you might play in the garden with a tennis ball and a plastic bat? Did you see Pant whirling his arms like a Mexican featherweight, plonking the ball over long-off with a slash of those fast-twitch wrists? And did you see him go to his hundred off 117 balls with another gloriously violent straight hit, the bat slashed from left to right like a fencer filleting his opponent? It could not last. In the end Rashid did what he had been picked for, finding enough rip late on to tip the day England’s way. In his next over he had Pant out for a brilliant 114, caught shovelling the googly high in the air to long-on. Rashid will not take the headlines but he did finish the series with 10 wickets at 30, the best English leg-spinner’s return since Tommy Greenhough in 1959. It has been a decent-to-good summer and Rashid will surely go to Sri Lanka now. But whatever happens, whatever the ultimate fall-out from a rancorous selection, he will always have Kennington, KL and a lovely little moment of late-summer mischief.