Politicians and activists in Ireland have pledged to protest against Donald Trump when he visits in November. On Friday, the White House announced the visit to Ireland would take place as part of a European tour that would also see the US president travel to Paris for a commemoration of the 100th anniversary of the Armistice after the first world war. A White House statement said Trump’s visit would “renew the deep and historic ties between our two nations”. The Irish Labour party, Greens and Solidarity – People Before Profit all pledged to organise protests surrounding the visit, within an hour of the announcement. The Irish Green party leader, Eamon Ryan, released an official statement on Friday night: By turning up in large numbers, surely we can send a clear signal to the American people; we want a less divisive, peaceful and more sustainable world? Meet in College Green 10th November, to help hold that line. #TrumpInIreland #protest #PeoplePower https://t.co/pVIr23tGHN pic.twitter.com/rd956Y0vnl He urged the people of Ireland to “show their disgust and rejection of the Trump administration’s policies by turning out, as we did during the Iraq war in 2003, in large-scale mass protest around the country”. He said: “Donald Trump’s administration champions policies that are destroying our planet, destabilising international order, and reaching new political depths by appealing to racism, misogyny, xenophobia and hatred. These policies do not reflect the Irish people’s values – we need to show him and the world that this is not normal. “Decency, integrity and fact-based politics still exist and are worth defending. We’re calling on Irish people to tell our government to cancel this visit; and for them to demonstrate in never-before-seen numbers should they fail to do so.” The Workers’ party Cork City councillor, Ted Tynan, said the taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, and the minister for foreign affairs, Simon Coveney, were not representing the views of the majority of Irish people in extending the welcome. “The deep and abiding connection between this country and the United States is based, not on the fawning and false obsequiousness of the taoiseach and minister Coveney, but on the shared experiences of our peoples and their common struggles”. Trump was originally invited to Ireland by former taoiseach Enda Kenny on his final St Patrick’s Day visit to the White House. Details of the forthcoming visit have yet to be released, however it is thought Trump will spend two days in Ireland. The announcement has proved overwhelmingly unpopular on social media, with many criticising Trump’s policies.