The two men identified as suspects in the Salisbury nerve agent attack appeared on Russia’s state-funded TV station RT on Thursday, claiming they had visited the “wonderful” English city as tourists to see its cathedral. The pair, who said their names were Ruslan Boshirov and Alexander Petrov, appeared to resemble men shown in stills from CCTV cameras released by British police investigating the attempted murder of Sergei Skripal, a former Russian spy who had passed information to the British. British police say that the names used by the men are aliases and that there is evidence that they are Russian military intelligence agents. In the RT interview the men said they had both been in Salisbury and were the people identified in the CCTV stills. “Our friends had been suggesting for a long time that we visit this wonderful town,” the man identified as Alexander Petrov said. Boshirov added that the two had gone to visit Salisbury Cathedral, noting its high spire. “There’s the famous Salisbury Cathedral, famous not just in Europe, but in the whole world,” he said. “It’s famous for its 123-metre spire, it’s famous for its clock, the first one [of its kind] ever created in the world, which is still working.” Boshirov said that they “maybe approached Skripal’s house” while they walked around Salisbury, “but … didn’t know where it was located”. The interview appeared to show that Russia was not planning to deny the veracity of video evidence released by Scotland Yard, but just to argue it had been misinterpreted. The men confirmed they visited Salisbury twice, on 3 and 4 March. British police say the first trip was made to stake out the city in advance of the attack on the 4th. Petrov claimed they were merely tying to go for a walk on the 3rd, “but we lasted for only half an hour because it was covered in snow”. The weather was better on the 4th, Petrov said, so the two returned “to see the Old Sarum [Stonehenge] and the cathedral.” “We were just taking in the English gothic [style],” Boshirov said.“Nobody shows that part,” Petrov added, noting the CCTV stills mostly showed the two men at rail stations. The two men police identified as Petrov and Boshirov were charged in absentia last week in the UK. They are accused of conspiracy and the attempted murder of Sergei Skripal and his daughter, Yulia, and of a police officer who was investigating the poisoning. Investigators say novichok, the nerve agent used in the attack, was transported in a fake Nina Ricci perfume bottle. Asked about the bottle on Thursday, Boshirov said: “Is it silly for decent lads to have women’s perfume? The customs are checking everything, they would have questions as to why men have women’s perfume in their luggage. We didn’t have it.” On Wednesday, Vladimir Putin called for the two men to speak with the media during an economic conference in Vladivostok. He said the two men were innocent and “civilians”, apparently contradicting accusations by Scotland Yard that they were agents of Russian military intelligence.