A woman has died and other people have required hospital treatment as Storm Ali swept across northern Ireland, central Scotland and northern England with winds of up to 90mph. As Ali, the first named storm of the season, arrived in time for the morning rush-hour on Wednesday, Irish police confirmed the woman died after a caravan was blown off a cliff in the west of Ireland. They said: “Gardaí at Clifden, County Galway, are investigating an incident which occurred at Claddaghduff, County Galway, this morning. “At approximately 7.45am, a report was received that a caravan had blown off the cliff at the above location. A search was carried out at the scene on the beach and after a short time the body of a female in her 50s was recovered.” The Met Office issued amber “be prepared” weather alerts along the path of the storm which remain in place until 6pm. It said that gusts of 91mph had been recorded in Killowen, County Down, on Wednesday morning but the strongest winds were felt in central and southern Scotland and north-east England later. About 55,000 homes and businesses, mainly in the south-west of Ireland, were left without power due to the weather, while another 16,000 in the south-west of Scotland were similarly affected. A major incident involving “serious risk to life” was declared in Dumfries and Galloway, south-west Scotland, by the police and local council, with schoolchildren not allowed to walk home because of flying debris. The council’s virtual operations support team warned: “It is likely that, in order to keep pupils safe, we will not be allowing children to walk home from school at the end of the school day. Staff will remain in school to supervise pupils at the end of the school day until they can be collected. We are asking parents to collect their children in vehicles where possible or wait until the wind calms down.” The storm caused widespread travel disruption across Scotland’s central belt, with all train services out of Edinburgh Waverley, Glasgow Queen Street and Glasgow Central’s high level suspended by early afternoon after damage to overhead power cables. Flights from Glasgow and Edinburgh airports were also delayed. If you have been affected by severe weather you can tell us about your experience using our encrypted form, or by sending your pictures and videos to the Guardian securely via WhatsApp by adding the contact +44(0)7867825056. We will feature some of your contributions in our reporting. Though we’d like to hear from you, your safety and security is most important. When responding please make sure you put your safety and the safety of others first. Severe weather events can be very unpredictable and carry very real risks. Vehicles and pedestrians were stopped from using the Forth Road Bridge, while the Queensferry Crossing was shut to high-sided vehicles and double-decker buses. Restrictions were also put in place on Skye Bridge, while a 91.7mph gust was recorded on the Tay Road Bridge, which has also been closed to traffic. A cruise ship became detached from its moorings in strong winds at the port of Greenock, Inverclyde. Oceania Cruises said: “This afternoon, the … Nautica encountered extremely strong winds, which resulted in the parting of mooring lines and the vessel being detached from the dock. All guests and crew onboard are safe and there were no injuries.” In the north of England, the M6 was closed northbound between junctions 43 and 44 after an HGV was blown over, while Highways England has also issued a severe weather alert for north-west and north-east England. The Met Office also issued amber and yellow warnings for Cumbria, warning people to secure garden furniture, be aware of flying debris and take extra care on the roads. Belfast city council said it had closed all its parks, pitches and playgrounds, while dozens of roads in the north-west are known to have been affected, with a number closed by fallen trees. Ali is first on the storm names list for 2018-19 announced by the Met Office and Met Éireann, which have run the Name Our Storms scheme for four years. The names were chosen from submissions by the public to reflect the culture and diversity of the UK and Ireland.