In 1977 and ’78 I was living in a Queenslander on Auchenflower Terrace opposite the railway station, in a sharehouse with creative types. Next door was a bunch of guys who played UK punk relentlessly; one of them, John Hoey (later in Died Pretty) would drop in with the most recent recordings. He’d shake up Jim Dixon (Survivors, Radio Birdman), whose room was on the closed veranda outside mine. Jim spun Kinks singles endlessly on the turntable. I played in lounge rooms with a female jazz group called Shrew: piano, double bass, saxophone and flute. I was also acting, touring Queensland in two iconic theatre companies: The Grin and Tonic and the Popular Theatre Troupe. I was torn between the world of drums and theatre, and managed to pull the drums into some of the stage shows. Through September, Guardian Australia is spotlighting Brisbane's groundbreaking music scene – its legacy, its present and its future – and asking our readers to decide: what are the best Brisbane songs of all time? When it comes to music, Brisbane has always punched above its weight – from Kev Carmody and the Go-Betweens and the Saints, to Regurgitator, Katie Noonan, DZ Deathrays and beyond. Each year the country's biggest music conference BigSound descends on the city, and this year Guardian Australia has partnered with them and community station 4ZZZ to launch Songs of Brisbane with a bang. Don't worry - if it goes well, we might roll it out to other cities too ... You can nominate any song by a band that originated or is based in Brisbane – or any song written explicitly about the city. But how you choose to vote is up to you. Maybe it's a nostalgia thing, a song that makes you think about a certain time. Maybe it's that the way it sounds somehow encapsulates the beat of the city itself. Or maybe it's just a killer tune. Head over to our Songs of Brisbane page to scroll through the list of nominated songs and vote for your favourite. You can vote once per device, so please use your vote wisely! Once you've voted, you'll be able to see who is winning the poll – and you'll get the option to tweet about the song you voted for, using the #SongsofBNE hashtag. If your favourite song isn't there, you can nominate it yourself by filling out the form on the poll page. If you’re voting for a track which does not have a “picked by” blurb with it, and you’d really like to tell us why this is a great tune that should win, please email us at songsofbrisbane@theguardian.com Nominations close on 14 September. Voting ends at midnight on 18 September and the winner will be announced shortly afterwards – along with a playlist that soundtracks the city.  Back then, everyone moved to Sydney. The corrupt cops ruled the streets, the right to march was banned and being gay was illegal; we had to catch the bus south for pregnancy terminations, and Indigenous people were arrested leaving the pubs at 10 o’clock. But not me. I moved to Petrie Terrace, into a rambling wooden two-up on stilts on Wellington Street. It was an open house because of the music we played, the pot we smoked, the availability of beds and the huge sunken bath in which we entertained. In his book True Love and How To Get It, Gerard Lee harshly described finding a sanitary item in our toilet bowl. Some female rock musicians were looking for a drummer. I met the band in the Curry Shop: a punk music and curry nirvana in a basement in George Street. Deborah Thomas sidled up to me and said, “So you think you can play rock’n’roll?” I turned up at the audition with the Premier kit that 4ZZZ announcer Stuart Matchett had sold to me for $100. We played for hours, jamming on Tom Robinson Band’s two-chord Power in the Darkness, and John Lennon and Yoko Ono’s Woman Is the Nigger of the World. The band comprised Irena Luckus on vocals, Deborah Thomas and Vicki Allen on guitars, Barbara Hart on sax and John Hunt on bass. They were anarchists, playing in front of an anarchist banner; we called ourselves Zero, the name taken from an anarchist feminist newspaper. Irena’s family were refugees who arrived on a boat from the Baltics, ending up at Wacol refugee camp. Deborah and Vicki (aka Nicki Naught) had hitched up from Sydney and stayed. We set to work rehearsing every day in the huge house in Kelvin Grove that they shared with other women. It was Patti Smith, the Velvets, the Slits, X Ray Spex, the Stranglers. A friend, who later became Red Stripe in the Flying Pickets, gave me his red mini moke. We tore around with our gear, hung out screaming at other punk bands in New Farm Park on the way to the gig in the rotunda. We played shows in halls and pubs all over town. Everything was fast and furious. The police shut us down playing in the back lane behind Wellington Street. In April 1979, we tore into the cops as we watched the Deen Bros demolish the Bellevue Hotel. Deborah told me not to wear shoes I couldn’t run in. Geoff Shera, the self-proclaimed spectacularly unsuccessful Australian music entrepreneur from Canberra’s Culture and Anarchy café, sometimes slept on the Wellington Street veranda, our beds separated by a window. We supported another of his book launches at the Baroona Labour Hall where there were jugglers, street theatre and slides, and the cops came as always to bust the gig. Geoff organised a band tour to Canberra by train for the launch of his anthology, Death on the Dole. The train from Sydney stopped 25km out of Canberra because of a strike and we were stranded with amps, drums, guitars. We hitched a ride squashed in a station wagon, and were dropped off at the central bus station. We ended up playing a gig in Canberra at a gay and lesbian celebration at community radio 2XX. We played in a cavernous room, the sound echoing back to the stage after the beats. There was laughter and dancing and later that night I broke the hot water system and other electrical appliances. The owners came home early the next morning and were distraught. We headed to Newcastle for a gig at the Star: a venue notorious for its straight tough bloke patrons. They’d never seen anything like us: a group of women agitators spitting punk from the stage. We ended up having to flee that night – and caught the train back home to Brisbane.