A few days ago Anthony Joshua was horrified to find his £150,000 bespoke Range Rover had been stolen in London in the dead of night. And when he faces Alexander Povetkin at Wembley next Saturday he knows he must be wary of another daring heist targeting three things even closer to his heart: his WBA, IBF and WBO heavyweight belts. “Povetkin is dangerous,” he says. “He doesn’t really throw that many punches but then suddenly – boom! I can’t allow him any opportunities.” Povetkin may not be the most interesting of names for the more casual boxing fan but outside of Deontay Wilder and Tyson Fury, who are expected to contest the former’s WBC belt later this year, there is no more dangerous challenger for Joshua in the division. Certainly the Russian’s pedigree is impeccable. He won gold in the super-heavyweight division at the 2004 Olympic Games, has a 34-1 record in the professional ranks, and held the WBA title for almost two years before his only defeat, against Wladimir Klitschko in 2013. He also punches accurately and thunderingly hard, as he reminded a British audience by brutally stopping David Price on the undercard of Joshua’s fight against Joseph Parker in April. “It will be a real breaking down job,” Joshua says. “He will be waiting for me to come in and then he’ll hit me. So I have to take him off his game and bully him a bit.” Yet there is a darker side to Povetkin, who has twice been banned after testing positive for prohibited substances, first for meldonium in May 2016 and then ostarine seven months later. Given his doping history, many in the sport believe the Russian should not be in the ring at all but Joshua is confident his opponent will be clean because of the more comprehensive Voluntary Anti‑Doping Association testing that both fighters have signed up to. “We’re doing the same thing – so whatever testing regime he was on before, we’ve probably gone that little bit extra this time,” says Joshua, who has been tested 12 times in the past three months. “I’m sure he wants to prove himself clean as well.” Joshua’s response to those who doubt the provenance of his impeccable physique is emphatic: he is clean and always has been. “Since the London 2012 Olympics they have been testing me nonstop,” he says. “It’s part and parcel of my regime now. I get to know the testers really well. Cups of tea, they know my routine. I’ve done it all, pissed in front of them, I’ve done it all. There are no secrets.” There are no secrets either on how to handle the 6ft 2in Povetkin, with Klitschko beating him comfortably by using his height and reach advantage to win by a large points margin. However Joshua is promising to take a different approach. “Klitschko’s performance was phenomenal,” he says. “Staying behind the left jab the whole fight was very difficult to do and very smart. I think I will approach it differently, by doing more to put him in his place. “My plan is to just relax and have fun but in heavyweight boxing you can get embarrassed and badly hurt. So I want to go in there and outclass him, outthink him, outsmart him and hopefully I will be victorious.” Joshua also promises his fight will be more explosive than his comprehensive, if slightly dull, points victory over Parker. “There was a lot of pressure in that fight because I thought Wilder was coming next,” he admits. The bookmakers make Povetkin – who turned 39 this month – an 8-1 underdog to spring a surprise, which sounds about right. And the Russian is under no illusions about what awaits him. When asked if Joshua represents an even bigger challenge than Klitschko, who ruled the heavyweight division for the best part of a decade, he nods. “Definitely,” he says, before insisting he is nevertheless ready to spring a massive upset. “Since the Klitschko fight a lot of time has passed, and I can assure you that I’ve become stronger, wiser and smarter.” Perhaps that is true. But, as ever, Joshua’s fists are ready and willing to terminate his opponent’s best-laid plans.