Safe to say that we know what Love Island is now: people with six packs or eyelash extensions saying, “Where’s your head at right now?” for eight straight weeks; Caroline Flack nominally hosts. And, crucially, that it is a statistical outlier in terms of TV dating shows: Love Island, above every other, offers a genuine chance at love. Winners Jack and Dani may be set to make £2m in the next year alone, but the real prize is an unshakeable bond between their two tanned Essex souls and a lifetime spent hugging, squabbling and going to barbecues with Danny Dyer together. Truly, it is the dream. What if you can’t get two months off work to go graft in a villa, though? Well, you have two options: go for the Saturday night blockbuster gloss of Blind Date and Take Me Out – essentially the same show on different channels, where a man in a suit watches people stand on podiums and flirt loudly while occasionally saying “Woo!” to an appreciative studio audience. Or, you go weirder. What about Sexy Beasts (people dressed in monstrous prosthetics go to a normal bar for a very, very weird first date)? Or Naked Attraction (featuring a junk-up slow reveal, like a dick pic-first version of Tinder)? How about Hello Stranger (a hypnotist temporarily makes a couple forget they are in love and they go dating again)? Why do we love dating shows so much we’d watch even the very weirdest formats? “I think it’s because we’ve all probably been in the same position,” says Sean Doyle, Channel 5’s commissioning editor and the man in charge of bringing Blind Date back. “[We’ve all been] meeting someone for the first time or trying to win someone’s affection, so it’s relatable. Also, I think ultimately people want to see good things happen to good people, which is why we root for people to fall in love.” Matt Edmondson, narrator and format creator of Dress to Impress (horny people run around Westfield trying to buy an outfit for an unseen partner), broadly agrees. “I am obsessed with the idea that no matter how mad the premise of the show, the law of averages suggests that one or two of them may actually find a genuine connection and form a relationship,” he says. “I think we can all place ourselves in the position of the contributors and think: ‘What would I do in this situation?’ I remain convinced that were I not a happily married man I could get a handful of lights left on during Take Me Out by performing the one card trick I know, badly.” That’s fine for the more normal dating shows (First Dates, for example), but in the 30-plus years since Blind Date made flirty banter a Saturday night mainstay, dating shows have gone considerably off-piste. Just this year, Seven Year Switch introduced a panic-attack of a format to British TV (couples in failing long-term relationships go to Thailand and switch partners for a fortnight to see if that fixes anything), while BBC Two ran the Sara Cox-fronted Love in the Countryside (people from the countryside go on dates near pigs). We even have dating shows for relationships that have ended, such as Channel 5’s One Night With My Ex. We have dating shows that crash the concepts of “new relationships” and “dead relationships” together, as with MTV’s Ex on the Beach. In 2016, it seemed every dating show was naked: Naked Attraction, Undressed and the American Dating Naked pushed pixel blurs to the logical extreme. It’s hard not to watch these shows and think: ‘Who goes on these, and why?’ “I liked the fact that this is really the only true way you can go on a blind date now,” says Lucy Cox, a 32-year-old events manager from London, who ended up on Dinner Date. “If a friend sets you up with someone, you can hardcore social media stalk them and know what they had for dinner yesterday before you’ve even met them. I got home drunk one night and applied and forgot about it, then three months later they called.” After a successful episode of Dinner Date, Lucy and her winning date David hit it off, and now it’s three years later and they have a cat together. Is it embarrassing telling people you met on a show where the commiseration prize is a microwave meal? “I think I’m more impressed if people met on Tinder,” Lucy says. “In my experience, it was full of sociopathic time-wasters.” “They paid £150 a day,” George, a 24-year-old bar manager from London, says, slightly more straightforwardly. George was one of the prospective daters on Puppy Playdate, an as-yet unaired show where … well, you get it. “My hairdresser cuts the head of casting’s hair at this production company and gave him my number. The premise is that a girl has a dog and three guys have to take that dog out on a date. I did ‘doga’ on my date, which is dog yoga. After all the dates the dog has to choose which bloke it likes best and then he goes on a date with the girl. The dog had a wag-o-meter. It was genuinely mental, mate.” “It would be easy to turn around and say people are looking to go on the new shows just because they want to be on TV,” says Aaron Calvert, the hypnotist behind Channel 4’s semi-baffling Hello Stranger. “I don’t think that’s entirely true. I think sometimes it comes down to people wanting to find love in a way that matches their quirky personality. There isn’t access to that dating environment in the real world, [as on] shows like Dating in the Dark, where they can show off more about themselves than their looks, or Naked Attraction where physical attraction might be an important factor in love for you.” I ask biological anthropologist Helen Fisher to watch an episode of Take Me Out to ascertain why it is dating shows are so enduringly compelling. “Courtship is about winning,” she says, having watched a model and a student wave at a studio audience before going off on holiday together. “You’re trying to win life’s greatest prize: a mating partner. And if you have the opportunity to go on national television, that’s advertising; you’re advertising to a very large group of people who can see you and hear you. It’s way better than a dating site.” For Helen, modern dating shows are an extension of the way in which the dating landscape has changed over the last 20 years, with the advent of apps and dating sites. “These days we have to advertise ourselves. Our parents aren’t introducing us to people, a great many of us know all the people in our social group, and so all of these contestants are stepping away from their normal daily means of attracting a partner and going for a broader pool of people who might be interested in them.” Edmondson agrees. “Tinder as a format is amazing, but people are looking to escape the norms a bit, which is where the mad dating shows come in to their own,” he says. “The theory behind them often sounds quite compelling, too. You’re going to see them naked eventually, so why not make it the first thing you do? Suddenly, Naked Attraction is born. It’s the same with Dress to Impress. There is an element of you that hopefully thinks: ‘Well, I’ve not met anyone through traditional means … but what if I could meet my dream partner because I like the leggings they’ve bought for me?’ People have met in weirder ways.” Talk to enough people and you’ll realise everyone in the UK is six degrees of separation away from a TV dating show contestant: nans, brothers, friends, dogs. This, truly, is what drives our insatiable bloodlust for watching people flirt awkwardly and occasionally get off with each other: the fact that, out there, at any one time, there is a pulsating world of singletons, tired of the swipe-and-ghost cycle and dedicated enough to sit through a full day’s filming in pursuit of something more. After all, isn’t that what love is all about? Doing kick-ups in front of 30 girls while Paddy McGuinness shouts at you?