It’s weird to be sad when children’s shows end, right? It’s weird for adults to feel palpable regret when a series designed for people a third of their age shudders and stops of its own accord. Nobody ever held a vigil for the finale of Button Moon, did they? Nobody ever wrote a gushingly emotional thinkpiece to mark the end of Dog With a Blog. But Adventure Time was different. As of this week, Adventure Time is over. And it’s strange to imagine life without it. When it debuted back in 2010, Adventure Time might have felt like another zany brain-rotter for kids to slowly grow obese to; there was a boy and a dog and a magical land and it was all very twee, like something Zooey Deschanel might dream up after over-indulging at an ironic vintage fondue revival night. As the episodes rolled on, though, the show slowly built the confidence to show its true colours. Dark isn’t the word – dark can never be the word for a programme that created a character called Lumpy Space Princess – but Adventure Time’s increasing determination to reflect emotional truth wherever it was found certainly made it more mature than the normal fare. Take the show’s primary antagonist. In any other show, Ice King would be a two-dimensional princess-stealing baddie who cackled to himself in a castle and never learned from his mistakes. But in the hands of Adventure Time’s creator, Pendleton Ward, he was one of the most thoroughly complex characters on all of television. Genuinely misunderstood, Ice King quickly became a lonely old man; a cypher through which Adventure Time could tell stories about social isolation and mental illness. He never learned from his mistakes because his memory was failing. One Ice King episode, I Remember You, is just outright devastating. In it, Ice King cries with loneliness, misreads social cues and is oblivious to several frantic reminders about who he was before he lost his mind. It’s a breathtaking piece of television – part Doctor Who, part Michael Haneke – that begins, develops and ends in the space of 11 minutes. And never once does it take on that off-puttingly portentous Very Special Episode stink, never once does it buckle under its own self-conscious worthiness. It is curious and empathetic and light-footed, and it blends with every other episode seamlessly. Nor was Adventure Time stuck in the weird stasis that cripples most other animated programmes. Rather than follow the lead of The Simpsons – a show where a 10-year-old has been a 10-year-old for nearly 30 years – the characters of Adventure Time have all grown up with the show. Finn the Human, Adventure Time’s main character, was 12 at the time of the first episode. By yesterday’s finale he stood right on the cusp of adulthood, still voiced by the same person. Jeremy Shada has gone through puberty voicing Finn, and you have been able to hear his voice deepen with every passing year. This was reflected in Finn’s character, too. Physically, he is ganglier than he was, but emotionally, he has gone through the wringer; we have seen him leave the warm hug of childhood and be confronted by the cold, hard light of adolescence, smashing into every painful notch along the way. It was never hard to watch, but the show’s emotional complexity never made it particularly easy. To watch it back as an adult is to dredge up all the weird feelings of inarticulate alienation and confusion that you have long put behind you, so God knows how it must have felt to actually grow up alongside Finn. I suspect we will find out quickly enough; I wouldn’t be surprised if, as with Harry Potter, an entire generation of young adults will soon unfurl their devotion to Adventure Time, swearing their loyalty to the characters that helped them through a difficult time. Now it’s over, it is easy to look at Adventure Time as a whole and see that it was a work of almost unparalleled artistic expression. And it was a cartoon. A cartoon about a dog, for crying out loud. This isn’t how things are supposed to work. But it isn’t dead. Not really. The show has already produced a slew of heirs, including the equally inventive Steven Universe, whose creator Rebecca Sugar worked on Adventure Time; Over the Garden Wall’s Patrick McHale was creative director on Adventure Time for a spell. Soon its fanatics will have kids of their own, and they are bound to pass down Adventure Time like a beloved possession. Long may it continue.