They figured it might be cute to leave Ben Utecht hanging out to dry, just for old time’s sake. Only this was a nippy December in Minnesota, as Utecht was on stage, channeling Andy Williams. If Andy Williams happened to be 6ft 6in and ran a 40-yard dash in 4.8 seconds. “I’m kind of a balladeer at heart, anyway,” says Utecht, the former NFL tight end. “If you ever would’ve told me I’d be singing Andy Williams, I’d have laughed.” So there’s a bit in An Andy & Bing Christmas, a vocal revue that Utecht, the pro football veteran with the granite shoulders and the velvet pipes, and Mick Sterling, a Twin Cities entertainer who serves as the Crosby half of the show, have performed around the state every December since 2015. In the bit, Utecht cracks wise about his six seasons in the NFL; the hits that kept on coming; the silver bells that never stopped ringing; the five concussions; and the Super Bowl he won as a member of the Indianapolis Colts in February 2007. “And the band would play the NFL theme song,” Sterling explains. “And he was just being very silly. It’s a very funny bit, and Ben thought of it.” Only one night, the 16-member backing band decided it was the perfect time to pull a prank on their towering front man. While Utecht was in mid-pose, waiting for a music cue, the band decided, puckishly, to call an audible. And stopped playing altogether. As the silence lingered for several beats too long, as Utecht stood, awkwardly, Sterling’s face reddened with embarrassment, then rage. Backstage, in between sets, he let loose. “That was too much,” Sterling told the band. “He’s the star of our show. You can’t put him in that position. OK, there’s fun, but you can’t have that much. “He’s the star of the show. Don’t make him look like anything but the star of the show.” Utecht forgave. “A 10-minute issue,” Sterling says now. He laughs. “But it got us closer in some ways. Everybody felt a little bad. It was a silly joke that went a little bit too far. We talked it over. It was great. Ben was great.” No time for grudges, let alone regrets. Utecht has two sold-out performances in September to prepare for, songs to write for a new vocal trio in Nashville, and speeches to make on behalf of Keystone Culture Group, a consulting firm he formed last year with Dr Daniel K Zismer. “I was part of such a special team, this team in 2006 under Tony Dungy and guys like Peyton [Manning],” Utecht says. “But I’ve got a huge passion for how to build a high-performing culture. That culture is going to be a part of your group whether you want it to be or not. Why not design it? “And I use that championship [approach] to really go into companies and give them a blueprint of how to do that and that results in direct performance. So it’s been a joy to be able to do that.” So much joy, in fact, that Utecht is a little embarrassed about the book that brought him back into the national spotlight some two years earlier. If he could take back any words from Counting the Days While My Mind Slips Away, the autobiography published in August 2016 that detailed Utecht’s history of head trauma, that’s easy – he’d start with the title. “To be honest with you, I almost feel like I would go back and definitely change that,” Utecht says. “I wrote [that] when I was going through kind of the most difficult time, right after my retirement transition. And so I was very vulnerable, afraid. “But it [doesn’t] represent how I’m doing today. I think that, if anything, there were people that probably didn’t want to read that book because of what they thought I would be sharing, based on such an ominous title like that.” Instead of counting the days, 2018 has been about counting blessings. A narrative built on making memories rather than mourning the ones lost to the ether. “I’m doing better cognitively, I think, than I’ve ever been in my life,” says the 37-year-old Minnesota native, who’d spent four seasons with the Colts (2004-07) and another two with the Cincinnati Bengals (2008-09). “I found myself in a really good place.” *** Although the journey was fresh hell, the road to the good place felt long, winding, and – given the public’s heightened awareness as to the long-term effects football can have on the brain – eerily familiar. Utecht says the biggest hits were delivered across the middle, served by linebackers or defensive backs he never saw coming. He wound up with 87 catches in his career, and one of them – on a seam route in Houston – ended up with the Minnesota native plastered high and low at the same time by a pair of onrushing safeties. “I got my head ripped off,” he says now. “It was so bad.” If your body doesn’t tell you to hang it up, NFL front offices sure as hell will. Utecht’s final concussion as a pro came during a preseason practice in 2009 with the Bengals; he was eventually released in November of that year after an injury settlement. A subsequent tryout with New England “went really well – I caught everything,” Utecht recalls. “I was flying around the field.” Off the field, Patriots brass sent him crashing back to Earth. “I do remember getting a lot of questions about that concussion history,” Utecht says. “And part of that was realizing that my concussion history was going to make it really challenging for me to make a team again, number one. “Number two, we just had our first daughter. My wife I thought, ‘Gosh, even though you didn’t reach that personal level that you thought you were capable of, you were in the league six years, you were on a Super Bowl team, it’s such a blessed career.’ It was just time to take care of what was more important.” The son of a Methodist minister, Utecht’s gifts included a wicked set of pipes and a commanding stage presence. Having grown up in front of crowds, performing was the natural next step. His 2012 record Christmas Hope was nominated for a Dove Award in 2012 – presented annually by the Gospel Music Association – for Christmas Album of the Year. One daughter became four, yet the love couldn’t completely pave over the mental and emotional scars left by the violence of football, the recurring fissures. Utecht found himself forgetting minor points so consistently, he felt compelled to leave himself sticky notes with pertinent details. Honey-do tasks got accidentally overlooked. Tempers started to flare up, the wrong buttons pushed, from out of nothing. “I had come home to a house full of [girls], where there’s a lot of communication happening, there are a lot of situations always occurring,” Utecht recalls. “And I was really struggling to really be in that environment, because number one, I’m going into the initial stages of no longer being an athlete and having to figure out my life, but on top of that, I’m not able to function, cognitively. I’m struggling with being able to focus. “Because I can’t focus, I can’t remember the last thing that my wife has asked me to do. And when I don’t do those, that causes situations at home and when you see that, you can see how all that starts to compound. No wonder, at times, I lost my temper or I noticed that I was acting in ways that are not really normal to my own character.” Utecht found himself receiving compliments on a stunning vocal performance he gave at a friend’s wedding. When he realized couldn’t remember a damn thing about it, the alarm bells started ringing even louder. *** Cue the fates, daring to chuck a lifeline into the mix. Utecht happened to be appearing on a local talk show where Rich Frieder, owner and executive director of the LearningRx centers in suburban Eagan, Savage and Woodbury, Minnesota, was also booked as a guest. The two struck up a conversation, which eventually led to Utecht signing on to 100 hours of cognitive therapy at LearningRx, broken up over sessions held four days per week, 90 minutes at a time. “You try to build sustained attention and strength to deal with things over long periods of time,” explains Brad Olson, assistant director at LearningRx and Utecht’s personal brain coach. “Initially, I know, Ben would leave sessions saying he was exhausted. Not just mentally, but feeling physically exhausted. “But over time, he built up that strength and stamina. We worked hard for an hour and a half. I always appreciated his take on [it being like] having a conditioning coach in the NFL. But I pushed him back hard, I had the freedom to just go at this hard and not stop to be careful, because he took everything I asked of him seriously. And sometimes, he wouldn’t stop until he would do it. Which I admired.” Utecht usually sat across the table from Olson, no stone left unturned. Processing speed. Executive functions. Short-term memory. Long-term memory. Olson checked what the former NFL receiver could remember after five minutes, then what stuck after 60. At the start of their sessions, he graded out in the 12th percentile at five minutes of recollection and the 17th percentile after an hour. “It was shocking,” Utecht says, “but it also gave me a lot of peace because it told me that I wasn’t crazy. Because what I had been sharing with the world, on national television, was true. I was having some issues in my ability to retain information.” Olson kept pushing. Flash cards. Vocabulary work. Puzzles. A lot of math problems. Every exercise was done with a metronome on the table turned on at 120 beats per second. Tock… tock … tock … “Different shapes that related to six different quadrants,” Utecht explains. “You’d have three seconds to see what order they were in and you’d have to do your best to place the cards in the same order they were in before.” Tock … tock … tock … “And you’ve got to understand: the training room is an open cubicle,” Utecht said. “So you could have four other students in there listening to their own metronomes. It was one of the most challenging environments that I’ve stepped in. “Those first couple weeks, I remember literally sweating in this room and visibly frustrated that I couldn’t perform the tasks that were asked of me. And I was overwhelmed – I was hearing all these other students completing their tasks, and their metronomes going off. It almost brought me back to what it was like being on the football field all those years of practicing and shutting the crowd out.” By the end of Utecht’s 100 hours, his recollection numbers jumped to the 78th percentile after five minutes and the 98th percentile after 60. “Throughout training, I’m giving him words quicker and quicker,” Olson says. “I think, by the end, I’m giving him 20 words in 20 seconds … and he loves doing that and he loves pushing himself and seeing what he can remember.” Numbers. Dates. Towns. Lyrics. Laughter. “It became this miracle of coming out of this cognitive fog that I believe existed due to multiple concussions,” Utecht says. “It was really just as easily explained as almost being parallel to a personal trainer in a gym. “It doesn’t mean I’m going to regain memories that I had lost of the past, or I had noticed were not there from the past … I’d given myself the ability to store more memories going forward. My ability to focus [improved]. The other thing that came out of that that, I noticed, was because I was functioning at a much higher cognitive level, I wasn’t getting frustrated.” Patience returned. The angry outbursts didn’t. Clouds of depressive moments – a recurring fog of doubt and indecision – began to part. “My wife would say, ‘I got my husband back,’” Utecht says. “And a book that was designed to be about fear for the future turned into an answer I found for being able to create and retrain more memories going forward. And that was a miracle.” *** A miracle he thinks could be repeated, if only it were made more widely accessible – or even encouraged – by NFL teams and players. “I think in athletics, this should be a part of every high school program, every college program,” Utecht says. “Our brains are a part, if not the most important part, for us as elite athletes. Why not make brains as elite as they could possibly function? “It’s definitely something that needs to be more available for veteran players who are struggling. I do believe that, in many cases like my own, you’d see not only cognitive change, but you will see cognitive healing to help the behavioral issues that we talk about. I also believe this type of product is something the [players’] union and the NFL would agree on. “From the NFL’s perspective, how do we keep players on the field and how do we get them back on the field faster or keep them on the field longer? I believe this type of cognitive training program can do that. I think from the players’ perspective, it could be very beneficial too, because there’s nothing negative about sitting down with a personal trainer for the brain and honing all the cognitive things that you use in game situations. I think, hopefully, as we learn more about the brain in the last five or 10 years, and maybe this type of program grows and hopefully, it’s something we see more available.” The walls of stigma separating discussion of mental health and machismo continue to crumble, but the NFL’s Wally Pipp quandary – those who don’t play risk losing their job forever to the next guy in line – makes it hard for active players to risk a lucrative roster spot, concussions be damned. Utecht has been up front about his struggles with head trauma, having presented at clinics in recent years and even testifying before the US Senate in 2014. But he says former teammates have been hesitant to seek his advice about how best to put the head before the heart. “Every once in a while, I’ve had that happen, but not a whole lot,” Utecht says. “It’s interesting. There’s so much out there now. There’s a whole broader range of supplements that are available … neural feedback machines, chiropractors, there are just so many facets to what’s available out there. So guys are just trying to go and find what they can in order to find some comfort.” Some turn to faith, others to drugs, some to the abyss. Utecht turns to Andy Williams, the Emperor of Easy. “Music has been such a support system throughout my life, in so many different ways,” he says. “But definitely over the last six years and trying to define this new identity – to have things that you’re passionate about is something that I was able to do to help through the challenging times.” But even a peaceful mind gets restless. Utecht dropped another record, Standing Strong, earlier this year. During a late-summer junket to Music City, he laid down tracks as part of a nascent singing trio. “We just wrote and recorded three songs down there, and we’re just going a step at a time,” Utecht notes. “It’s in its infancy. What we’ve kind of described it as is theatrical pop.” Meanwhile, the Andy & Bing revue rolls on. Utecht and Sterling performed 18 shows last December; they’re shooting for at least 15 more to close out 2018. They’ve talked about performing with local symphony orchestras, or even taking the act to other states. The crooner and the crooning tight end. “It’s so funny – when I get done with the show, when we go to meet people, I’m 5ft 11in, I’m not short. And they’re like, ‘Hey, you’re not that small,’” Sterling laughs. “Ben has an amazing voice that can do that Andy Williams stuff really well. But he’s not trying to imitate Andy Williams; he just sings like Ben Utecht showcasing those songs, which is no easy feat. “Plus the guy is just ridiculously charming. People love him. He’s very natural, he’s very engaging and he sings this stuff like a champ. Obviously, he’s an impressive figure – he’s kind of hard to take your eyes off of. You still have to back that up. You still have to be able to sing. The thing that’s separated him from athletes in a lot of sports, when they do something in retirement, they try to get away with it because of who they are. They’re not the best singer or the best actor. Ben is not that. Ben is the real deal. “He’s a Super Bowl champion, and that’s part of his life, for sure. But he is way more than that. What he’s doing now, the way that he sings, the way he performs, and the good things that he’s doing to get the word out about what he’s gone through, it’s really inspiring.” The real deal reminds us that there’s life after a half-dozen head shots. Life and a song. Every day. “I think one thing we have to do, as fans and players, is accept that concussions are an eventuality within the game,” the former NFL receiver says. “You can’t have football without them. You can’t have any sports without them. If we want to support our athletes and want to continue to love watching the game, we’ve got to accept that.” Utecht forgave, ages ago. The real gift, the marvel and the muse, is how much easier it is to never forget.