Young, svelte, pre-injury Botham was great on the numbers alone. In his first 50 Tests Botham scored 2,500 runs at 35 and took 230 wickets at 22, a swing bowler in the Anderson class. For the last eight years of the Botham Supremacy he was something else, toting around his own outlandish celebrity, still conjuring moments of paunchy brilliance, but never looked after in the manner of the current crop. The greatest and, oddly enough, still the most famous modern English cricketer. BR No batsman in history has scored more than his 61,760 first-class runs, nor can match the 197 first-class centuries he compiled between 1905 and 1934. And had Archduke Franz Ferdinand not been assassinated in Sarajevo in 1914 – the spark from which four years of bloody conflict raged across Europe, thereby pausing the sport – the first cricketer to be nicknamed “the Master” (and the first professional to be knighted) would probably have finished with a few more. AM For her fizz, her gumption and her refusal to take no for an answer. For her fundraising, her promotion, her organisation of the first World Cup. For the first six in a women’s Test, her six unbeaten series in charge of England, her match-saving 179 against Australia. For her grin, and for hauling women’s cricket out of its obsession with skirt length and the right sort and into the modern era. TA Rank Grace against his contemporaries and in his best decade he scored almost one out of every three centuries made in first-class cricket. Rank him against everyone else, and he’s still in the all-time top 10 lists for both batting and bowling in first-class cricket. But really, his impact is better expressed in words than numbers. In 50 years of cricket, Grace didn’t just “found the theory of modern batting” as Ranji put it, but turned cricket from “a county pursuit pastime into a national institution”. AB She is England’s leading run‑scorer of all time. She won two World Cups and five Ashes series across her 20-year career. But “greatness” – it’s not just about the numbers, is it? It’s about having the kind of impact on cricket that continues to reverberate long after you retire, as generations take up the sport thanks to you. And the truly greatest thing about Edwards? She did 95% of it without being paid a penny. RN In later life, in the commentary box, he was a bit of a bore. But on the field he was the finest bloody fast bowler England ever produced. He had pace, swing, heart, an average of 21 and a strike rate of 49. He took 307 wickets, then a world record, in 67 Tests, which is about 60 more than Jimmy Anderson took in his first 67, and at an average of 21 rather than 30. And Fred didn’t have DRS on his side. TdL Of the current batch I would put Jimmy Anderson just ahead of Alastair Cook in this category and I have great admiration for both. I’ve bypassed Botham, Gower, Trueman, Hutton, Compton, Hammond, Hobbs , Rhodes and the statistically awesome Barnes and will settle for Grace, who more or less created the modern game as well as taking all those wickets and scoring all those runs. VM While longevity brings admiration and sometimes love, peak performances inspire awe. In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Botham was the world’s leading miracle worker. His comical, unprecedented self-belief was combined with exquisite skill: as a swing-bowling artist, a genius in the slips and either a classical hitter or a beery slogger. He could also drink till dawn and still be ready to walk on water from 11am. English sport has never produced a superhero like him. RS Hammond had the lot: one of England’s greatest slip fielders, one of the country’s finest batsmen and a more than decent fast‑medium bowler, he averaged 58.45 across 85 Tests (only two men have scored more than his 167 first‑class centuries, and there were 36 double-centuries to boot), took 110 catches – putting him fifth among non-wicketkeepers, in considerably fewer matches than his rivals – and snared 83 wickets at a handy average of 37.40. SB The weight of statistics alone would provide a compelling argument for Hutton; his 364 against Australia in 1938 remains England men’s highest Test score. However, it was the environment in which he achieved a career average of over 55 that elevates these achievements: the first professional to captain England, a world war intervening at the prime of his career and all done on uncovered pitches throughout. As batter, captain and pioneer, Hutton is peerless. IW