‘We’re talking about $12m in rare books, and one old lady guarding it!” This excited description sums up the market forces governing Bart Layton’s bizarrely gripping true-crime thriller – about a mind-bogglingly audacious and incompetent theft from an American library. Part of what was stolen was a rare edition of Charles Darwin’s The Origin of Species, and the title itself is a quotation from Darwin about the flora and fauna of Kentucky. It could be that the robbers themselves believed that people with the courage to carry out one single existentially thrilling and lucrative crime are the fittest to survive. Layton is the British director who made the 2012 documentary The Imposter, about the notorious French conman Frédéric Bourdin, using interviews and dramatic reconstructions. American Animals effectively develops this technique so that the reconstructions are the main body of the film, effectively making it a based-on-a-true-story fiction feature, but periodically cutting away to interviews with the real people involved in this chaotically crazy crime – older and sadder if not exactly wiser. I was on the edge of my seat. With enormous flair, Layton is dramatising a staggeringly audacious and stupid robbery attempted by college students, which in its naivety, its weird innocence, its muddle-headed criminal purism, really does approach that quaintly contrived fictional genre, the “heist”. And the movie-mad participants awarded themselves code names like Mr Black and Mr Pink, apparently unaware of how Quentin Tarantino’s Reservoir Dogs ends. Or begins. These criminals assured each other that nobody would get hurt, yet it all hinged on Tasering and tying up a middle-aged woman working in the library. That Tasered librarian, like the coshed driver in the British Great Train Robbery of 1969, is our reminder that these people aren’t lovable antiheroes. She is Betty Jean Gooch, played in the movie by Ann Dowd, and she (rightly) has the last word in her own person as an interviewee. In 2003, Spencer Rheinhard (played by Barry Keoghan) was an art student at the exclusive Transylvania University in Lexington, Kentucky; the somewhat odd name of the place has nothing to do with vampires; it is Latin for “beyond the trees”, referring to the forests where the place was founded. Spencer became obsessed with the college library’s poorly guarded collection of important American books, especially John James Audubon’s exquisitely engraved and hugely valuable volume Birds of America. We see how almost as a joke, or a reverie, or a dare, Spencer floats the idea of stealing it to impress his dodgy and reckless pal, Warren Lipka, tremendously played here by Evan Peters (Quicksilver from the X-Men movies). Lipka instantly becomes obsessed with the idea, recruiting two other students, Erik Borsuk (Jared Abrahamson) and as getaway driver Chas Allen (Blake Jenner), an alpha-male jock and teen entrepreneur, like a single-body fusion of the Winklevoss twins from The Social Network. Our hapless non-heroes are not quite so stupid that they do not understand the need for a fence, someone to receive this stolen property. Lipka assures Spencer that he has one lined up in Amsterdam, and, before the job, Spencer gives him money for a plane ticket there to set up the deal. But did Lipka even take the flight? Is he conning his fellow robbers? Or himself? Even before the main event, there is duplicity and malice. I was utterly absorbed in this teeth-clenchingly exciting story and the “heist” sequence itself stands up really well – as well as anything I’ve seen. It’s not hedged with tongue-in-cheek comedy like the Ocean’s movies or genre unreality like the classics. It really does feel authentic. Having said this, the film actually begins with some worryingly arch stuff teasing us about what’s real and what isn’t, and for a minute I thought that this was going to be an irritating cop-out, covertly muddling the issue. But no. Layton has some valid things to say about the robbers’ differing version of events, but there is no sneaky bad faith on his part. Keoghan and Peters give terrific performances and thoroughly bring you round to their addled point of view. They are the young people, the people with the idealism, the passion, the courage to do something interesting with their lives: an act of daring almost artistic in its originality. They are almost right.