The Netflix film To All the Boys I’ve Loved Before has given rise to an unbilled star. Yakult – the probiotic drink – is discreetly feted in this romantic comedy as a symbol of a Korean American upbringing (Peter Kavinsky, the romantic lead, drinks it in a scene that seals his love). The Yakult is not mentioned by name – it is referred to in the movie as a “Korean yogurt smoothie”, despite its Japanese origin – but its distinctive red foil cap makes it unmistakeable on screen and now it is enjoying a spike in interest as unlikely as the one for Hanro vests after Eyes Wide Shut. There are Yakult-inspired stickers on Etsy, Yakult art is available, and shares of the stock, which had dropped this year, have reportedly risen by 2.6% since the film’s release last month. Yakult might seem an unlikely object for a cult following, but the brand has a long history. It was invented by the Japanese scientist Minoru Shirota when, in 1930, he managed to isolate and grow a strain of bacteria that could survive in the intestines. He named it Lactobacillus casei Shirota, and five years later the first bottle of Yakult – from “jahurto”, yogurt in Esperanto – was produced and sold in Japan and Taiwan. Next came Brazil. The first English-speaking country to produce and sell Yakult was Australia, in 1994. The UK followed in 1996, then the US in 1999, initially through Asian and Hispanic markets. In Japan, India, Brazil and Malaysia, the cult of Yakult is spread by thousands of “Yakult ladies” who sell the drinks door-to-door while dressed in distinctive red and white or blue costumes. Some people – though I have no idea if this includes those Yakult ladies – swear by it as a dog wormer. In the UK, each little bottle contains 6.5bn bacteria (100m bacteria to a millilitre). Although some academic research in 2016 found no benefit from probiotic drinks for healthy adults, the global probiotic market was worth about £35bn ($45bn) last year. And you can always use the empty bottle to make a Yakult santa. 