“The first great millennial author,” rave reviews have dubbed Sally Rooney, one of five millennials on this year’s Man Booker longlist, who, in just two books, has also earned the monikers “Salinger for the Snapchat generation” and “Jane Austen of the precariat”. Rooney herself describes her books as “just a bunch of fake people in a room talking to each other” – but Normal People, her second book, is far more than that. The critics praising Normal People in the national media right now are, for the most part, well outside the millennials’ bracket (by most definitions, aged between their early 20s and late 30s). Not that youth is a prerequisite for enjoyment – Rooney’s gift for interiority is undeniable, no matter your age – but being the same age as her, I emerged from Normal People feeling utterly unnerved by the accuracy of Marianne and Connell, her young, will-they-won’t-they protagonists. After years of seeing myself reflected only in think-pieces, blamed for variously destroying diamonds, napkins, marriage, sex and mayonnaise, it’s wonderful to see my generation preserved in literature as something worth writing about. Often, millennials eschew previous generations' lifestyles yet still drift towards domesticity with performative glee Not that damning young people is anything new. In Tom Wolfe’s 1976 essay The Me Decade, he criticised those we now know as baby boomers for being obsessed with “remaking, remodeling, elevating, and polishing one’s very self … and observing, studying, and doting on it”. Their lives were “a drama with universal significance”, with their every indulgent act (such as group sex – Wolfe’s example) elevated into a character-building search for meaning. Forty years on, replace swinging with “sweat crawls”, and voilà: millennials! But Normal People makes being young a drama of universal significance. Coming of age in post-Celtic Tiger Ireland, her characters use irony to dilute their existential anxiety about being over-educated and aimless in a time when the very world order seems up in the air. They have witty conversations about open relationships, communism and male privilege, and are clever and aware, if not entirely engaged (Connell liking comments on Facebook posts counts as “probably the most strident political action he has ever taken in his life”). Reviews invariably allude to Rooney’s characters being a tad annoying – urbane, liberal-arts types who spar in conversations that seemingly never end, moving from phone to laptop, to book launch to house party, and back. They are very, as the title suggests, normal (young) people. The hesitancy of the small steps Marianne and Connell take towards adulthood rings absolutely true. Imagining his attractive future life at Trinity College Dublin, Connell “would start going to dinner parties and having conversations about the Greek bailout” – all unimaginably grownup and exotic, and suggestive of a comfortable stability he craves. So often, millennials eschew the lifestyles of previous generations as unattainable, yet we still drift towards traditional domesticity with performative glee. As if throwing a dinner party, getting a mortgage or having babies is somehow a novel achievement. Is it a harmless, funny anomaly to fill a house with plants – a millennial quirk observed and memed relentlessly – to fulfil a desire to care for something living in the face of restrictive rental agreements and incomes that suit neither pets or babies? Or is it, in some ways, a bit sad? As a young woman, Marianne particularly rings true. For all her intellectual bluster, low self-esteem makes her a magnet for rubbish blokes: a boyfriend who chokes her, an aggressive brother, creeps on the street, sleazes on the internet. This constant awareness is a heavy weight all young women bear, the thing that reminds them to hold their keys between their fingers while walking home, to always remember the consequences of unattended drinks, dodgy taxi drivers and bare skin. Her attitude to sex is similar to that of so many young women, who believe submission is one way of taking back control. But any feminist inklings are made ineffectual by the young men around them – too often taught by porn that degradation and submission are one and the same. Rooney isn’t the first millennial author to capture this imbalance. Melissa Broder’s recent novel The Pisces sees Lucy head to Victoria’s Secret to prepare for a date with a “douche bro” on Tinder; in return, he gives her a UTI in a hotel bathroom. In Kristen Roupenian’s infamous short story Cat Person, Margot agrees to sex with sullen, skittish Robert because refusing “would make her seem spoiled and capricious, as if she’d ordered something at a restaurant and then, once the food arrived, had changed her mind and sent it back”. For every harrumpher claiming they didn’t understand Cat Person, there was a woman who saw herself in Margot. They will see themselves in Rooney’s Marianne too – no matter their age. “It adds, fearlessly, to an unsettling discussion about submission – I felt I understood something, at the end of it, that I had previously pushed away,” Anne Enright wrote in her review of Normal People for the Irish Times. An older colleague said to me, not unkindly: “Normal People made me realise how bloody awful it is to be a young woman right now.” Perhaps it is, in some ways, but at least now we have books to help us navigate it. How strange it is, and how wonderful, to see oneself in a book – and how very exposing. • Sian Cain is the Guardian’s books site editor