I wonder if my growing love of cake is an age thing. I seem to get far more excited by cake than I used to, especially when experimenting with new recipes. The sticky, caramelised nature of this one had the whole family cooing. It is certainly not a thing of beauty – superficially speaking, that is – but together its moist, crumbly texture and citrussy flavour have made it a firm favourite. And it contains greens! This sticky, squidgy cake feels both decadent and virtuous thanks to the courgettes and olive oil. Prep 15 min Cook 1 hr 30 minMakes 1 loaf 100g pistachios170g olive oil, plus extra to grease250g golden caster sugar2 eggs200g white self-raising flour, siftedSalt200g courgettes, coarsely gratedZest of 2 lemons For the drizzle175g caster sugar100ml freshly squeezed lemon juice – about 3 lemonsZest of one lemon Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas 4. Grease and line a 450gloaf tin. Put the pistachios on a baking tray and roast for seven to eight minutes until they are beginning to turn golden, then remove and leave to cool. Once cool, empty into a food processor and blitz until they are the texture of breadcrumbs. Set aside 30g for garnishing the cake later. Put the oil and sugar into the bowl of a stand mixer and beat until thick and creamy. Add the eggs, one at a time with the machine running moderately slowly, then carefully fold in 70g of the pistachios, the flour, a pinch of salt, the courgettes and the lemon zest. Do not overmix, or the cake will become heavy. Pour the cake mixture into the prepared tin and bake in the oven for 65-75 minutes, or until an inserted skewer comes out clean. While the cake is baking, make the drizzle. Warm the sugar in a pan over a medium heat until dissolved, then add the lemon juice and stir. As soon as you have removed the cake from the oven, prick it all over with a cocktail stick and pour over the warm syrup so it runs into the holes. Scatter over the reserved pistachios, followed by the lemon zest. Leave to cool, then remove from the tin and serve in thick slices with dollops of creme fraiche, softly whipped double cream or a dairy-free substitute. Slow-cook any leftover courgettes in a pan with good olive oil, masses of garlic and a splash of water and lemon juice for a wonderful vegetable side, pasta topping or soup – I toss in chervil, wild fennel, mint or oregano depending on what is around. You can also shave the courgettes with a peeler – a lovely, visual addition to a salad, particularly if you can find yellow ones. Or just stuff them with tomatoes and grains and bake them with a topping of breadcrumbs, olive oil and pecorino.