A mushroom – vast, alarming – burgeons out of the gallery wall. It looks real, in just the artificial way of such fungi. But we are not in a forest, and this is not just any botanical specimen. It emerges from a neat plaque of wood like the lion’s head in a clubroom trophy. Real, unreal, certainly surreal: it is a phenomenon in monumental plaster. Velvet toadstools, glass slugs, a pair of miniature turtles deep in conversation in their tank of formaldehyde – every object in this spectacular show might be a work of contemporary art. But almost all were made in the 19th century. A turkey or a tumour were hard to preserve for Victorian students of medicine and zoology; after dissection, moreover, they would have to be thrown away. So why not make the bird in papier-mache, stripping it of feathers and skin so that its innards were visible, while catching its clumsy not-quite-airborne flight? And why not make each tumour in tinted glass, so that the different internal tissues were available to the inquiring eye? Could these stained-glass animals, such as the lion-mauling dog, ever have existed? So far-fetched, yet so enchanting What was designed for the purposes of knowledge might surely be beautiful, fragile, forceful, dramatic. Elucidation through art; to see is to know. Sculptors made rare toads out of porcelain; embroiderers spun coral out of silk. Craftsmen took immense pains to create flawless facsimile lemons from all round the world, staggeringly various in form: two-pronged, spherical, shaped like a banana. Can they be real, either as varieties or actual fruit, you wonder? The most famous of the objects on show, all loaned by the Anglo-Dutch collector George Loudon, was made by the extraordinary father-and-son team Leopold and Rudolf Blaschka. Leopold, a Czech immigrant to Dresden, was sailing to America in 1853 when his ship was becalmed. He became enchanted by the sight of jellyfish glowing in the evening waters. His praise of nature’s miracles took the form of tiny versions modelled (not blown) in glass; even now, specialists are not precisely sure how they were made. Spotlit in the gallery, as if floating in mid-air, is a translucent white creature with blue kiss marks on its side, a crest of cobalt beads and fronds that trail like gorgeous sugar ribbons. It is closer to jewellery, or sculpture, than anything in nature; yet it is based on a Portuguese man-of-war. Glass suspends the familiar motion; scale estranges. The Blaschkas made hundreds of these objects, depicting sea creatures in such minute detail that marine biologists still use them to search for rare species. You can see more in the Natural History Museum. But removed from their scientific context, they emerge as exquisite artefacts; an example for contemporary glass artists such as Dale Chihuly. It is this crossover that fascinates Loudon. Once he collected the standard blue-chip British artists, from Anish Kapoor to Damien Hirst, until there was no more room in his house. Now it is as if he collects their original inspirations. Here are plaster casts to make you think of Rachel Whiteread and picklings to prefigure Hirst. Here are those half-flayed anatomical figures Hirst likes to enlarge; except that these 19th-century statues have powerfully expressive faces. Who is to say whether they are artefact or art, these disturbing figures, whether they are example or portrait? None of the works in Loudon’s collection is merely, or exactly, a facsimile of the object it is supposed to depict. There is no telling whether the skull of some strange sea creature, fierce, nacreous – pearls for eyes – is real or imaginary, but so riveting is this bizarre apparition one scarcely notices that the long tongue projecting from its jaws (and leading into an equally improbable snake’s head) is in fact a rod of red ceramic, strategically placed there by the contemporary Italian artist Salvatore Arancio. Arancio has interpolated some of his own works among the exhibits to confound the certainties even further. Mostly they stand out by virtue of their iridescent glint, but just as you think you’ve got a clear sense of the division between old and new comes a bizarre meadow of flowers, larger than life and somehow twice as bright, like a hybrid of Marc Quinn and Claes Oldenburg. But these aren’t modern at all. They were made in papier-mache by French artists for the closer study of plant forms. Decoupled from their scientific purpose, these creations constantly astonish. Sometimes this is by virtue of their makers’ powers of illusion – the eye is entirely fooled, for instance, by the red-velvet toadstools – and sometimes by the sheer imagination involved. Could these stained-glass animals, such as the extinct lion-mauling dog, ever have existed? And the study of souls, in full colour, and by character, shape and hue: so far-fetched and yet so enchanting. The idea that there is nothing new under the sun – very much a surrealist principle – is borne out all through the exhibition. Paintings of snakes spotted on the Coromandel Coast in 1796 look like Disney cartoons. Victorian phrenology heads, got up in jaunty ties, look forward to the art of Eduardo Paolozzi. And the ring of black plaster casts of upper jaws, neatly labelled and arranged like a miniature Stonehenge, could be straight out of Marcel Duchamp. A giant’s foot, about twice the size of a human being, or did it belong to some kind of strange beast? I still don’t know what I saw; there is a terrific blurring here between truth and fiction. But the most shattering work, so to speak, is made from real relics. This is the exploded skull from France, all its bones disassembled and rearticulated so that it seems to be flying apart. A huge thing, larger than life, depersonalised and as frightening as anything in Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein, it allowed medical students to contemplate every bone in the head while reflecting, in Romantic fashion, on mortality. Man and Superman, it is the centrepiece of this enthralling manifestation of the intersection between art and science. • Surreal Science: Loudon Collection with Salvatore Arancio is at the Whitechapel Gallery, London until 6 January