In 1994, Hole released their second album, Live Through This. It ends with Rock Star, a vicious kickback against the riot grrrl scene and the “no-sellout” ethos that mingled uneasily with the 90s alternative rock explosion. “We look the same, we talk the same,” sneers Courtney Love, before her disdain unravels into a bark. “Make me real? Fuck you.” The template for its sequel, Celebrity Skin, which turned 20 this year, was set early on. In 1995, Love said she already had the title, a reference to a soft-porn magazine (and “’cos I touched a lot of it”). Three years later, Celebrity Skin was a rebirth for a band who had weathered so many storms that the album’s dedication – “To all the stolen water of Los Angeles and to anyone who ever drowned” – could have applied to any number of their associates. It was a record that threw off the policed “authenticity” of their musical peers and instead embraced a radio-friendly, Fleetwood Mac-inspired pop-rock that prettified a band who had, up until then, been anything but pretty. With hindsight, the drama and excess of Fleetwood Mac made them the perfect reference point for an album so concerned with both embracing fame and staring down its horrors. By the time Celebrity Skin came out, Love had reinvented herself several times, as a conduit for unbridled rage during the chaotic period of touring Live Through This, which followed the deaths of Kurt Cobain and Hole bassist Kristen Pfaff, and then as a shiny Hollywood contender, receiving a Golden Globe nomination for her role as Althea in The People vs Larry Flynt. Celebrity Skin’s aesthetic is caught up in that turmoil of competing identities, a push-pull of glossy glamour and its seedy underbelly. For all the slickness of Michael Beinhorn’s production and the big-budget videos that accompanied its singles, the songs remain raw and cynical, as wary and worn as they are defiant. This was a calculated shot at the big leagues, but it wore its sheen like cracked old nail varnish, and was peppered with lurid lyrics about exploitation and the true cost of making it: “I’m not selling cheap”. The brilliance of Celebrity Skin is that it is the sound of a person like Love, and a band like Hole – complex and messy and impossibly raw – asserting themselves as superstars, pushing their way to the front. It may have been a wilful deal with the devil (and the making-of stories that have emerged over the years, particularly around the ousting of Patty Schemel, are horrible), yet the results stand up, even two decades later, a period of time in which fame has changed immeasurably. Unlike Live Through This, Celebrity Skin ends on a note of rare optimism. In Petals, Love sings: “Oh, it’s all mine … I never knew what I could be”.