I note the vogue for writing the speeches you think politicians ought to give and offer my own contribution, for one T May, on the occasion of her having displayed her body in a manner deemed risible by the tricoteuses of Twitter. Herewith: “Thank you all for coming this morning. I am aware of the disquiet caused by my awkward attempts to ‘join in’ with the ‘fun’ by ‘dancing’ while representing Great Britain abroad. While I take those criticisms very seriously, I feel minded to point out that, between fending off a bunch of utter shits in my own party and steering the country to probable ruin, I have neglected to attend the weekly Westminster Ceroc Your Way Around the World With Confidence sessions so kindly organised by my ‘funkier’ colleagues. “For this lamentable lapse, I am truly sorry. In my defence, I would also like to point out that, as a 61-year-old woman, slightly lanky of frame and not blessed with the gift of ‘letting go’, the Terpsichorean arts are not my forte. I am, to put it mildly, a square. Now bugger off, you bunch of spiteful, superficial, lazy, fish-barrel shooters and do some proper work.” Bingo. Plaudits for May’s devastating honesty and an OBE for me; what could be easier? What a wonderful week it’s been for the war against women’s bodies. A tennis player takes off her shirt and is penalised as though she has unleashed a vial of sarin; elsewhere, the sport’s biggest star is warned against wearing a suit that covers much of her body. A large woman appears on the cover of a magazine and is accused of trying to convert us all to her obesity cult. A group of senior medical professionals on holiday in Spain come to blows in a debate over whether BBC political editor Laura Kuenssberg is attractive enough to appear on television. Imagine a world in which any of the anxieties provoked by these brazen women had even the smallest grounds. Where spectators at tennis matches received medical attention after glimpsing the rise of a sports bra. Where manufacturers of calorie-dense foodstuffs were cleaned out by women desperate to fatten themselves up. Where the entire country sleepwalked into oblivion because they were horror-hypnotised by a television presenter’s “lopsided” smile. Meanwhile, what is the most humiliating garment that antsy, rightwing bores can think of to adorn their Sadiq Khan blimp? Why, a yellow bikini, naturally – a skimpy, silly, feminine piece of leisurewear that most women have been taught to shun lest they scare the horses. Let us name the attention Theresa May's physical presence engenders for what it is: it's about sex Before we leave Theresa May to her lonely dance practice, let us name the attention her physical presence engenders for what it is. It is unrelated to her pursuit of austerity, to her handling of Brexit, to her inability to control governmental systems. It is about sex. It is always about sex: sexual charisma, sexual availability, sexual desire and desirability. May’s kitten heels, her sensible hiking outfits, her husband who looks like Arthur Askey, her lack of children – all ineptly veiled attempts to calibrate her existence as a sexual being and to place her on the sex chart. Few women in the public eye escape this form of scrutiny, but nor are they allowed to name it, because for a woman to declare herself aware of the ceaseless ratings game is itself a transgression, whether it leads to charges of arrogance, narcissism, collusion or manipulation. Why do you wear shoes like that if you don’t want to attract attention? Why do you wear lipstick? Do you like sex? Do you?! What were those doctors talking about as they necked the beers and dissected Kuenssberg’s face? Brexit, BBC bias, her private views, her style of enunciation? Are the female colleagues and patients of these men, not to mention Kuenssberg herself, supposed to feel grateful for the gallantry that caused one to blindside the other for allegedly declaring that she would look better with a paper bag over her head? We rarely see 'plain' women on the front of magazines. The idea is that those images are aspirational It is often said that women are other women’s worst enemies, that it is women who pass the most acid judgments and critical comments on their sisters’ bodies and appearances. Well, being a rat in a trap will do that to you; but, nonetheless, it is not usual to find us brawling in bars because one has said another has a wonky smile and should therefore be disqualified from appearing on a TV screen. But these discussions can be complex, as demonstrated by Tess Holliday’s Cosmopolitan cover; there is a proper discussion to be had over whether extreme thinness or fatness are useful in promoting body positivity and why, as many have pointed out, we rarely see “plain” women on the front of magazines. Underlying this is the idea of those images as aspirational; that whatever we see, we will feel we need to become. What we must never be allowed to do, by that logic, is to settle in ourselves, our own bodies, our own lives. Enter, thankfully, the actress and – as she describes herself – activist Jameela Jamil, who last week told Channel 4’s Krishnan Guru-Murthy that women must resist attempts of the “double agents of the patriarchy” to sell us an unattainable ideal. She touched on the Kardashians, which in itself raises questions of sorority and autonomy. But she is right. Time for us to come in from the cold, lumpy bits and all.