What did the internet look like in 1996? It was both basic and chaotic – message boards and some forums. Few people had email. You had to dial up with a modem. There was no social media – no Facebook or Twitter or Wikipedia. According to Slate, in 1996 Americans with the internet spent less than 30 minutes a month on it. It was just too slow – and anyway, it tied up the phone line. That year, the writer David Foster Wallace was winding up a national book tour for his door-stopper Infinite Jest. He was 34 and the book was his generation’s Ulysses (or Finnegans Wake depending on the critic), giving readers a completely different kind of text to grapple with. At the end of the tour, Rolling Stone journalist David Lipsky joined him on the road for five days and recorded their conversation, which became the book Although of Course You End Up Becoming Yourself: A Road Trip with David Foster Wallace. Last week it was 10 years since Foster Wallace’s death, and I went back to his short stories, nonfiction and the Lipsky book. I was struck by how in 1996 Foster Wallace predicted so much of what was happening now, particularly the internet and our relationship to it. The internet back then was small, shitty and chaotic. There was no organising principle, no algorithms, no Google (the first search engine, called Archie, was created in 1990, a few years before the first batch of websites started appearing in 1993). Infinite Jest is about many things – but a big theme is how entertainment can become addiction. Foster Wallace keeps referring to it as a continuum. You don’t have to be living in a hellhole to want to numb yourself There’s a plotline in Infinite Jest about a film that’s so entertaining that viewers lose all interest in anything other than viewing it, and they eventually die. It was maybe far-fetched back then, but in 2018 I spend so much time on Twitter, I wouldn’t be surprised if my epitaph read: “She had some good tweets.” The entertainment, such as Twitter, starts as an amusing diversion and then becomes habit, then becomes addiction (to check it, to post on it). It is, after all, the story that never ends and is told even as you sleep. Said Foster Wallace: “(Entertainment) is fine in low doses. But that there’s something about the machinery of our relationship to it that … we don’t stop at low doses. “Entertainment’s chief job is to make you so riveted by it that you can’t tear your eyes away, so the advertisers can advertise,” said Foster Wallace in 1996. “And the tension of the book [Infinite Jest] is to try and make it at once extremely entertaining and also sort of warped – and to sort of shake the reader awake about some of the things that are sinister in entertainment.” In the 1990s, the addiction to tech took on more passive forms (think Kurt Cobain singing with dead eyes “here we are now entertain us”). It was channel-surfing and binging on eight hours of TV – “an easy way to fill in the emptiness”, said Foster Wallace, who described himself as a television addict. Television was just one iteration of entertainment as addiction. Foster Wallace saw how in the future (so now) “The technology’s gonna get better and better at doing what it does, which is seduce us into being incredibly dependant on it, so that advertisers can be more confident that we will watch their advertisements. And that as a technology system, is amoral.” Although Facebook and Google did not exist in 1996, Foster Wallace predicted that algorithms or some sort of sorting mechanism would materialise. He called it the Interlace. “That Interlace will be this enormous gatekeeper. It will [be] sort of like the one publishing house from hell. They decide what you get and what you don’t. Because this idea that the internet’s gonna become incredibly democratic? I mean if you’ve spent any time on the web, you know that it’s not gonna be, because that’s completely overwhelming. There are four trillion bits coming at you, 99% of them are shit, and it’s too much work to do triage to decide. With these gatekeepers “we will beg for those things to be there. … If you go back to Hobbes, and why we ended up begging, why people in a state of nature end up begging for a ruler who has the power of life and death over them we absolutely have to give our power away. The internet is going to be exactly the same way … We’re going to beg for it. We are going to literally pay for it”. ** I was reading these passages a couple of weeks ago, from a stilted house over the water on a northern atoll in the Maldives. The setting was unimprovable. You couldn’t take an ugly photo if you tried. There were no cars on the island, just bicycles and white-sand beaches with water the colour of mint Listerine, fringed with the proverbial swaying palms. From the deck of my suite I could put down my book and slip from the deck into the minty-green water and see the most incredible fish. Yet that evening, at the bar over sunset drinks with the resort’s general manager, he admitted that an earlier experiment to make the island tech free had failed. People wanted wifi. They were addicted, preferring doses of disruption and chaos coming from their screens to the uninterrupted sublime and ordered reality around them. You don’t have to be living in a hellhole to want to numb yourself. In a place of ease and physical perfection, of nature at its most beautiful and symmetrical – even living inside this gorgeous postcard – we want to escape. Said Foster Wallace: “We’re absolutely dying to give ourselves away to something. To run, to escape, somehow.” He saw this as a “distorted religious impulse”. ** There was one thing Foster Wallace didn’t predict. That when entertainment and addiction met in the internet, rage and hate would be thrown into the mix. The entertainment addict of Foster’s future projections was a bit of a blob – a passive vessels for this entertainment to pour into. Even the most dystopian thinker couldn’t have predicted that addiction would have rage and hate as its lubricant. That rage, primarily performed on social media, would eventually drive populations into silos and test democracy. And that brings us to now. Foster Wallace’s prediction? “I tell you, there’s no single more interesting time to be alive on planet Earth than in the next 20 years.”