Typhoon Mangkhut has hit the southern coast of China, after leaving at least 59 dead in the Philippines amid landslides and flooding. The storm battered the heavily populated Guangdong region on Sunday afternoon with 100mph (160km/h) winds, after skirting 62 miles from Hong Kong. High winds smashed windows in the city, tearing off parts of buildings and roofs, while storm surges flooded hotels and restaurants. More than 100 people were injured. In Guangdong, almost half a million people have been evacuated from seven cities. Schools have closed until Tuesday and the high-speed rail line has been suspended, according to China’s state news agency, Xinhua. In the southern province of Fujian, officials have ordered thousands of fishing boats to return to harbour and closed construction sites near the coast. #TyphoonManghkut pic.twitter.com/xinZeFanPa In the Philippines, the presidential adviser, Francis Tolentino, said the heaviest casualties were in the mountainous Cordillera region in northern Luzon, where torrential rains caused landslides that left dozens dead, including those who tried to rescue miners buried in the mud. A pregnant woman was also among the fatalities. The country’s president, Rodrigo Duterte, is due to visit the area on Monday. Four others – including two children – were buried in a landslide in Nueva Ecija, another person died in Kalinga, and one was killed by a falling tree in Ilocos Sur, Tolentino said. The total death toll has risen to 59. The storm, the strongest in the region this year, was not as ferocious as feared due to the remote areas where the typhoon hit. However, the full death toll and extent of the destruction is still unknown. On Sunday, Duterte and government officials flew to the heavily impacted area of Cagayan. He said in a televised briefing: “I share the grief of those who lost their loved ones. Those [are what] we call the unforeseen events. In insurance, this is an act of God. I don’t know how it can be an act of God, but that is the term used by the insurance.” Tolentino said the search and rescue operation had ended and the focus would switch to rehabilitation and the restoration of power and water supplies. Ma Wan, off the eastern edge of #HongKong's Lantau Island, feels the force of #Mangkhut https://t.co/vw3rCPfflY #TyphoonMangkhut 🎥: Sian Loh pic.twitter.com/UHRQq0bKKU The category five super-typhoon hit the northern end of the Philippine island of Luzon early on Saturday morning, with the high winds ripping roofs off houses and pulling down trees and electricity pylons, and the rains causing fatal landslides and flooding. More than 5 million people were in its path. The island is a key agricultural area in the Philippines, producing most of the country’s rice, corn and other vegetable crops, which have been ruined a month before harvest, damaging the livelihoods of thousands in the region. Even well-off families could not sufficiently prepare for the strength of Typhoon Mangkhut. Mila Catabay-Lauigan, a Cagayan resident, reinforced her two-storey home and evacuated her family to a hotel before the typhoon made landfall. “There was no escaping it. We could hear the whistling of the winds from where we were, at the fourth floor of the hotel. The typhoon also stayed longer than we’re used to. It would have been worse if we stayed home,” she said. Despite the preparations, she found the ceiling of her home had collapsed. “All over Cagayan, the houses were destroyed and crops were flattened,” she said. Jerome Balinton, a spokesman for Save the Children who was in north-eastern Luzon, said: “The further north we travelled the more extensive the damage, particularly in Cagayan province. House after house had been flattened or badly damaged, with roofs or walls missing. Large trees have been uprooted from the ground and power poles bent right over, leaving power lines strewn across the ground.” He added: “In some areas where the eye of the storm hit, it seems as if nothing has been left undamaged.” The typhoon affected 250,000 people in Luzon, according to the government’s natural disaster council. Mangkhut, a Thai word for the mangosteen fruit, is the 15th storm this year to batter the Philippines.