A man wielding a knife and an iron bar has stabbed seven people including two British tourists in Paris. Police arrested the suspect, who they believe to be an Afghan national aged 31, after a group of petanque players chased the man and reportedly brought him to the ground. Officers say the random attacks on Sunday evening do not appear to be terror-linked. Four of the wounded are in a serious condition in hospital, one of them critical. Le Parisien newspaper said the suspect stabbed one of the British tourists in the chest and the other in the head. The Foreign Office said it was investigating the attack. The attacks occurred at about 10.45pm (2145 BST) on Sunday, near a cinema on the popular Canal de l’Ourcq at Villette in the 19th arrondissement of the French capital. A security guard at one of two cinemas on either side of the canal said he saw a man who had assaulted people being chased by two men who tried to stop him. “He had an iron bar in his hand which he threw at the men chasing him, then he took out a knife,” the guard said. Police said the man attacked passersby at random; an investigation has been launched into attempted murder, according to a judicial source. “At this stage, nothing leads us to believe these attacks are of a terrorist nature,” a police source said. One witness told BFMTV: “We saw people on the ground. We saw blood. There was a man who was running around with a knife of 40cm long. The whole thing happened quickly: it was all over in about seven minutes.” Loic Travers, the spokesman for the Alliance Police union, said the man was finally brought under control by one of the petanque players who had chased him. The man was reportedly unknown to the police and was not on France’s Fiche-S list of potential terrorism suspects. One witness, Youssef Najah, 38, said he was walking along the canal near a bowling green when he saw a man running and holding a knife. “There were around 20 people chasing him. They started throwing petanque balls at him,” Najah said, referring to the sport popular in France also known as boules. “Around four or five balls hit him in the head, but they weren’t able to stop him.” According to the same witness, the attacker then dived into an alleyway, where the man “tried to hide behind two British tourists. We said to them: ‘Watch out, he has a knife’. But they didn’t react.” The pair were then attacked, he said. There have been several knife attacks in France in recent months. Terrorism has been ruled out in most cases. On 23 August, a man stabbed his mother and sister to death and seriously injured another person in a town near Paris before being shot dead by police. Authorities said the 36-year-old had serious mental health problems and had been on a terror watch list since 2016. That attack came days after an Afghan asylum-seeker was arrested in the town of Perigueux after a drunken rampage with a knife in which four people were wounded, one seriously.