Dr Christine Blasey Ford, the woman who has accused US supreme court nominee Brett Kavanaugh of sexual assault, has detailed the agony of coming forward to “relive this trauma in front of the world” at an historic Senate hearing. With Kavanaugh’s confirmation to America’s highest bench hanging in the balance, Ford recounted in gripping detail how she was allegedly forced into a bedroom in the early 1980s by Kavanaugh and his friend Mark Judge, when they were teenagers. “I am here today not because I want to be. I am terrified,” said Ford, her voice cracking with emotion, in her first public appearance before members of the Senate judiciary committee on Capitol Hill on Thursday. “I am here because I believe it is my civic duty to tell you what happened to me while Brett Kavanaugh and I were in high school.” Kavanaugh, Donald Trump’s hardline conservative pick for the vacant seat on the supreme court, had been expected to sail through the confirmation process until Ford came forward earlier this month, followed by two other women who publicly accused him of sexual misconduct. Appearing before the committee after Ford, Kavanaugh struck an aggressive tone, calling the confirmation process “a national disgrace”. “I was not at the party described by Dr Ford,” he said, reiterating his previous denials. Judge has also denied the allegations. “I am not questioning that Dr Ford may have been sexually assaulted by some person in some place at some time. But I have never done that to her or to anyone,” Kavanaugh will state. Ford, a research psychologist from northern California, was the only woman called to testify. She recounted how Kavanaugh had allegedly groped her, tried to remove her clothes and covered her mouth to block her screams. “This was what terrified me the most, and has had the most lasting impact on my life,” Ford said. Several people in the room were moved to tears by Ford’s testimony, which was delivered with raw emotion and precision. At one stage, Ford was asked by Senator Dick Durbin, a Democrat of Illinois, with what degree of certainty she could state that it was Kavanaugh who attacked her. “100%,” Ford replied. When asked about her strongest memory of the incident, Ford replied: “The laughter, the uproarious laughter between the two, and their having fun at my expense.” In an indication of how closely Trump was watching the hearing, the White House confirmed that a crucial scheduled meeting between the president and deputy attorney general Rod Rosenstein, was postponed. “They do not want to do anything to interfere with the hearing,” White House press secretary Sarah Sanders said. The high stakes were further underscored by the tense atmosphere in the small hearing room as Chuck Grassley, the Republican chairman of the committee, opened proceedings. Acknowledging the threats received by both Ford, Kavanaugh, and their families since the allegations surfaced, Grassley said the backlash was “unacceptable and a poor reflection on the state of civility in our democracy”. “I want to apologize to both of you for the treatment you’ve received,” he said. The partisan undertones of the hearing were nonetheless swiftly put on display, as Grassley went on to chastise the process by which Ford’s allegations were brought to light. He accused his Democratic counterpart on the committee, California senator Dianne Feinstein, of withholding Ford’s account as “secret evidence”. Pointing out that the FBI had conducted several background checks on Kavanaugh to date, Grassley said: “Nowhere in any of these six FBI reports, which committee investigators have reviewed on a bipartisan basis, was there ever a whiff of any issue – at all – related in any way to inappropriate sexual behavior.” Feinstein disputed Grassley’s version of events, stating she had sought to handle Ford’s allegations in a manner that would honor her initial request for confidentiality. “What I find most inexcusable is this rush to judgement, the unwillingness to take these kinds of allegations at face value and look at them for what they are,” she said, “a real question of character for someone who is asking for a lifetime appointment to the supreme court”. If confirmed to the supreme court, Kavanaugh will shift the nine-justice bench in a decisively conservative direction, potentially reshaping social and cultural issues such as abortion, LGBT rights and immigration for decades to come. He was nominated by Trump in July to replace the retiring justice Anthony Kennedy, a conservative who earned a reputation of acting as a crucial swing vote. In advance of Thursday’s hearing, Trump emphatically defended Kavanaugh but signaled there was potential yet for him to change his mind about his own nominee. “I think it’s going to be a very, very important day in the history of our country,” Trump said on Wednesday at a press conference in New York. The Republicans on the committee, all of whom are men, delegated their questioning of Ford to an outside female prosecutor from Arizona, Rachel Mitchell. Four women serve on the committee on the Democratic side. While Democrats focused on the impact the alleged assault had on Ford’s life, Mitchell instead conducted her line of questioning as though Ford was on trial in a court of law. The contrast raised doubts over the Republican strategy of bringing in an outside lawyer, whose emphasis at times appeared to be on unearthing potential inconsistencies in Ford’s account. Even Fox News, the conservative network favored by Trump, was critical of the way the hearing had been handled. “This is a disaster for the Republicans,” Fox host Chris Wallace said, while adding of Ford’s testimony: “This was extremely emotional, extremely raw and extremely credible.” Another Fox host, Brit Hume, said Ford came across as a “very sympathetic witness”. Before the hearing, Republicans had cast doubt on Ford’s account and dismissed the allegations against Kavanaugh as part of a “smear campaign” orchestrated by Democrats to obstruct his nomination. Democrats have meanwhile said Kavanaugh should withdraw his nomination and called for an FBI investigation into the allegations. Trump told reporters on Wednesday he believed the accusations against Kavanaugh were false, likening them to the sexual assault allegations made against him by as many as 19 women. “You have a man who is great, outstanding, but he has charges against him,” Trump said, adding: “It has happened to me many times.” In her testimony, Ford rebuked the notion that she was “acting out of political motivations”. “Those who say that do not know me. I am a fiercely independent person and I am no one’s pawn,” she said. “It is not my responsibility to determine whether Mr Kavanaugh deserves to sit on the supreme court. My responsibility is to tell the truth.”