Having cancer changes everything; and when one of your closest friends dies from cancer, the world changes again, says Lauren Mahon. For Mahon, who co-presented the podcast You, Me and the Big C with Rachael Bland, her own cancer diagnosis had inspired the desire to find love. Now, her colleague’s death has given the quest a new urgency. Mahon sounds focused and warm when we meet, a tall order just days after Bland’s death, and despite what she describes as the “tornado” of TV and radio interviews since last week. But that is absolutely in the spirit of the conversation-changing programme the women created along with the podcast’s third presenter, Deborah James. Mahon only met Bland and James for the first time in March, when they recorded the opening episode of the podcast: in the six months since the three women – all current or former cancer sufferers – have sought to change society’s approach to the disease, and how we think about it, talk about it and act around it. They have tackled subjects such as money, children, work and doctors through the prism of their own experiences, in an entirely honest and sometimes raucous way. One of the most recent episodes was on intimacy and dating; and that is apposite, given that Mahon is currently appearing on First Dates Hotel on Channel 4. Having cancer, she says, has totally changed her perspective on dating. “Before I got ill I was a very ‘legs open, heart closed’ kind of girl. I’m not saying I was promiscuous, but I would take someone home, have a couple of nights with them and then never speak to them again. “I was having a lot of fun but not letting anyone into my heart. But when I got cancer, I said to the doctor, ‘I don’t want to die – I want to get married, I want to have children’ … I realised I wanted to take my love life more seriously.” Tonight, viewers will find out whether the burgeoning relationship between Mahon, 33, and the Cole Lockhart–from–The–Affair lookalike Patrick is going to hot up, or not. The surprise for viewers last week – and Mahon herself – was that the blind date, chosen by the programme’s production team, was someone she actually knew. That was “a massive shock,” she says. “I’ve known him for about six years. We were never bezzies but he’s part of one of my groups of friends. The funny thing is that a few weeks ago I was telling some of these friends what I’d asked for from the First Dates team, and they said, “Why don’t you just go out with Pat?” And then there he was, walking in … and I was like, but I know him; nothing is going to happen here. But another part of me was thinking, let’s just wait and see …” Tonight’s episode, she says, is “really heartwarming … I think it will touch a lot of people. I’ve had a lot of positive feedback [from people who know what happens]. I think the public are going to have me in their hearts.” She had already applied to be on First Dates before being diagnosed with breast cancer, and the first time they called she was in treatment; “I said, ‘I’m bang in the middle of chemo, mate.’” Chemotherapy and dating don’t sit well together for most people; but having sex does let you know you’re alive, and “when I came out of it I threw myself into my sex life … I saw quite a few people and it was a way to feel like a woman again rather than a vessel”. In the months that followed she started to think more deeply about “laying myself bare and putting my heart on the table”. Telling dates about her cancer isn’t as tricky for Mahon as it is for some people – she had a lumpectomy, not a mastectomy, so her body hasn’t changed as much as it might have, and she says the disease has become “my career, it’s part of my life”. What is harder to tackle is the early menopause into which her treatment has thrown her, and the fact that she has had eggs frozen to give her the possibility of children in the future. “And not only all that, but emotional side-effects you get from a cancer diagnosis … and if someone isn’t OK with all that, then they’re not going to be for me.” Although she is an extrovert, she says, she is “most vulnerable” when it comes to matters of the heart. “A big barrier had gone up there,” she says. “And now if someone was to let me down, I’d feel it in a much bigger way.” But cancer is about potential and hope, as well as suffering and pain, and that is what has changed things for Mahon. “It’s opened up that side of me,” she says. “I’m ready to change the way I look at it now. I’m not just looking for sex, I’m looking for love.” Bland, a broadcaster with BBC Radio 5 Live, and Mahon were already in touch when the idea of a podcast was hatched. The two had been diagnosed with cancer within months of each another in the autumn of 2016, and Mahon, a social media manager, had started an upbeat blog, Girl vs Cancer, about her own journey through diagnosis, surgery and chemotherapy. She met Bland after she, too, had set up a blog, Big C, Little Me: Putting the Can in Cancer. “We would comment on one another’s pictures and follow one another’s journeys,” says Mahon. “And, in December 2017, Rachael emailed and said she loved everything I was doing, and would I be interested in this idea she’d had for a podcast? And I said, ‘A hundred per cent yes.’ I didn’t realise at that stage that it would be for the BBC – I didn’t know what Rachael did, I knew her because of breast cancer.But then we started talking on the phone and putting the wheels in motion, and suddenly it was all a bit daunting. But Rachael had this way about her; she was like, ‘It’s a podcast, we can’t really go wrong.’ She made us feel so comfortable, and she taught Deborah and me how to do it.” Life moves fast when you have cancer – I know, I’ve had it too – and the podcast became a reality very quickly. (The production staff were apparently shocked when they realised the three women only met for the first time on the day of the initial recording.) The sense of urgency was mirrored by the pace of the conversations on the podcast. From the chirpy way Bland, Mahon and James approached their subject, it was also clear that, though they were as terrified as anyone about the increasingly ubiquitous disease, they weren’t willing to change who they were because of it. Cancer, their logic went, takes enough from those it affects, without allowing it to strip out our personalities. We give it too much power if wetalk about it in hushed or even respectful voices, allowing it to make us into “cancer sufferers” rather than the individuals we are. In part, their attitude came from being so young when they were diagnosed (James has bowel cancer); all three were in their 30s, and have said that the whole tenor of the conversation around cancer seemed aimed at a different generation, perhaps even a different age. I know what they mean: I was 51 when I was diagnosed with breast cancer four years ago, and even though I was two decades older than they were, thatis very much how it felt. No part of me identified with either the victim–language of the endless pamphlets (and God, there are so many of them), or the pictures of people looking lank, worried, defeated and oh–so old. There seemed to be an assumption that was going unchallenged that cancer made you a different kind ofbeing from everyone around you. In fact, the greatest gift anyone cangive you when you have cancer is to recognise that you are still yourself, and that, while you have cancer today, they might have it tomorrow. One in two of us, after all,is now likely to get cancer; andmore and more of us will surviveit. Not Bland, though. And when someone dies from the disease you have had, it makes you catch your breath, forcing you to look at something you deny most of the time; that this horrible thing you think you have left behind could still come back and kill you. Mahon, who, like me, is now cancer–free, agrees: she is mourning a friend this week, but she is also thinking about her own mortality. “I’d be lying if I said Rachael’s dying didn’t make me reflect on it,” she says. “My friends talk about their plansand the future, but I do spend a lot of time thinking my cancer will come back. That is my biggest fear; but I’d take great comfort from leaving this world knowing I’d madea big dent in it. So many people just come and go [through life].” That, indeed, is one of the bestthingsabout having cancer – the realisation that your time is finite, and that if you want to do anything you need to do it now. Series three of First Dates Hotel continues on Tuesday at 9.15pm on Channel 4; download and subscribe to the You, Me and the Big C podcast.