Jürgen Klopp claimed Liverpool’s dramatic victory over Paris Saint-Germain showed there is not a mountain his team cannot climb in the Champions League. Roberto Firmino’s injury-time winner inflicted a first defeat of the season on the French champions while maintaining Liverpool’s 100% start. The Brazil forward was a late substitute having damaged an eye at Spurs on Saturday and struck a superb finish after Kylian Mbappé had equalised for Thomas Tuchel’s team in the 83rd minute. PSG are among the favourites for this season’s competition but having started the Champions League in the same thrilling fashion that took his team to the final last season, Klopp insisted Liverpool’s win confirms they are a match for anyone. The Liverpool manager said: “The cool development of this club is that when you hear Liverpool are playing PSG you don’t think we have no chance any more. One, two or three years ago maybe people thought it’s a mountain we cannot climb. It’s still so unbelievably difficult. It’s not that you can plan for it. What the boys make of the match plan is extraordinary. One of them a yard less tonight and it’s game over. They were so in the game, and while we had to fight a lot we also played football. “It’s a lot more tuned than maybe it was in the past. We played a midfield that played a lot together last year. It was clear that [Jordan] Hendo would come back and it was a brilliant performance from him. Physical wise, so good. We know the players after the World Cup have struggled a bit. He opened the bottle tonight and is ready now, so that’s really important for us. We didn’t learn a lot that we didn’t already know before but it’s nice to know we can do it again.” Klopp praised the contribution of Daniel Sturridge, who marked his first Champions League start for Liverpool with the opening goal, and admitted it was a close call on Firmino’s involvement following the eye injury. “The day before yesterday it was no chance,” he said. “Yesterday it didn’t look really well and we had only one session this morning. Bobby tested it a little bit but then he went in. I think it is a moment where you have to show faith in the squad. Yes, when you have Bobby Firmino available, you actually always think, ‘Come on, bring him’. But it was nice to see how Daniel performed and he paid 100% back so that’s so cool for him, for us, such an important sign.”