There is nothing new about professionalism in women’s rugby. Since the Netherlands became the first country to award contracts to their women’s sevens players in 2011, the rest of the women’s rugby world has been playing catch-up – off the pitch at least – in the game’s rapid acceleration towards the pro ranks. Australia, New Zealand, Ireland, South Africa, Canada, the US, Russia and Spain quickly followed the Dutch lead and England eventually offered full-time contracts in 2014. So to the casual observer of Monday’s announcement that England are to offer full-time permanent deals to the nation’s top 15s players, perhaps it felt like old news. But that would be to underestimate a groundbreaking decision that is set to change the women’s game for ever. For while there is indeed nothing new about professionalism within women’s rugby, a full-time sevens game is a vastly different beast from a pro 15s game. Primarily this is because sevens funding does not just trickle down from a country’s own national union. Income for top sevens players, who are competing on the World Series and at the Olympics, is usually a mix and match affair with investment also flowing from the many other bodies which offer investment for Olympic sports. In Canada, for example, a significant chunk of its women’s programme is funded by Own the Podium, a not-for-profit organisation which funds an array of Olympic sports. While that funding is hardly excessive, it has meant the shift from amateur to professional in women’s sevens has been relatively pain-free thanks to a stable funding base, while at the same time allowing less-established rugby nations like Spain, Canada, Russia and – for a short period – the Netherlands, to keep up and thrive. The same will not be true in a professional women’s 15s world where primary sources of funding will remain union-driven. England’s deals will include a flat player contract fee plus match fees, on top of which leading players will be free to secure their own sponsorship and commercial deals. They will become the first permanent full-time Test team, having had contracts trialled for a year in the lead up to the 2017 World Cup, and will have rival nations like France and New Zealand, who currently offer part-time deals to top 15s players, watching on with envy. It was interesting if not naive to see players from other nations herald England’s decision and raise demands for their own unions to follow suit and create a “level playing field”. The stark truth is that there will be no level playing field and, just like the men’s game, the countries offering the most financial clout to their teams will streak ahead. But it will not all be about cash – it will also be about will. Countries like Ireland, Australia and Wales have yet to show significant willing when it comes to matching their potential with the funding that would help to realise it. Countries with less cash, like 2017 World Cup semi-finalists USA and former Six Nations competitors Spain, will find themselves expected to compete with full-time players and falling behind. It would be tempting to draw parallels with where the men’s game was when it turned professional in the 1990s but this time players are contracted to their union, a decision which will bring its own challenges while offering stability. As with all great steps forward in sport, England’s decision has in part been driven by pressure and by lessons learned in failure. The Rugby Football Union faced a PR storm at last year’s World Cup following the news that the players who had taken them all the way to the final would be out of contract and therefore out of a job just hours after the final whistle. The RFU’s announcement on Monday was a vindication of sorts for those, including leading English players, who hammered the union for their poor handling and short-termism. While it is understandable that the RFU’s decision has been reported in some quarters as a U-turn, the truth is it is so much more than that: women’s 15s is going pro and the game is set to change for ever.