‘It’s extraordinary. It’s not polished. It’s personal. It feels like you’re in the room with him,” says Prince and the Revolution keyboard player/vocalist Lisa Coleman, describing the previously unreleased recording of 17 Days. The track is an exclusive preview of the forthcoming Prince album, Piano & A Microphone 1983, which captures the star solo, tinkling the ivories and singing in his home studio. 17 Days began life that same year in a warehouse outside Minneapolis. As Prince and the Revolution began rehearsals, Coleman started playing organ with a reggae feel. “And we just started jamming on that,” the musician remembers. “Prince really liked it and we worked on it all day. The ‘ha ha ha’ backing vocals came quickly. I think he had the lyrics the next day. He always worked pretty quickly.” Thus, according to Coleman, the subsequent piano session – which also features an embryonic Purple Rain – consists of Prince “really getting to know the songs more personally. Getting them into his body.” Prince Rogers Nelson is well-known for his singing, songwriting, guitar playing and dancing, but perhaps less so for his piano skills, which make these tracks such fascinating insight into his creative process. 17 Days seems to contain hints of New Orleans jazz and classical. “He came from the church, so his gospel and soul playing was instinctive,” Coleman explains. “But then he would be attracted to more harmonically complex or jazz things or things with more space, like Joni Mitchell.” A cover of the folk singer-songwriter’s A Case of You appears on the album along with a skeletal version of the key Prince track Strange Relationship, a song Coleman says “hung around for years” before he eventually recorded it for Sign O’ the Times. “He was amazing with his output but he didn’t leave a lot unfinished,” Coleman says. “So he could have a song for ages and suddenly start playing it again and say, ‘Let’s do something with this!’ He was fast but he was also careful.” 17 Days first appeared in full band form in 1984, on the B-side of When Doves Cry, with Prince sharing songwriting credits with Coleman and Wendy Melvoin [aka Wendy and Lisa], and keyboardist Matt “Doctor” Fink. “Usually, the initial ideas came from him,” Coleman explains. “But this really came from the outside in, from the jam.” The lyrics, of course, are Prince’s, and Coleman believes that the song’s tale of a lonely person whose lover has left him for someone else is typical of the man behind the mythology. “He sang the part of the lonely person a lot, like When You Were Mine or The Beautiful Ones. Even though he’s got the prowess of a” – she laughs – “love god, an incredible kind of fantasy person, at the same time he was like a deer in headlights, a very vulnerable person. Those big brown eyes would kill you. But he struggled with his success. One of the reasons he stayed in Minnesota all his life is that it allowed him a little bit of freedom. It was hard after Purple Rain, because it was limos and planes and thousands of people, all the time. I think it was hard for him to decide when he could just be Prince, the guy, and when he had to become Prince the superstar. He gave himself so thoroughly to it.” Indeed, in some ways the Piano & A Microphone 1983 recordings mark the start of that transition from star to global megastar, which he became after 1984’s Purple Rain. “Absolutely,” Coleman says. “He was working day in, day out at being something great. If that meant recording himself at the piano and studying it later he would do it. He would observe himself: recordings, videos, mirrors around the house. He’d dance himself so hard, practising spinning around, the splits, high heels, everything. He wanted to make sure that when the time came – and he was going to make that time come – he would be something that would make the world go, ‘Wow.’” • Piano & A Microphone 1983 is released on 21 September. • The Revolution play Shepherd’s Bush Empire, London, 13-14 February.