Guests who stayed at a London hotel used by two men suspected of the novichok poisoning of Sergei and Yulia Skripal in Salisbury have been urged by the chief medical officer to contact the investigation team. Professor Sally Davies said anyone who stayed at the City Stay hotel, in Bow, east of the capital between 4 March – the day Alexander Petrov and Ruslan Boshirov checked out – and 4 May, when it was deemed safe, should get in touch. She described identifying and reassuring guests as one of the main remaining issues of concern. Davies said police had conducted tests and “this [the suspects’] room was only allowed back into use after experts deemed it to be safe”. The City Stay hotel, where Petrov and Boshirov spent two nights, was open as usual on Wednesday. Although the building, next door to Bow Church DLR station, was declared safe in early May, there was police activity inside and outside the building, with both uniformed and plainclothes officers present. In a statement, the hotel management said: “We are fully supporting the police investigation. We are reassured that the police and Public Health England have confirmed very clearly that there is no health risk whatsoever to our guests or our staff.” DI Rob Dodds, on duty at the hotel, said there was no danger to the public. Despite the tests having been carried out more than three months ago, he said staff had only just been told about the link to the Novichok poisoning. The choice of hotel by the suspects appears to be an attempt to remain as low profile as possible. Although it lies just 100 metres from Bow Road police station, it is an unimposing building that looks as if it has seen better days. Rooms begin at £49 for a single en-suite room according to the hotel’s website. Online reviews are mixed, with City Stay earning an average rating of 2.8 out of five on Expedia and three out of five on Tripadvisor. One posted by Alex (no surname provided) on Expedia the day after the Russian pair departed, read: “Staff rude, said good morning and they ignored me completely. Staff (I believe) talking and shouting loudly early in the morning. Room was ok, but smelled strongly of damp. Shower head almost completely blocked with limescale.”