Born in London, Martin Clunes, 56, starred in the 90s television sitcom Men Behaving Badly. He went on to play Richard Burbage in the 1998 award-winning film Shakespeare In Love and starred in the 2002 TV film Goodbye, Mr Chips. Since 2004, he has played the lead role in the television drama Doc Martin and he appears in the ITV adaptation of Vanity Fair, which starts tomorrow. He is married with a daughter and lives in Dorset. When were you happiest? On childhood family holidays in Mallorca, with my mum, dad and sister, Amanda. What is your earliest memory? Lying in an old-fashioned pram as a baby, in the garden of our house in Wimbledon. What was your most embarrassing moment? Starting to wet the bed at boarding school after my dad died. It went on into my early teens and was a nightmare for me – and the rest of the dormitory. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought? A bespoke wagonette I had made in Germany; I drive a pair of Clydesdale horses called Ronnie and Bruce. What do you most dislike about your appearance? The lot. Who would play you in the film of your life? Scarlett Johansson; we’ve got the same mouth. What is your most unappealing habit? Drinking. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you? Someone I used to share a flat with said: “God, you’re ugly.” Which words or phrases do you most overuse? “No worries.” What is your guiltiest pleasure? The car I picked up yesterday – a Lexus. I am slightly mutton dressed as lamb. Which book changed your life? The Master And Margarita by Bulgakov. I was in my early 20s when I read it and it gave me a different slant on adulthood. What was the best kiss of your life? The first kiss with my wife, Philippa, in a little flat in south London. What is the worst job you’ve done?A kitchen porter at some big telecom office in Wimbledon. I was also a kitchen porter at L’Escargot and, while I was there, a model for Gilbert and George. It was a quick £15 and they were terribly nice. If you could go back in time, where would you go? To the height of the horse-drawn era. When did you last cry, and why? I often cry when people do things well, like on Britain’s Got Talent; I cried at the old ladies doing finger knitting. What is the closest you’ve come to death? Abseiling down a cliff for Doc Martin in a suit, carrying a medical bag. What single thing would improve the quality of your life? Retiring. What has been your closest brush with the law? A long time ago, I failed a breathalyser test and was banned for a year. How would you like to be remembered?Frequently. What is the most important lesson life has taught you? Calm down and take a look around you.