1) Geraldao Dutra Pereira or Geraldão, a centre-back by trade, scored probably the greatest swerving free-kick of all time that you haven’t seen for Cruzeiro in 1986. 2) Burt Reynolds, who died last week aged 82, was a college football running back before he headed for Hollywood and starred in one of cinema’s most famous gridiron depictions in the Longest Yard, a tale of a former NFL player recruiting a group of prisoners to play against their guards. Here’s a trailer for the 1974 film. Until Vinnie Jones made Mean Machine, a football-based remake in 2001, the closest UK equivalent to The Longest Yard’s in-game action was this scene from 1979’s Porridge: The Movie. 3) Saturday is T20 Blast finals day at Edgbaston, and here’s highlights of last year’s final, where the Notts Outlaws outblasted the Birmingham Bears and Gloucestershire’s Alfred the Gorilla won the Mascot’s Race for the second year in succession. Can anyone possibly live up to the brilliance of Chris Gayle’s 50 in 12 balls for the Melbourne Renegades against the Adelaide Strikers in 2016? Probably not. 4) Wesley Sneijder has retired from international football after 134 caps and 31 goals. To mark the occasion, he sat with his family in a makeshift on-field and watched highlights of his days with the Oranje. Here is a lengthier montage of his finest moments, and the finest day of his international career, downing Brazil in the 2010 World Cup quarter-finals with both goals in Port Elizabeth. He scored five goals at the 2010 tournament as the Dutch reached the final. 5) Moto2 rider Romano Fenati has retired from the sport in disgrace, having lost his cool during the San Marino GP when grabbing the brake of fellow Stefano Manzi. He had some form. Elsewhere … bah gawd king! That’s all these angry motocross riders’ music! Then, of course, the all-time two-wheeled rage clip. Some rather more palatable motorcycling action from this year’s Goodwood Revival Meeting, where Troy Corser handles a classic 1929 BMW R57 to win the Barry Sheene Memorial Trophy. 6) There’s quite simply no stopping Oakland Raiders running back Marshawn Lynch. Here, he gives an insight into his philosophy – contains swearing. As this tweet doing the rounds shows, Lynch hasn’t always been so uncompromising. 1) What do you mean, you’ve never heard of Kin-Ball? 2) Look who congratulates Nyal Bell after his magnificent goal for Stockport County. 3) If anything, Clive Allen hit this too well. 4) The best overhead kick of all time? Take a bow, Fiorentina’s Mauro Bressan.5) Danny Hart’s legendary winning downhill run at Champery in 2011 to win the UCI Mountain Bike World Championships. Do subscribe if you fancy. Do subscribe if you fancy.