Danny Cipriani has been left out of the first England training squad since his convictions for common assault and resisting arrest. Cipriani has since made a flying start to the season with Gloucester but he is the eye-catching omission from Eddie Jones’s 36-man squad, which includes Manu Tuilagi and the suspended Chris Ashton. Cipriani is England’s incumbent fly-half, having made a first start in a decade against South Africa in June, but in August he was arrested following a nightclub incident during Gloucester’s pre-season tour of Jersey. He was fined a total of £4,000 and found guilty by the Rugby Football Union of “conduct prejudicial to the interest of the game”. This month Jones revealed he had since visited Cipriani and that he would “make a decision on whether he’s going to add value to the team”. He also added that: “If a guy gets in trouble all the time you’ve got to have second thoughts about it.” Jones does not name his squad for England’s autumn internationals until 18 October – this is a three-day training camp in Bristol where the players will, among other things, get accustomed to their new defence coach, John Mitchell – but while Cipriani’s hopes of retaining his place are not over, his omission would suggest his chances are damaged. Tuilagi meanwhile, is rewarded for showing some semblance of early-season form – he has started all three of Leicester’s matches and scored a fine try against Newcastle – and is included by Jones for the first time since he was sent home in disgrace after a late-night drinking session last August. He has not played for England since a replacement appearance against Wales during the 2016 Six Nations and not started since the summer of 2014 but Jones’s decision to cast his eye over him makes obvious sense with exactly 12 months to go until the World Cup. ForwardsTom Curry (Sale), Jamie George (Saracens), Dylan Hartley (Northampton), Nathan Hughes (Wasps), Nick Isiekwe (Saracens), Maro Itoje (Saracens), George Kruis (Saracens), Joe Launchbury (Wasps), Courtney Lawes (Northampton), Joe Marler (Harlequins), Zach Mercer (Bath), Michael Rhodes (Saracens), Chris Robshaw (Harlequins), Nick Schonert (Worcester), Brad Shields (Wasps), Kyle Sinckler (Harlequins), Billy Vunipola (Saracens), Mako Vunipola (Saracens), Harry Williams (Exeter), Mark Wilson (Newcastle) BacksChris Ashton (Sale), Mike Brown (Harlequins), Danny Care (Harlequins), Joe Cokanasiga (Bath), Elliot Daly (Wasps), Nathan Earle (Harlequins), Owen Farrell (Saracens), George Ford (Leicester Tigers), Alex Lozowski (Saracens), Jonny May (Leicester Tigers), Jack Nowell (Exeter), Dan Robson (Wasps), Henry Slade (Exeter), Ben Te’o (Worcester), Manu Tuilagi (Leicester), Ben Youngs (Leicester Tigers) “It’s the first time in the three years I’ve been in England that Manu’s been fit,” said Jones. “He’s put together a series of games and we’re looking forward to him continuing on that run. He’s got the opportunity to come in and show us what he’s got.” Ashton’s selection is not surprising in that Jones had hinted at including him a couple of weeks ago but he is currently in the middle of a seven-week suspension for a tip tackle during pre-season and will not have played a competitive match this season before Jones names his autumn squad. Ashton was included in Jones’s August training squad however, in what constituted an immediate recall following his summer move from Toulon to Sale. “The training camp in Bristol is our last opportunity to get the squad together before the [autumn] internationals so it is vital we put down some parameters, particularly with John Mitchell coming in as defence coach,” said Jones. “We’ll implement a slightly different defence philosophy building on the great work Paul Gustard has done to keep advancing our defence. It’s a great opportunity for the players to work with John and for the team to keep evolving.” Among the other notable inclusions is Michael Rhodes, Saracens’ uncapped South Africa-born flanker who may make his debut against the Springboks in England’s opening autumn fixture on 3 November. Billy Vunipola is in the squad, as are Zach Mercer and Joe Cokanasiga but their Bath teammate Sam Underhill is a surprise omission. As are the Exeter pair of Luke Cowan-Dickie and Sam Simmonds – though the former suffered a rib injury at the weekend and the latter missed out through illness. The Wasps pair of Joe Launchbury and Brad Shields are both included despite carrying injuries while Danny Care, George Kruis and Jack Nowell all return the squad. Dan Cole is still not in the squad though, nor is James Haskell following his summer move to Northampton. Jones added: “It’s a chance to get the players thinking about England and the way we want to play for England and the way we want to beat South Africa. These players have the opportunity to press their chances for selection ahead of the first Test so they will have to be enthusiastic and ready to give their best.”