I am not very good at speaking, in public or private. If it’s a matter of recounting facts, I manage more or less to bring them to a conclusion. But if I have to explain my reasoning, argue rigorously, I get agitated, confused – everything seems to fly out of my head. Things go badly in particular if I’m dealing with people who I think have some authority. I have everything clear in my mind to start with, and yet it’s as if, after a few words, something gives way. I lose faith in what I wanted to say, the taut thread of the argument I had in mind breaks, I keep repeating: “I’m sorry, but I can’t explain.” On the very rare occasions when I have had to speak in public, I spent days preparing a text. I memorised it, so as to give the impression of speaking spontaneously; but I ended up reading it line for line and, naturally, boring the audience, who prefer speakers who improvise and know how to stir the emotions, how to entertain. I, too, admire people who have that ability, and I’ve made an effort to accept the fact that I don’t. I feel master of myself – insofar as anyone can be master of herself – only if I write. Even interviews, in the end, become a flight from speech, an exercise in writing. Some people reproach me for giving so few interviews, and some consider that I give too many. Almost 30 years ago, when journalists first asked to interview me, I prevaricated, then refused. In reality, although I use the word myself, I have never “given an interview”. In interviews, the subject entrusts her body, her facial expressions, her eyes, gestures and, above all, her way of speaking to the writing of the interviewer – a conversation that is improvised, temperamental, disjointed. Against the face-to-face encounter, I have preferred – because of my own limitations – a written correspondence. The journalist thinks about it and writes me her questions; I think about it and write my answers. In the past I didn’t think I was capable of organising answers suitable for publication. Or they seemed too compact, often a yes or a no. A question of a few lines became an occasion for reflection, and then I wrote pages and pages. Now I seem to have learned how, and I find these written exchanges increasingly useful – for myself, naturally. It results in writing that should be set beside the books like a fiction not very different from the literary one. I invent myself for a journalist, but the journalist – especially when she is herself a writer – invents herself for me, through her questions. And I address not only the interviewer and our eventual readers but also myself, or at least that substantial part of myself that considers using up so much time writing – being an author – senseless, and needs reasons to justify this waste of a life. • Translated by Ann Goldstein