I remember my first taste of halva, from the deli counter at our local suburban supermarket, where it was kept in a plastic box on top of the cheese counter. My mum used to buy big hunks of it, chipped off the block with a satisfying crumbly precision. Halva represents all that I love about sweets and cakes from the Middle East, the contrast of something pleasingly sweet with a savoury note from sesame to cardamom and saffron. Here are two easy treats that tread the fine line between sweet and savoury with perfect balance. I recently ate a honey cake baked by Alex from 26 Grains in London, for Cook for Syria, a charity supper club that turned into two cookbooks and a global movement raising money for Syrian children. For days afterwards, I could think of very little else. This is my version of Alex’s cake. It makes a large loaf and is quite rich, so you’ll get a lot of slices out of it. Prep 10 minCook 1 hrMakes 1 loaf For the cake 200g light spelt or plain flour150g ground almonds2 tsp baking powderSea salt250g unsalted butter200g demerara sugar 150ml honeyZest of 1 orangeZest of 1 lemon4 medium eggs For the drizzle4 tbsp honey1 tsp orange blossom water2 tsp toasted sesame seeds1 tsp fennel seeds4 cardamom pods1 tsp coriander seeds To serveHoneyYoghurt Heat the oven to 170C/335F/gas 3. Grease and line a large 900g (2lb) loaf tin with baking paper. Put the flour, almonds, baking powder and a good pinch of salt into a large mixing bowl and whisk until there are no lumps of baking powder. In a stand-up mixer fitted with a cake paddle, or with an electric hand whisk, beat the butter, sugar and honey until creamy and combined. Add both zests, then add the eggs one by one, mixing well between each one. Add the dry ingredients a large spoonful at a time, mixing between each one. Tip the mixture into the prepared tin and smooth out the top with the back of a spoon. Bake for 55 minutes to one hour, until the cake is dark golden on top. It will sink a little in the middle. Take the cake out of the oven and leave to cool in the tin. Put all the drizzle ingredients into a small saucepan, bring to a simmer and reduce to a thin syrup – it will thicken a little more as it cools. Leaving the cake in the tin, prick with a skewer and pour over the syrup, then leave the cake in the tin until cooled completely. Serve in thick slices with honey stirred through yoghurt and with mint and orange blossom tea. An almost no-effort dessert I often make to end a meal with friends. Figs are my favourite, but any soft fruit or compote would work here – ripe plums and peaches are particularly good. I’ve written the recipe for two, but it is very easy to multiply for a crowd. Prep 5 minServes 2 4 ripe figs2 tbsp honey4 scoops good vanilla ice-cream50g halva, crumbled1 small handful pistachios, roughly chopped Peel and mash two figs and stir in the honey. Cut the remaining figs into quarters. Take two glasses and spoon in a quarter of the mashed figs, top with a scoop of ice-cream, a crumble of halva, a couple of quarters of fig and some chopped pistachios. Then repeat the process, finishing with the final pieces of fig and the last of the pistachios. Eat immediately.