There was no acceptable alternative to victory for Alex McLeish in this, Scotland’s Nations League opener. The manager – unmoved from the pitchside for 90 minutes in pouring rain – knew that all right, such has been the scale of audible discontent surrounding the Scottish team. Handily for McLeish Albania provided woefully limited opposition on the kind of mundane occasion so disappointingly removed from those who once made Hampden Park a place for visiting teams to fear. Still, in this context, a win mattered more than anything. That Scotland deserved it was a bonus. This success affords McLeish that priceless managerial commodity: breathing space. Earlier friendly fixtures cannot be discarded in analysis of this, McLeish’s second tenure, but here Scotland won when it mattered. The Nations League may yet prove their major tournament salvation. McLeish caused a pre-match stir by leaving out Leigh Griffiths, Stuart Armstrong and James Forrest. The deployment of Stephen O’Donnell and Andy Robertson meant they started proceedings with five defenders. When at home to the 58th ranked team in the world, this was bound to raise eyebrows. McLeish’s starting XI was more defensive in orientation than took to the field against Belgium on Friday. Yet Scotland opened in positive fashion. Albania spent the first 20 minutes camped inside their own half, which appeared a serious touchline source of frustration for their manager, Christian Panucci. Scotland’s only problem at this juncture related to poor decision making on the regular moments when they found themselves within 20 yards of goal. There was also an extraordinary let-off for the visitors. John McGinn’s free-kick was headed into the path of Steven Naismith by Charlie Mulgrew. Naismith had the simplest of tasks to head home, with the Hearts player instead watching his effort bounce off a post and across the goalline to safety. Naismith had the ball in the net before the interval, only for the close-range strike to be correctly ruled out for offside. Albania’s only response came via Ledian Memushaj, who dragged a shot wide after McGinn had handed him possession. Scotland were to receive the early second-half stroke of fortune they, on balance of play alone, will claim was merited. Naismith, on the occasion of winning his 47th cap, was again in an offside position when moving to meet a Robertson cross. No flag was forthcoming, with Naismith’s header finding the net after a deflection from Berat Xhimshiti. Albania almost responded within seconds, Bekim Balaj instead fluffing his lines after another McGinn blunder. The same attacker was soon brilliantly thwarted by the outstretched legs of Allan McGregor. Balaj’s third opportunity was his best, with a volley from a left-sided cross flying over McGregor’s crossbar. Scotland needed the cushion that duly arrived in the 68th minute. McGinn’s corner found its way to Naismith, with the Albania goal unguarded because of the erratic dive of Thomas Strakosha. Albania never looked capable of clawing themselves back into proceedings; and duly did not.