The journey towards British domination of world cycling that began in Barcelona in the summer of 1992, when Chris Boardman claimed an Olympic gold medal, is likely to climax in Madrid on Sunday if Simon Yates completes a British grand slam of European road racing’s grand tours. Assuming he survives Saturday’s final mountain stage of the 2018 Vuelta a España in Andorra, Yates will become the first of Bury’s chosen two — he races alongside his twin brother Adam — to win one of cycling’s grand tours. Yates closing on a first grand tour victory — and the fact that he does not ride for Team Sky — is remarkable enough. What is even more astounding is that his success would achieve an unprecedented clean sweep by three different British riders in the 2018 season. Yates would follow Chris Froome in Italy and Geraint Thomas in France, should he win in Spain. It will also be the fifth consecutive grand tour win by a Briton, a sequence that began over a year ago with Froome’s win in the 2017 Tour de France. With two stages remaining the usual caveats apply – not to mention the Giro d’Italia, the Grand Tour in May, in which Yates seemed set fair for victory only to “do a Devon Loch”, collapsing on the mountain climbs only 48 hours from victory to finish a mere also-ran in Rome. The swashbuckling, devil-may-care style that after years of calculated racing by others proved so refreshing, but ultimately so fatiguing, in Italy, has not been evident in Spain. Instead Yates has bided his time and, like his brother Adam, seems to have conserved his energy as much as possible. As the Vuelta reaches its climax, the Spanish media is talking of a “four-legged Yates”, with the twins leaning on each other in the final mountain stages to ensure Simon’s final success. “He’s my secret weapon,” the race leader said of his brother this week. Yates’s success has been almost a decade in the making. As an 18-year-old in 2010, he joined the British Cycling Academy and won a world junior track title. Stage wins in the 2011 and 2013 Tour de l’Avenir, a proving ground for young talent, stole the eye, as did a stage win in the 2013 Tour of Britain. His Tour de France debut came in 2014 and by the following year he was finishing in the top 10 of Alpine races such as the Tour de Romandie and Critérium du Dauphiné. In March 2016 he failed a drug test and served a four-month ban for a “non-intentional” doping violation after his defence of an administrative error was accepted. Twenty-five years ago the prospect of a Briton contending for overall victory in a grand tour was a fantasy. “It was laughable,” Brian Cookson, the former president of British Cycling and UCI president, told the Guardian. Cookson, who became president of British Cycling in 1997, remembers first noticing the Yates twins racing at the Manchester Velodrome. “The Yateses, particularly Simon, are absolutely a product of the system. If the velodrome hadn’t existed they would not have been recruited into the sport. I’m absolutely sure of that.” Cookson agrees that Boardman’s gold medal at the Barcelona Olympic Games was something of an epiphany for a federation which in the early 1990s had only a handful of active members. “There’s a number of ground zeros but Boardman’s gold in Barcelona began to convince people that we could become world class,” he said. There were other significant hurdles, such as the radical changes to the structure and governance of the British Cycling Federation in 1996 and a brutal overhaul of the federation’s ailing finances, which Cookson says were in “a parlous state”. “To secure lottery funding we had to persuade UK Sport that British Cycling was a safe pair of hands,” Cookson said, “and to fulfil the desire to transform the membership as we went from 14,000 members to 100,000 members. “People laughed at the idea of British success in cycling and now it has happened. Yes, British Cycling has taken a bit of stick recently, but what we are seeing now is the proof that the process and the structure was right. OK, Chris Froome’s a bit of an outlier but the development of British talent has been very much built on a structured process. It’s all bearing fruit now.” Before Dave Brailsford’s appointment as British Cycling’s performance director the nation had claimed only one Olympic gold — Boardman’s — in 40 years. Unsurprisingly, Brailsford and Boardman became integral to the Olympic medal hauls in Athens and Beijing – which led on to the founding of Team Sky in 2009 – and then London, fuelled by Brailsford’s ambition in the post-Lance Armstrong era, to move into road racing and win the Tour de France with a “clean” rider. People laughed at the idea of British success in cycling and now it has happened It took Team Sky three years to win the Tour and they have dominated grand tour racing since, taking six Tours de France, a Vuelta a España, a Giro d’Italia and countless other European stage races. That dominance has fuelled unprecedented scrutiny, manic trolling on social media and the unwanted nickname “UK Postal” – an unflattering reference to Armstrong’s former sponsor, US Postal Service. At the climax of last week’s Tour of Britain in London, few among the thousands lining the streets of London’s West End seemed to have any misgivings. Team Sky held sway and drew huge crowds of fans and well-wishers, unbothered by the cynicism towards the team. Away from the selfie-hunters and bodyguards, the peloton journeyman Alex Dowsett, once of Team Sky but now riding for Katusha Alpecin, was able to give perspective to the cultural and sporting revolution in British cycling. The Essex-born rider, a veteran of the European scene, says that the Tour of Britain attracted the “biggest crowds” of any of the non-grand tour races. “On a lot of days the Tour of Britain does compete with grand tours and has Tour de France-esque crowds,” the Giro d’Italia stage winner said. “I think British cycling will continue on an upward trajectory,” the 29-year-old continued. “That’s because a lot of it comes down to the nation embracing cycling as a mode of transport, not just as sport. “If a hundred more people start using bikes then one or two might turn to racing. Thousands of people are getting on to bikes instead of using cars or public transport, and now there’s also phenomenal talent coming through in the junior ranks. “If I was a British junior racer now I think I’d have a much harder time making it as a pro than I did because of the talent there. The pool is so much bigger now. The junior Tour of Wales for example – when I was younger would just about get a full field and include some teams from overseas. “Now they could run it two, maybe three times over, just with young British talent. That’s a massive change. When I was young there were just a couple of us.” So much of the change is cultural, fuelled, as concerns over health and the environment grow, by a renewed enthusiasm for the simplicity of the bicycle but also by the hip and discreet styling that has been led by British clothing brands, such as Rapha, bought last year by Walmart, and David Millar’s CHPT3. The commercial growth of British cycling style – a combination of sharp design and clever marketing rooted in a chic retro style – has also fuelled the growing sense of superiority and swagger. At the top of cycling’s sports marketing pyramid sit Team Sky, a wealthy and dominant franchise that despite all the brickbats and criticisms, rule their sport. A younger Simon Yates was courted by Team Sky but opted to progress his career elsewhere. “It seems that young riders kind of get stalled there because of the hierarchy of Sky,” he said in 2013. “It’s hard for a young rider to get established. It was best for me to sort of break out and try something new. I do not want to get caught up in that web.” This is professional cycling, a sport shadowed by the past and suspicious of consistent success. Scepticism and suspicion hovers in the background, whether it relates to Froome’s salbutamol controversy, Lizzie Armitstead’s missed tests, Simon Yates’s four-month ban or the allegations of “unethical” practices laid at Brailsford’s door by the digital, culture, media and sport select committee report into anti-doping in March. Victory in Madrid would complete a remarkable journey, both for Simon Yates and British cycling as a whole, but like those before him this is a success that will be thoroughly and endlessly scrutinised.