Most cyclists tootle around town at something like 10mph. Competitive amateurs might double that, while elite professionals can exceed 30mph on the flat in events such as the Tour de France. So spare a thought for Russell Bridge, a 41-year-old amateur cyclist and father of twins who will this week lead a British challenge to break the world record for the fastest speed achieved on a “human-powered vehicle” (HPV), which stands at a white knuckle-inducing 89.6mph (144kph). Adding to the challenge is the fact that Bridge has barely ridden the vehicle, a recumbent bicycle housed in a super-smooth shell made out of fibreglass and Kevlar that bears a passing resemblance to a dolphin. “We did a test day at Rockingham Speedway two weeks ago, and I’ve had all of about six minutes in it,” Bridge said. “We got up to 37mph on the first run and 47 on the second but that was without the top bonnet on.” He admitted to feeling nervous as the Aim 93 team (the number represents the maximum miles per hour the team believe the vehicle can theoretically achieve) prepare to fly out to the International Human Powered Vehicle Association competition at Battle Mountain in Nevada. “I’m anxious about it,” he said. “I’ve ridden at reasonably fast speeds on recumbents before but I’ve bought motorycle clothing to protect myself so if the worst happens, and we slide down the road at 70 or 80mph, I’ve at least got some resistance between myself and the road.” Aim 93 is a joint collaboration between two of the giants of Britain’s HPV scene, Glen Thompson and Mike Burrows, long-time rivals who put aside their differences in an attempt to bag a world record for Britain. Thompson is a senior lecturer at London South Bank University who specialises in aerodynamics and as a racer won a silver and four bronze medals at the World HPV championships. Burrows, 75, designed the revolutionary Lotus 108 bicycle on which Chris Boardman won gold at the 1992 Olympics and has built Aim 93’s chassis. Pip Piper, whose company, Blue Hippo Productions, is making a documentary of Aim 93’s quest to break the world record, said the relationship between the two men was crucial to the team’s dynamic. After meeting up in 2013 at the funeral of Richard Ballantine, a legendary cycling writer and key player in the HPV movement, Thompson and Burrows got talking, according to Piper. “They said ‘look, we’ve been rivals for 40 years, trying to outdo one another in terms of human-powered vehicles. Why don’t we have one last hurrah? Let’s get together and do something.’ Glen is more the academic while Mike is a bit more Heath Robinson, building things in his shed.” It used to be people building their own things in garages but it’s all got a bit more technical In this week’s competition, riders from some 20 teams will make their record-breaking attempt on a 200m stretch of highway after cycling more than five miles along it to get their vehicles up to top speed. The location is chosen because it is at altitude and the air is thin. The HPV championships, which date back almost half a century, have changed down the years, said Thompson. “It used to be people building their own things in garages but it’s all got a bit more technical, and you need the resources of a university to build it. You need a lot of computer power to do the computational fluid dynamics to get the aerodynamics right.” Despite it’s futuristic look, much of what was under the shell of Aim 93 was relatively simple, said Thompson. “We’ve gone right back to the roots of cycling to develop this thing. It’s a single speed and it has a very fine chain, much thinner than a normal bicycle chain. “We’ve had special tyres made and we’ve tried to make it as minimal as possible, whereas the other teams tend to be highly complex in terms of transmission.” Thompson, who hopes that the team’s exploits will encourage interest among students in science and technology, said he was not expecting to break the world record. “We are going out there to gather data, do the research, and sort out what we need to do. You can’t go out to Battle Mountain and do it in your first year. No one’s ever done that.” Bridge agreed. “If we get to two-thirds or three quarters of that speed (93mph), we’ll see it as a positive. If we get down the course and arrive safely back home in one piece, then I’ll take that.”