Even in the increasingly filthy world of food porn, these fluffy pancake clouds seem especially X-rated. Perform a Google image search for “Japanese wobbly pancake” – not in the office, obviously; they’re strictly NSFW – and you will see what I mean. There they are, lolloping gently on top of each other, drizzled in syrup, dolloped with cream, and all the while teasing you that they might just float away before you get to taste them. They certainly proved to be elusive. My first attempt to sample them was thwarted after Fuwa Fuwa – the only place in the UK that seems to sell them – ended its east London pop-up residency on the day I was planning to visit. Of course, I wasn’t sad enough to spend the next few months refreshing its Instagram feed every morning, drooling afresh at the pictures. No, it was pure coincidence that, as soon as Fuwa Fuwa opened again at a new central London base, I was knocking on the door with a similarly pancake-enthralled friend. These towering, souffle-style pancakes have been a craze in Japan for a few years – Cafe Gram in Tokyo created the biggest buzz – although, while the rest of the world plays catchup, the Japanese have already moved on to fluffy pancake kebabs. How do they differ from normal pancakes? The basic gist is that the chef separates the whites from the egg, chills them, and then whips up a meringue mix before folding in the yolk and remaining ingredients. Chilling the whites helps keep the batter firm, allowing the pancake-makers to double stack the mix on an electric griddle for impressive height. They slowly brown them underneath before gently rolling them over to finish them off. Agonisingly, upon ordering, we discover a catch. These pancakes are so delicate that they need to be cooked very slowly at a low temperature – and, as everything at Fuwa Fuwa is made to order, that meant a 20-minute wait with nothing but Oolong tea for company. If purgatory for foodies exists, then this is what it feels like. Fuwa Fuwa’s toppings are all ludicrously tempting: salted-caramel miso and popcorn; banana and Nutella. We opt for honeycomb butter on one, and blueberry and yuzu cheesecake on the other. As delicious as they sound, these add-ons had a tendency to overpower the sheer majesty of the pancakes, which are not only as light and lovely as they look but satisfyingly eggy, too. They will not win you many wellness points – I leave feeling giddy, as if I have spent the afternoon inhaling candyfloss – but as a one off, it’s a thumbs-up. And be warned: whether you have waited hours, weeks or months to try these pancakes, they are unlikely to stay on your plate for longer than a minute.