Russia is set for a dramatic return to the international fold after the World Anti-Doping Agency recommended that an organisation that helped over 1,000 of the country’s athletes to cheat the system should be reinstated. The Russian Anti-Doping Agency was declared non-compliant in November 2015 after allegations of massive state sponsored doping. But in a move that will be seen by many as a betrayal of clean sport, Wada’s independent compliance review committee has recommended that Wada’s executive committee should, when it meets on 20 September, allow Rusada to operate again. The decision is bound to upset many athletes, especially as Russia has never accepted that it deliberately cheated across dozens of international sports. On Thursday British athletes sent an unprecedented letter to Wada warning it would be a “catastrophe for clean sport” if Russia were to be reinstated. The letter, which was signed by several top Olympic and Paralympic stars including Lizzy Yarnold, Paula Radcliffe and Callum Skinner, also warned Wada that a U-turn would leave athletes “no longer having faith in the system”, However, in a statement on Friday evening, Wada said a letter from the Russian Ministry of Sport had “sufficiently acknowledged the issues identified in Russia, therefore fulfilling the first of the two outstanding criteria needed for compliance”. For the second outstanding criterion, the compliance review committee “accepted that the new commitment to provide access to the data and samples in the Moscow laboratory to Wada via an independent expert would be sufficient to justify reinstatement, provided that the executive committee imposes a clear timeline for such access.” The statement marks a considerable U-turn from the previous recommendation from the CRC, published on Thursday, which said Russia had not met the outstanding criteria. No explanation has been given for such a dramatic change of heart. The news was greeted with dismay by Travis Tygaart, the head of US Anti-Doping. “Frankly it stinks to high heaven,” he said. “It’s no wonder clean athletes are shocked and outraged at Wada’s sudden about-turn curiously just days before its crunch meeting, and one day after clean athletes came out in force across the world to implore Wada to respect their rights.” Should Wada’s executive committee follow the recommendation of the CRC next week, it could also prompt Russia to be welcomed back by the IAAF, athletics’ governing body, and the International Paralympic Committee.