Jeremy Corbyn is facing a showdown with Labour MPs on Monday amid growing fears in sections of the parliamentary party that his supporters are systematically trying to purge MPs who dare to criticise the leadership. The party leader will attend what is expected to be a stormy meeting in the House of Commons, at which several MPs will call on him to guarantee that he and his office are not behind moves to deselect MPs who have criticised him. Last night, Angela Smith, MP for Penistone and Stocksbridge, who sits on the representative body of MPs, the parliamentary committee, said the atmosphere in the party was so negative it raised questions about its ability to survive: “It is time for Jeremy to show some leadership by making it clear he will not support measures to deselect Labour MPs. The mood within the party is unbelievably tense and threatens its very existence. Resolution of this situation is in his hands and he needs to act quickly.” After a summer in which Labour has been dogged by claims of antisemitism, Brexit disagreements and claims of bullying, several MPs whose views differ from those of the leadership have lost motions of no-confidence in their own local parties and now face battles to avoid deselection. Last week, former minister Joan Ryan, the MP for Enfield North who chairs the Labour Friends of Israel and has spoken out about antisemitism, narrowly lost a confidence vote in her constituency. An Iranian state-backed TV station, which is banned in the UK, carried footage of her local party passing the vote. Ryan, a Labour MP since 1997, said that Iranian journalists had “infiltrated” the party and had targeted her because of her support for Israel: “I’m horrified that they’ve infiltrated the Labour party in this way and I think it needs to be investigated, because it is incredibly serious.” Luton South MP Gavin Shuker also lost a confidence vote. Other MPs in trouble with their own local parties include the veteran former minister Frank Field, who recently quit the parliamentary party, citing the handling of the antisemitism row and bullying in local constituency parties, and Kate Hoey, who has voted with the government on Brexit. No-confidence votes carry no official force within the Labour party but local activists could hold a “trigger ballot”, where sitting Labour MPs can be forced to compete for selection as a candidate against all-comers, ahead of the next general election. Labour MPs also fear the party may vote through rule changes at its party conference in Liverpool this month that would make it easier for local members to deselect them. A party spokesman insisted last night that the leadership was not in any way involved in encouraging or co-ordinating votes of no confidence in MPs. On Saturday, the former shadow business secretary, Chuka Umunna, said Corbyn should “call off the dogs”. He said Labour’s tradition of fighting discrimination was under threat. “There is now a clear and present danger that this tradition is driven out of our party.”