It took me more than half a day to view this year’s Turner prize show – almost everything deserves a second look. One of the best and most demanding in the exhibition’s history, I also see trouble ahead. All the artists use film and digital imagery. No painting, no sculpture. The exhibition begins with an open, light anteroom with sofas and four doorways into the dark. Choose one: each will swallow you whole. The problems are mostly logistical. Imagine what it will be like when the crowds come. It takes three hours to watch Naeem Mohaiemen’s two videos. In Tripoli Cancelled a lone passenger is stranded in the abandoned Ellinikon Airport in Athens, which closed in 2001. He has been here for years. Apart from the modern ruin of the airport itself, Iranian-Greek actor Vassilis Koukalani is the sole protagonist. Wandering the ramps and concourses, haunting the departure lounges, Mohaiemen’s stranded traveller never runs out of cigarettes and there’s always a soft drink at the bar, where he talks to his own reflection. The same airport, the same atmosphere of permanent cancellations and litter-strewn tarmac, was used in John Akomfrah’s 2016 film The Airport. This is better. The marooned traveller composes imaginary letters to his wife, pretends to be a pilot, and makes out with a mannequin dressed as a flight steward. This is a moment of exquisite pathos. We feel trapped, too. Mohaieman’s second, three-channel Two Meetings and a Funeral, is longer. It consists of largely filmed using old stock footage shot at meetings of the Non-Aligned countries during the 1960s and 70s, interspersed with interviews and commentaries. All this is fascinating, and full of alarming, pompous, strident, passionate, devious world leaders, with their manoeuvrings and posturings. We visit a decaying sports arena, abandoned rooms of empty card-index files and a bookshop in Algiers. Mohaieman gravitates towards the ends of things, to entropy and failed ideals. There has been a degree of controversy over the inclusion of the work of Luke Willis Thompson. Thompson, who lives and works in London, is a biracial New Zealander of white and Fijian descent. His film portraits are extremely beautiful. Perhaps too much so. But one cannot dispute the sensitivity towards his subjects, who are ultimately his collaborators. Thompson’s silent 35mm films are projected on to a huge wall, rather than a screen. Their reflections wallow on the floor, just as in gallery screenings of certain films by Steve McQueen. You never forget the physicality of film here, the giant projector clattering in the dark, the ranks of looped film, moving in its cage. Here is Brandon, the grandson of Dorothy “Cherry” Groce, shot by police in her Brixton home in 1985. And Graeme, the son of Joy Gardner, who died after police tried to deport her during a dawn raid in Crouch End in 1993. Groce and Gardner’s descendants face the camera. They blink and look and neither move nor speak. Dark skin, white shirts, filmic light. Bleached highlights, stark tonalities, serious, implacable expressions. One by one they face us. Then Diamond Reynolds, who broadcast the fatal shooting of her boyfriend by police in St Paul, Minnesota during a traffic-stop, on Facebook Live. Thompson collaborated with Diamond in a portrait in two scenes. The camera has shifted slightly, and she’s in three-quarters profile. More mobile than the nearly static portraits of the two men, she appears lost in her thoughts, her sorrows, the words she sings, inaudibly. Finding sorrow and anger and accusation in these three faces, I know I am caught between what the camera projects and my own projection of their unknowable feelings. In a final, colour film Thompson looks closely at the small sculpture the late British artist Donald Rodney made, using scraps of his own shed skin, and held together with dressmaking pins, as he lay ill with sickle cell anaemia. The sculpture is in the form of a house. At once abstract and solid, fragile, translucent and nebulous, this little object turns before us. We see the human tissue in its walls, luminous as alabaster. Thompson has been accused of turning his subjects into a spectacle. Nothing feels further from the truth. His work appears to me as a kind of witnessing, an attending. In the work of Forensic Architecture, the spectacle of violence erupts and is analysed, again and again. You fall through the door into a battle zone of flashes and gunshots, police trucks, stamping feet, shouts, and a constantly sounding car horn. All this is projected and amplified on a curved black screen. Real footage and computer modelling, the careful analysis and reconstruction of a chaotic situation give the lie to official records of what took place when hundreds of Israeli police raided a Bedouin village in order to demolish some houses and killed a villager. A member of an activist documentary film collective was at the scene and shot 95 videos, but in the thick of the events couldn’t understand what had happened. Both in the digital work The Long Duration of a Split Second, and in a larger space beyond, where events and a timeline are reconstructed by way of films, texts, photographs and models, it is a world laid bare. Another kind of archaeology takes place in Charlotte Prodger’s Bridgit, a half hour, single-screen video shot on the artist’s smartphone. Close to the body, but an eye that is not hers, the camera records her movement and stasis. A view of her foot as she rests on a sofa, the radio playing in the background. Her cat mesmerised by a lamp. A T-shirt on a radiator, Alice Coltrane’s music drifting in. Prodger wading in a stream, and on the deck of a ferry, the horizon rising and falling, like breathing. Scotland’s greyness and greenness, standing stones in a field. All this is accompanied by 10 excerpts from Prodger’s journals, in which she talks about coming out, working in a care home, and the experience of going under anaesthetic. These are snatches from a rich and complex work that also draws in standing stones, the names of ancient deities, the names that persist and those we give ourselves, and what happens when we lose ourselves in nature or under an anaesthetic. Literary, lyrical and confessional, Bridgit is both a personal work and an attempt to analyse one’s place in the world. I don’t mind who wins this year’s prize, but Prodger, who will represent Scotland at the next Venice Biennale, is my favourite. Turner Prize 2018 is at Tate Britain, London, from 26 September to 6 January 2019. The winner is announced on 4 December.