Turkey‘s central bank has raised its key interest rate to 24% in a dramatic bid to control rocketing inflation and prevent a currency crisis. Ignoring calls for restraint from President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, the bank raised its main short-term rate from 17.5% following weeks of pressure from international investors. Financial markets have grown increasingly concerned that Turkey is in danger of adding its name to the list of countries seeking a rescue loan from the International Monetary Fund. Argentina agreed a loan earlier in the summer with the IMF and only last month called on the Washington-based lender to release the funds earlier to to ease concerns that the country would not be able to meet its debt obligations over the next year. South Africa, Indonesia and Mexico are also among a group of emerging market economies that have seen their currencies tumble as investors desert countries that have grown quickly using large amounts of borrowed funds. The Turkish lira began to recover shortly after the rate hike, strengthening by 3% to 6.16 against the dollar. Inflation also soared this month to a 15-year high of almost 18%. The currency has plunged in recent months and even after Thursday’s rise was down almost 39% against the dollar this year. Investors have focused their concerns on Ankara following Erdoğan’s re-election and his grab for control of the country’s economy. The leader placed his son-in-law as head of the finance ministry and in a separate move has attempted to take control of the country’s sovereign wealth fund. A growing crisis became acute earlier this year following the detention of an American pastor on espionage and terror-related charges, which prompted Donald Trump to double the import tariffs on Turkish steel and aluminium. The central bank’s interest rate hike, which surprised investors with its magnitude, comes amid growing concerns that Erdoğan is pursuing policies that will eventually bankrupt the country. Erdoğan has long been pressuring the bank to keep interest rates low to encourage economic growth. Growth slowed to an annual rate of 5.2% in the second quarter, from the first quarter’s 7.4%. Addressing a meeting of Turkish tradespeople in Ankara on Thursday, before the rate decision was announced, Erdoğan said the central bank is independent and takes its own decisions. He repeated however, his belief that interest rates should be cut, calling them an “instrument for exploitation”. “My sensitivities concerning interest rates are the same, nothing has changed,” he said. “I’m saying let’s cut these high interest rates.” He criticised the central bank, saying it had consistently miscalculated inflation targets and again portrayed the currency crisis as a foreign conspiracy. In a bid to shore up the Turkish lira, Erdoğan’s government issued a decree on Thursday banning the use of foreign currency in the sale and renting of property and the leasing of vehicles. In a statement, the central bank noted that the local economy was weakening while inflation was rising. The rate hike could squeeze growth further, but independent experts say it is needed to contain inflation of about 18% and support the currency. “The central bank will continue to use all available instruments in pursuit of the price stability objective,” the central bank’s monetary policy committee said in a statement. “Tight stance in monetary policy will be maintained decisively until inflation outlook displays a significant improvement.”