It was not Rory McIlroy’s morning. But it most decidedly was his afternoon. And, after the first two matches of the 2018 Ryder Cup, it just about was his day as well. He is a hero risen from the unfamiliar depths of mediocrity to look again like the golfer who owns four majors, and he will surely play a pivotal role in building on Europe’s surprise 5-3 lead going into day two. As Europe, down 3-1, struck back hard to blue-wash the Americans in the afternoon foursomes, McIlroy played the alternate-shot format with Ian Poulter for the first time, and the Englishman’s ever-bubbling personality seemed to lift the Irishman from the torpor that had gripped him in the morning. In the almost windless first session, McIlroy and Thorbjørn Olesen, the 28-year-old Dane making his Ryder Cup debut, were schooled by the world No 1, Dustin Johnson, and Rickie Fowler. But, when the afternoon wind carved viciously through this glorious course, McIlroy and Poulter gave Bubba Watson and Webb Simpson a pretty sound 4&2 beating. “Certainly seems that way,” McIlroy said greenside when asked if Poulter’s energy and enthusiasm had revived his spirits. “The guys had a discussion earlier in the week, and it was a little bit of a last-minute thing that Poults and I would try to play foursomes together. We played well together at Medinah. We played well together at Gleneagles [both in fourballs]. It was nice to get back out there with him and deliver another point for Europe.” Poulter, as emotional as ever at 42 (yet calmer since he ditched the loud trousers and garish tops last year), chipped in: “The second I got to the golf course I was OK. But the whole buildup? I didn’t have my best stuff in the practice rounds, two weeks off leading in. My mind … it’s been a long time since I played a Ryder Cup. Four years is a long wait. But the second I got going this morning, I felt good. It’s great to play with Rory. The buzz around the golf course is just incredible. “I left Rory a couple of seven-foot testers today and he managed to roll them in. It was a good match. The board looking so strong this afternoon, that’s key. The team have done what they do best and that’s be resilient. It’s awesome.” But what a contrast in performance and fortunes it was for McIlroy on day one. The linchpin of Europe’s last three winning campaigns was the only player of the 16 who jousted in the fourballs who failed to get a birdie. It is not often that McIlroy is anonymous on a golf course but, as the tumult gathered on the fairways all around him, he was almost invisible in Olesen’s shadow. Johnson and Fowler drew the sting from the Europeans in a tight front nine, recouped after going one down, then pulled away in the straight. Fowler was perhaps a little generous in his summary of a clear-cut win: “We knew what was going to be needed against Rory and Thorbjørn. They’re great ball-strikers, and we knew it was going to be a tough match.” Any notion that McIlroy would be the European playmaker dissolved on the front nine, Olesen coming to the rescue six times. The senior partner was roused to life briefly after the turn but did not find the after-burners in a one-sided finish. The alternate-shot format – as it is better known to the Americans – has inbuilt frustrations, given a player’s fortunes reside for half the time in the hands of his partner. One down within a few minutes, the challenge for McIlroy and Poulter looked to be considerable. Two down after three, the mound was growing into a hill. Then, a mood change: McIlroy drove beautifully to hand Poulter a gift on to the enormous green of the 486-yard 4th, stopping the rot, and, in a moment of old magic, he drove the 380-yard 6th to set up a birdie as they clawed back a precious hole. On the 7th, McIlroy found the gambling table with a curving approach shot. Roared to the blue skies by the blue-loving crowd, he smiled the smile, and they were back on level terms when the Americans failed to putt out. Poulter’s putter, normally his go-to weapon, was not firing consistently. Luckily, neither was Simpson’s, and McIlroy popped in a three-footer to take them one up, turning the foursomes scoreboard totally blue as they neared the turn. The Americans dragged one back on the par-three 11th but surrendered their little breakthrough immediately and, from there to the end, were never properly in the contest. On the 13th, McIlroy pulled off an extraordinary recovery shot, from well below his feet on the angled bank of one of the course’s many wet graves, and thrashed it on to the green for Poulter, who obliged from 15 feet with a fierce breeze tugging at the ball (after Watson had missed his birdie putt), and they led by three. As Watson said later: “That birdie they made on 13, where Rory hit it on the cliffs of the water and Poulter made it, that was a big turnaround. That could have easily gone our way, and they flipped it on us.” McIlroy drove big down the right with the aid of a crosswind on the 554-yard 14th, angled nicely for the double-tier green. His tidy chip left Poulter a great birdie chance, which lipped out, but, four from home, they were cruising. McIlroy, ignoring the 20mph headwind that ruffled his new haircut, went down two clubs and played safe to reach the 15th, sticking it long and left. He cleaned up the par, after Poulter’s neat, meandering distance putt dribbled downhill. The Americans were spent on the 16th, looking almost relieved to be out of the battle – but still in the campaign.