Labour’s ruling body has agreed to adopt the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance’s definition of antisemitism in full and issued a short statement emphasising freedom of expression on Israel and rights of Palestinians. The national executive committee (NEC) accepted the IHRA definition with all 11 examples at a tense three-hour discussion where Jeremy Corbyn was present, in an attempt to end the long-running row about alleged antisemitism within the party. A party spokesperson said: “The NEC has today adopted all of the IHRA examples of antisemitism, in addition to the IHRA definition which Labour adopted in 2016, alongside a statement which ensures this will not in any way undermine freedom of expression on Israel or the rights of Palestinians.” The spokesperson added that Corbyn had made a statement to the meeting describing action being taken against antisemitism and expressing solidarity with the Jewish community and the importance of the protection of Palestinian rights. Labour said this was welcomed by the NEC “as an important contribution” to the consultation on the subject – but sources added that the party body had refused to endorse it and it had to be withdrawn. The agenda for the NEC, which has about 40 members, had timetabled half an hour for discussion about the IHRA code from 1.45pm, but the debate overran by several hours. Two hours in, the meeting broke for tea, amid “big disagreements” about whether the body would sign up to the Corbyn statement. It is understood that Peter Willsman, a Corbyn supporter, who had accused Jewish “Trump fanatics” of making up some of the allegations of antisemitism in the party at its previous meeting, had chosen to recuse himself from the discussion. Earlier, Tom Watson, Labour’s deputy leader, said as he arrived at the meeting he hoped the NEC would endorse the IHRA definition to help repair relations with the Jewish community. “I hope that is the start of the journey to rebuilding trust,” he said. Before the meeting, rival groups of protesters gathered outside the party’s headquarters on London’s Victoria Street. About 100 Corbyn loyalists voiced concern about adopting the IHRA definition in full because they believed it would inhibit legitimate criticism of the actions of the state of Israel. They cheered Willsman when he arrived at the meeting. They were faced by a small counter-protest of campaigners, many of whom were draped in the flag of Israel, arguing that it was for Jewish people to determine what constituted discrimination against them.  The Labour MP Stephen Kinnock, who has previously called for Corbyn to take more action over allegations of antisemitism in Labour, said earlier in the day that the NEC should be wary of issuing new clarifications. “I think that the NEC should simply adopt the full IHRA definition and all of its examples,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “I don’t personally think that now is the time to be putting in additions and qualifications. That’s pouring more fuel on the fire, and that’s the last thing we should be doing right now.” But the MP Chris Williamson, a close Corbyn ally, insisted the row was overblown. “It’s been alleged that Labour hasn’t accepted the full IHRA definition. We have accepted the full IHRA definition. The argument is about examples,” he told Talk Radio. Some of the examples “fetter free speech”, Williamson said, adding: “Jewish academics have said these examples are not fit for purpose.” Jewish Labour organisations said they would wait and see what other clarifications were added, although there is frustration among many that antisemitism is being linked to what they argue is a separate foreign policy question about Israel and Palestine.