Though usually seen as an amoral, repellent schemer, William Makepeace Thackeray’s Becky Sharp has become warmer and more “relatable” in 21st-century portrayals. Produced by the makers of Poldark, ITV’s new version of Vanity Fair (starting on Sunday) similarly shows a likable low-born woman winning the heart of a toff – several toffs, in her case – in the Napoleonic era. Gwyneth Hughes adapted the novel and has talked of a tradition of viewing Thackeray’s 1848 novel as “a harsh story ... about a naughty social climber”, whereas her Becky is “a poor orphan who needs to get on – if she doesn’t, she’ll starve”. Played by Olivia Cooke, the artist’s daughter may become more bitter and ruthless in later instalments, but in part one she’s sweet and vulnerable with no flaws on show: no ulterior motives in her friendship with Amelia, and nothing blameworthy in her wooing of a rich dunce. Hughes presents her as a bilingual modern European woman, belonging to the new era – symbolically dumping 18th-century England by throwing away Johnson’s Dictionary and crying “Vive Bonaparte!” – when those around her are stuck in the old, insular one. Appearing at 10-or 20-year intervals, TV adaptations of Vanity Fair tend to come towards the ends of decades and inevitably find parallels with their own times. In a 1967 BBC production, Susan Hampshire’s Becky was a proto-60s chick, resembling the liberated protagonists of contemporary films. Twenty years on, at the height of the Thatcher era, Eve Matheson’s spunky redhead “who will stop at nothing” (as the publicity proclaimed) could hardly fail to embody the spirit of the age. In 1998, Natasha Little was the anti-heroine in an Andrew Davies-scripted serial that epitomised the “harsh” approach. Her Becky too (as a complementary BBC documentary invoking 90s celebrities like Madonna underlined) reflected her decade, but could also be seen as encapsulating the ethos of the 18-year Tory reign that had just ended. Cheering on Becky, rather than tut-tutting, starts on the big screen with the 2004 Reese Witherspoon movie: with a star committed to empowering women, a feminist Indian director (Mira Nair) drawn to social outsiders, and a script by a future Tory peer (Julian Fellowes) predisposed to applaud the Thatcherite ambition other adapters despised, she was always bound to rebound. As well as endorsing this pro-Becky perspective, the ITV/Amazon Vanity Fair performs the customary function of depicting its own decade in historical guise: the Cameron years, when a resurgent feminism collided with a snobbish, sexist elite that closed ranks instead of opening itself up – and, fortuitously, the snooty figure who blocks Becky’s entry to it in the opener (by nixing her chances of marrying Jos Sedley) is George Osborne. Among its innovations is the deployment of Michael Palin as Thackeray, genially introducing episodes with a merry-go-round as backdrop (a reworking of the novel’s image of its world as a puppet theatre). This is not quite the first appearance of the novelist on screen, since Palin has a distinguished predecessor; in the 1979 French film Les soeurs Bronte, the Thackeray who meets the sisters in London is played by ... Roland Barthes. • Part one of Vanity Fair is on ITV on Sunday.