Stormy Daniels intends to tell all. The pornographic actor who alleges she had a brief affair with Donald Trump will publish a memoir titled Full Disclosure next month, she said Wednesday. “It will blow your minds,” Daniels said during an appearance on ABC’s The View talkshow. The president has denied the affair. But his former personal lawyer, Michael Cohen, facilitated a $130,000 payment to Daniels to secure her silence on the eve of the 2016 election – money Trump said he later reimbursed Cohen for. Cohen pleaded guilty last month to violating campaign finance laws in connection with the payment. Daniels sued Trump in March 2018 to establish the hush agreement as invalid because he never signed it. Her lawsuit described efforts by Cohen to intimidate her. Lawyers for Trump and Cohen have since said that they would not attempt to enforce the agreement. On CBS News’ 60 Minutes in March, Daniels described having sex with Trump in a hotel room in July 2006, four months after the birth of Barron Trump, the president’s son with wife Melania Trump, whom he had married a year earlier. Daniels, who was 27 at the time, said that she did not want to have sex with Trump, but said it was consensual. She said Trump dangled an offer for her to appear on his TV show, The Apprentice. In 2011, Daniels told her story about an affair with Trump to InTouch magazine, but the account was not published until this year. That same year, Daniels has said, she was approached with her daughter in a Las Vegas gym parking lot by an unknown man who warned her not to sell her Trump story, saying: “That’s a beautiful little girl. It’d be a shame if something happened to her mom.” In a separate case on the eve of the election, former Playboy model Karen McDougal accepted $150,000 from the publisher of the tabloid National Enquirer for rights to her story of an affair with Trump, which then was never published. The publisher, David Pecker, a longtime friend of Trump, has been interviewed by special counsel Robert Mueller. Daniels’ publisher says her memoir will contain “everything about how she came to be a leading actress and director in the adult ﬁlm business, the full truth about her journey from a rough childhood in Louisiana onto the national stage, and the events that led to the nondisclosure agreement and the behind-the-scenes attempts to intimidate her”. After Trump became president, Daniels launched a national tour of guest appearances at strip clubs branded as “Make America horny again”.