Lewis Hamilton believes he is stronger than ever as he prepares for the Russian Grand Prix this weekend. The British driver goes into the race with a 40-point advantage over his title rival, Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel, and is confident he and Mercedes will prove competitive in Sochi. Six rounds of the world championship remain and Hamilton goes into them firmly on the front foot. He has won four of the last five races and comes to Russia on the back of a dominant win at the last round in Singapore, after which he took a break which proved beneficial. “I feel healthy, happier and stronger than ever,” he said. “It still feels like it has been a long year. But I have had plenty of time to myself, and some really good quality time with family, so I do feel really good for this last stint.” Hamilton is attempting to secure his fifth F1 title, and fourth with Mercedes, but he emphasised that he was still constantly pushing his team. “We are all stuck in our ways, it is hard for us to change,” he said. “When you work with engineers it is similar and breaking patterns and moulds and challenging people, that’s what I live to do. I am a pain in the arse to my engineers, because I am always challenging. I like to think it has a positive impact to spring an idea or a direction to push the car.” Last year the Russian Grand Prix took place early in the season and Hamilton struggled with performance, particularly in working his tyres, and finished fourth. Now he is more confident. “I believe this weekend we will be in a better position than we were last year,” he said. “Our understanding of the tyre is far greater than last year but it’s still a challenge.” Vettel could still take the title if he won and Hamilton was second in all the remaining races and in Russia he insisted he was focused on keeping the fight alive. “I think it’s very simple from where we are,” he said. “We are some points behind and we need to catch up to make sure we stay there. “That’s our target and the best way to do that is to finish ahead, and ideally ahead of everybody. So the plan doesn’t really change. Obviously at this point we try to give it everything we have and I still believe that we have the chance.”