The world I know of today, as someone reaching his 50s, is virtually unrecognisable to the one a decade ago where there was real hope that racism, prejudice and intolerance were finally on a downward slope. Although the UK is in a far better place than the 80s, when I experienced for myself the racist abuse meted out to Asian and African-Caribbean communities in Kent where I was schooled, the reality is that as a country we have slid backwards towards aggressive far-right marches rallying thousands of people, political instability and a rising sense of mistrust which is acutely felt between BAME communities and the two main political parties. We have also moved to a point where the airing of openly toxic views is widespread, and for someone like Danny Lockwood to have editorial control of a publication, while using it to spout such unsettling views, is troubling. The people of North Kirklees deserve better than this. More widely, the slide into a world of believing conspiracy theories and openly expressed bigotry has taken place over the past decade while many of us were not able to fathom how extensively social media had taken charge of our lives. This, mixed with a recent economic crisis, created the perfect storm for social insecurity that some individuals have played upon in fomenting divisive views toward groups of people in our society. It is within this environment that some have sought comfort within narratives of division that blame others, often Muslims, and provide a sense of meaning to them, however twisted that may be. For some, conspiracy theories and racist tropes become reality as the world around them appears unstable and frightening. Grasping on to something tangible that explains the complexity of life in a simplistic fashion fills the void that many of us currently feel in an increasingly frightening world. Which is why we must mobilise and defend social values that are under threat. It is not just those who are accused of trying to divide local communities, it is also those beyond our shores who support extremist groups and seek to destabilise our democracy by fomenting instability. If we take our eye off the ball in these crucial years, it is not just our values that may change, it could be our understanding of reality. Now that truly is frightening. • Fiyaz Mughal is the founder of Faith Matters and Tell Mama, the national Islamophobia monitoring service