There are three new faces in Germany’s squad, with Joachim Löw freshening up the group by picking Bayer Leverkusen’s Kai Havertz, Hoffenheim’s Nico Schulz and PSG’s Thilo Kehrer. Yet after Germany’s calamitous performance at the World Cup, when they suffered a first-round exit for the first time since 1938, Löw’s most interesting call is deciding to give Leroy Sané another chance. The manager’s decision not to take the Manchester City winger to Russia divided opinion, with one camp arguing Sané did not fit into Löw’s system and the other pointing out how that reflected poorly on the team’s style, and it looked an even stranger call once Germany, playing plodding football, had lost their opening game to Mexico’s speedsters. Yet time is on the 22-year-old’s side and he has a chance to show he can have an influence when Germany host France in their Nations League opener. Benjamin Pavard, who excelled at right-back as France became world champions, should provide Sané with a stern test. JS • Kroos questions Sané’s attitude as Germany regroup Four years ago Luke Shaw seemed certain to become England’s first choice left-back. Ashley Cole was on the way down after an excellent international career and Shaw, who was Leighton Baines’s understudy at the 2014 World Cup, looked ready to step up after joining Manchester United from Southampton, only for a broken leg to check his progress. It has been a tough recovery process, meaning that there was no controversy when Gareth Southgate chose not to take him to Russia this summer, and there have been times when he appeared to have no future at United under José Mourinho. Yet Shaw’s England recall is proof that hard work tends to pay off. He has looked sharper both from a physical and mental perspective, and it will be fascinating to see how he copes if Southgate starts him when Spain visit Wembley on Saturday. JS Richarlison has had a busy start to his Everton career. The £40m winger began in a hurry, scoring in the draw with Wolves and the win over Southampton, but then ruined his good work by picking up a silly red card against Bournemouth last weekend. Marco Silva, Everton’s manager, was not happy with the way Richarlison lost his cool during a spat with Adam Smith. “He's a boy, he has to learn,” Silva said. “It's a daft moment for him and for us but he has to learn fast.” But that moment of madness did not stop Brazil from calling up the 21-year-old for the first time for the friendlies against USA and El Salvador. There will be no better education for Richarlison than a few training sessions with the Seleção’s attacking talents. JS The Republic of Ireland kick off their Nations League campaign against Wales in Cardiff on Thursday, before travelling to Poland for a friendly in Wroclaw on Monday. It is worrying that Martin O'Neill's 26-man squad is more remarkable for who has been left out, rather than who has been included. The West Ham defender Declan Rice has asked for more time to consider his international options before nailing his colours to any particular mast, Cardiff midfielder Harry Arter appears to have stood himself down for the foreseeable future following a row with Roy Keane, while Shane Long is out through injury. Of the six Premier League players in the squad, Everton’s Seamus Coleman is by far and away the most high profile. While Rice looks likely to declare for England, who are welcome to him, the indefinite absence of Arter would be a massive loss to a midfield in need of his experience, intensity and industry. The decision to offer new contracts to O'Neill and Keane just before their squad came up short in qualifying for Russia 2018 was greeted with raised eyebrows. While qualifying for Euro 2020 doesn't begin until March, bad performances in Wales and Poland will do little to increase public approval of a management duo many consider to be past their sell-by date. BG Cristiano Ronaldo is selfish and I'd never want him in my team. He is the kind of player that thinks 'no matter if we lose, the only thing that matters is that I score a goal!’ Modric, on the other hand, is a brilliant person and always willing to help others, starting with his teammates." The context to the Croatia manager Zlatko Dalic’s comments this week come in the wake of Luka Modric beating the Portuguese to the Uefa Men’s Player of the Year award. Of course, Dalic’s claim that he would not pick Ronaldo is petty and false, particularly with Nikola Kalinic still absent from the squad after his World Cup tantrum and now that Mario Mandzukic has retired from international football. Ronaldo will not take the opportunity to make Dalic eat his words. Portugal coach Fernando Santos has allowed the forward to miss the friendly, and more tellingly, the Nations League tie against Italy. MB • Confusion greets Nations League as Uefa hopes to revive internationals Lionel Scaloni, Argentina’s new manager, does not know whether Lionel Messi will play international football again. Messi struggled to hide his discomfort during the World Cup, to the point where he seemed to be experiencing an existential crisis during the anthems before the defeat to Croatia, and the euphoria of his stunning goal in the win over Nigeria did not last long. France exposed Argentina’s flaws in the second round and it came as no surprise to see Messi left out for the friendlies against Guatemala and Colombia. Perhaps it is time for both parties to move on, even though Messi remains the best player in the world. Scaloni has also dropped Sergio Agüero and Gonzalo Higuaín and that could create space for Paulo Dybala. Jorge Sampaoli barely used Dybala at the World Cup, but perhaps the Juventus forward can be the man to lead a new generation in Messi’s absence. JS When Radja Nainggolan made his move from Roma to Internazionale this summer, many were surprised at the transfer fee – £33m felt on the low side for one of the league’s best midfielders joining a Serie A rival. But hidden in the deal was Nicolò Zaniolo going the other way in a swap deal, and the 19-year-old this week became only the fourth player to ever be called up to Italy’s national squad without making a Serie A appearance. The last player to achieve this? Marco Verratti in 2012, which goes some way to explaining the potential many in Italy think Zaniolo has. The 6ft 3in central midfielder will almost certainly not make an appearance against Poland on Friday or Portugal next Monday but he is very much seen as integral to Italy’s (and Roma’s) future, and will certainly hope to make an impression on the new manager, Roberto Mancini, who has reportedly been blasting Queen, Miley Cyrus, The Rolling Stones, and The Killers out on the training pitches this week. MB Having given t'job t'Giggsy following the departure of Chris Coleman, Wales face a familiar foe in their first competitive fixture under the new regime. The Republic of Ireland scuppered Welsh hopes of qualifying for the World Cup by beating them in Cardiff and now pitch up for a rematch, albeit with considerably less at stake. Despite a wretched season at Everton last term, Ashley Williams has kept his place in the squad. Described by Giggs as "a fantastic leader on and off the pitch", Williams will retain the captaincy. Should he bring his hideous club form to his country's matches against the Irish and whatever side Denmark put out in the wake of their player dispute, a colossus who owes his country nothing could find his international career coming to an abrupt end. On the flip side, his return to an environment where he obviously feels comfortable could be a welcome distraction. BG • Giggs prepares Wales for Danish unknowns after Ireland test Considering their woeful recent record in qualifying for major tournaments, the Nations League is a Get Out of Jail card that Scotland should cherish. Following Friday's friendly with Belgium, they travel to Albania for a tricky opener that their manager Alex McLeish has already – perhaps unwisely – described as "must win". In Kieran Tierney and Andy Robertson, Scotland have some serious talent in their squad, while the in-form Rangers goalkeeper Allan McGregor also provides reasonto be cheerful. Liverpool full-back Robertson has been handed the captaincy and it is to be hoped the rise in status he has enjoyed since signing for Liverpool helps inspire those around him in what, on paper, looks a decent Scotland squad. Whether or not their famously conservative manager is prepared to let them play to their strengths remains to be seen, but the next two games ought to provide no shortage of clues. BG Northern Ireland have enjoyed a fine time of it of late, but as the cycle begins for another qualification campaign, some of their squad is ageing and horribly out of match practice. Aaron Hughes, 39, remains a big presence in the squad, Steven Davis has made just one appearance this season and 38-year-old Gareth McAuley only signed for Rangers earlier this week having spent the summer unattached. How Northern Ireland contend with Bosnia’s Miralem Pjanic and Edin Dzeko in ther Nations League match on Saturday remains to be seen, but with Michael O’Neill picking the same players, there doesn’t appear to be a wealth of talent ready to come through and replace the older generation. MB