West Ham have complained to TalkSport about criticism from Danny Murphy regarding their handling of contract negotiations with Declan Rice after learning that Rice’s agent has also represented Murphy. Murphy argued that it was “ridiculous” that West Ham were yet to reward Rice’s impressive performances with a new contract when he appeared on Jim White’s radio show on Monday and warned that the club risked losing their brightest young talent if the matter were not resolved soon. The 19-year-old has entered the final two years of his deal and rejected an offer worth around £15,000 a week in the summer. Yet West Ham, who are thought to be confident that Rice’s contract contains an option that will allow them to extend it until 2021, are determined not to be pushed around and believe that Murphy should have declared his connection with Neil Fewings, who landed Rice as a client this year. Fewings declined to comment but confirmed he had represented the former Liverpool midfielder. “I’m amazed West Ham haven’t got him a new contract sorted,” Murphy said. “Why haven’t they sorted it? This lad hasn’t just come into the first team, he’s been around since last season. This is typical of lots of clubs who forget to reward young lads when they’re doing really well – and I don’t mean stupid money, I don’t agree with young lads who aren’t in the first team earning £20,000 a week. “But he is on a very low contract, playing at the top level, dealing with some top players and looking very, very accomplished. All of a sudden he’s only got next season on his contract and what, West Ham think the big clubs aren’t watching him now? I’m amazed at West Ham, it’s ridiculous for a lad of this talent. It shouldn’t have got to this. You can’t let this happen. “They’ve got a problem now after his last couple of performances. They’ve got a super young player who they haven’t looked after and dealt with. Hopefully they deal with it soon. He’s probably very happy there and wants to stay, but they have to act quickly because his performances now are taking him to a different level.” The Guardian has approached TalkSport for comment. Rice has received rave reviews since breaking into West Ham’s first team last season and excelled as a defensive midfielder in the 0-0 draw with Chelsea at the London Stadium last Sunday. Yet his relationship with the club has grown complicated since signing with Fewings, a prominent figure at Wasserman Media Group, one of the world’s top agencies. Rice, who is comfortable at centre-back or in midfield, receives £3,000 a week and it is understood that his representatives are asking West Ham to offer a basic wage of £30,000 a week. However, West Ham are believed to be wary of giving the teenager too much too young after 36 first-team appearances. They do not want to harm his progress and believe that a contract worth £15,000 a week plus lucrative appearance bonuses is a more realistic figure. The club are poised to resume talks with Rice’s representatives and are confident that the matter will be resolved by the end of the year. West Ham are desperate to ward off potential suitors by securing Rice to a long-term deal. They have taken delight in his development and regard him as a mature character. He is popular within the club and is admired for his professionalism and eagerness to learn. All the same, Rice’s negotiating power has strengthened with each impressive outing and his emergence has led to England attempting to prise his allegiance away from the Republic of Ireland, for whom he has been capped three times in friendlies.