Pep Guardiola has reassured Gareth Southgate that Phil Foden will be given first-team opportunities this season, after the England manager expressed concerns that young players in general and creative midfielders in particular were becoming invisible. “We will do our best, because Phil is ready,” the Manchester City manager said. “I think he is ready for England and he is ready for City because he is here. I don’t feel under any pressure to bring him on, I feel under pressure to win the games, but Phil can compete for a place with any of the top players. “If you look around the big 10 or 20 clubs in Europe you don’t see many 18- or 19-year-olds playing regularly [Foden is 18], but it is possible to use players of that age. Phil is special, his work ethic is excellent and I believe he will have a lot of minutes this season. After that Gareth has his own decision.” Competition for places is intense at City, with Leroy Sané yet to make an appearance this season, but Guardiola has rejected the allegation from Germany’s Toni Kroos that Sané’s body language suggests a lack of motivation. “His body language is the same as last season when he was the best young player in the league,” Guardiola said. “Leroy is a nice guy, I don’t have any bad words about him; he just faces a challenge to get into the team because Bernardo Silva has started so well.” Guardiola has denied any knowledge of a release clause in Kevin De Bruyne’s contract, following reports in Spanish newspapers that the Belgian could be bought for €250m (£223m). “The journalist asked me if we would sell for 250 million and I said ‘no’. I don’t think he has a release clause in his contract.” Guardiola has confirmed he would like to manage a team at a World Cup, though would not be drawn on which country he might choose. Generally he favours coaches working with their country of birth, though because of his strong Catalan affiliation it should not be assumed he will be considered for the Spain position. “I think that is not going to happen,” he said. “But I do have a dream of taking a team to a World Cup or a European Championship. Maybe it could come about in eight or 12 years, but it doesn’t just depend on me – a manager has to be selected.”