Sweden’s 7.3 million voters go to the polls on 9 September, electing a new parliament and government to succeed the Social Democrat-Green coalition of the prime minister, Stefan Löfven, which has run the country since 2014. Current opinion polling suggests his centre-left party may remain Sweden’s largest, as it has for more than a century. But it, the main centre-right Moderate party and their respective blocs face a stiff challenge from the rightwing populists of the Sweden Democrats, who could well end up holding the balance of power. After Italy’s election of a far-right, populist coalition in March, the performance of the anti-immigration, anti-EU party will be watched across Europe – though its support appears to have been fading since early summer, when it led some polls. The 349 MPs in Sweden’s Riksdag are elected through proportional representation, 310 of them by the country’s 29 constituencies (each of which has a set number of seats depending on their population). The remaining 39 are divided up so each party’s parliamentary representation matches its share of the national vote. Four percent of the national vote, or 12% of a constituency vote, is needed to enter parliament. Europe’s 2105 immigration crisis, in which Sweden received 163,000 asylum seekers (more, per head of the population, than almost any other EU country), propelled immigration and integration to the top of the political agenda. Although the present government radically tightened asylum laws, the Sweden Democrats – whose roots lie in the neo-Nazi movement, but under leader Jimmy Åkesson have been mostly purged of their openly racist elements – have kept them there, hammering their core message that Sweden’s generous welfare state is at risk. Sweden is also increasingly alarmed by violent crime; following a spate of shootings and grenade attacks, often in deprived areas with high concentrations of immigrants, masked youths recently torched more than 80 cars in Gothenburg and other west coast towns. The far-right party’s other main policy, holding a referendum over whether Sweden should leave the EU, has little support among voters. Sweden’s economy, motoring along nicely, barely features in the debate. After this summer’s record heatwave, however, climate change is also now a major electoral issue. On the left, the Social Democrats have – like many classic northern European labour parties – seen their support slide and are now on around 25%. But the more radical Left party, which stayed out of government last time but wants to be part of any future leftist coalition, has surged to nearly 10% from 5.7% in 2014, with the Greens holding relatively firm on around 5%. The combined left could reasonably hope for a shade over 40% of the national vote – marginally ahead of the conservative Alliance, in which support for the Moderates, on 19-20%, is down but the free-market Centre party (10%) well up on 2014 levels. All parties have pledged not to cooperate with the Sweden Democrats, whose support has slipped to 20% from over 25% earlier this year. But if both main blocs end up on around 40%, whatever government emerges will need backing from either the opposition, or the far-right populists, to function. Many analysts believe that could clear a path for Moderate leader Ulf Kristersson to become the next prime minister, even at the head of a minority government, if the anti-immigration party votes down Löfven. A strong performance by the Sweden Democrats could create its own problems for the anti-immigration party, however: although it might force mainstream parties to engage, compromising on their fundamental principles for a share of power has rarely won populist parties more votes.