Much like the temperatures in Paris this week, Chloé’s creative director, Natacha Ramsay-Levi, was determined to keep attendees in a midsummer mood at the French fashion house’s show on Thursday. Entitled Hippy Modernism, the collection was about incorporating memories of summer with a back-to-work wardrobe. “I was thinking about the woman who cares about nature and takes souvenirs from summertime back to the city,” the designer said, adding that she wanted to be literal while also capturing a new-age energy. This presented itself in a collection of prints, patterns and pieces you might find in a beach market in Ibiza but which were given a city sensibility by being worked into softly structured silhouettes and styled with city-approved accessories. Clashing scarf prints were realised in tailored jumpsuits, palazzo trousers, A-line skirts and handkerchief tops, while bright embroidered jacquard and tasselled carpet fabrics were cut into blazers, dresses and miniskirts. Where looks threatened to wander into backpacker waters, they were pulled back to the boulevards of the French capital with decadent diamanté drop earrings and shiny gold bangles, which formed Ramsay-Levi’s largest jewellery offering to date. Polish also came care of smart Marcie bags, the house’s bestseller which was updated in croc-embossed leather this season to mark its 10th anniversary. Several outfits came decorated with beachcombed details – a prevailing trend at the New York and London shows also – such as a boxy trouser suit with adornments resembling sandy-hued shells and pebbles attached to the collar and placket, as well as rope belts – another detail proving popular with designers for next summer. Ramsay-Levi, who joined the house from a senior design role at Louis Vuitton last year, spoke of going back to things that are simple and grounded, explaining that these details were about “taking something which is prosaic and making it something that is sophisticated” – a micro-analogy for the wider concept of idealism she sought to explore and redefine. There were beautiful pieces in this collection, such as the crinkled long-sleeve jackets made from plissé mousseline, a fabric also used for the series of flowing evening dresses that closed the show and which Ramsay-Levi said were inspired by Greek goddesses. There were also items that will define this season, specifically the multicoloured T-shirts featuring a motif of two hands forming the heart shape around a Balearic sunset – the chosen design for the show invitation and messaging around the venue. At Chloé, Ramsay-Levi follows in the footsteps of Phoebe Philo, Stella McCartney and most recently Clare Waight Keller – three successful British female designers who, despite their different approaches, all kept the house’s signature elevated bohemia a constant throughout their tenures, to critical acclaim. With only three ready-to-wear collections for the house now under Paris native Ramsay-Levi’s belt, and the first of her collections becoming available this spring, it is too early for Chloé owners Richemont to know the impression that her take on the aesthetic has had on finances. The fashion, however, is looking solid.