Hot out of the oven, drench with honey, chilli and oregano for an impressive lunch, or take it to eat cold on a picnic. Serves 4pumpkin or butternut squash 350g, peeled and cut into 2cm dicepine nuts or chopped walnuts 75g onion 1, finely dicedolive oil 1 tbsp feta cheese 200g, crumbledcottage cheese, ricotta or quark 100g eggs 2, beatendried oregano 3 tsp ground cinnamon ¼ tsp nutmeg ¼ tsp, freshly gratedsalt and freshly ground black pepper about 1 tsp of each filo pastry sheets 300g butter 100g, meltednigella seeds 1 tsp, or use sesamerunny honey 1 tbsp chilli flakes 1 tsp Preheat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Put the pumpkin or squash on a baking tray and roast for about 30 minutes, until tender. Put the pine nuts or walnuts on a separate tray and put into the oven for the last 5 minutes. Meanwhile, fry the onion in olive oil for about 8-10 minutes, until soft and translucent. Lower the oven temperature to 190C/gas mark 5. Line a baking sheet with greaseproof paper and set to one side. In a bowl mix the cooked pumpkin, roasted pine nuts (or walnuts), cooked onion, feta, cottage cheese, beaten eggs, 2 teaspoons of oregano, the cinnamon, nutmeg, and salt and black pepper. Put the prepared baking sheet on a work surface, with the shorter end facing you. Lay a sheet of filo lengthways on the baking sheet and brush with melted butter. Top with another sheet and brush with more butter. Take 2 more sheets and turn them so that they are at the 11 o’clock and 5 o’clock positions, brushing each sheet you add with the melted butter. Continue to arrange the sheets in a clockwork fashion, until you have an incrementally overlapping circle shape. Be sure to butter each sheet liberally as you go. When all the sheets have been used, place the pumpkin mixture in the centre and spread out into a circle – leaving a good 5cm border. Carefully fold the filo sheets over the edge of the pumpkin mixture, allowing the majority of the centre to still be visible. With the remaining butter, generously brush all the edges of the pie and scatter over the nigella seeds. Bake for 25-30 minutes, until the edges are golden and the centre is set. Remove from the oven, drizzle with the honey, sprinkle with the remaining oregano and the chilli and set to one side for 5-10 minutes before slicing and serving. For the full wow factor, get hold of a pizza box to transport this magnificent looking pie on a picnic. Alternatively, cut into quarters and wrap in tin foil with a square of cardboard beneath for support. As for an accompanying salad, some peppery rocket, dressed simply with red-wine vinegar, salt and olive oil would work well here.Adapted from The Art of the Larder by Claire Thomson (Quadrille, £25) I always make a large vat of these since they’re lovely to pick at in the fridge. Although they’re easy to make, you do need quite a few ingredients – and this holds true whether you’re making a small or big batch, so you may as well go all out. I buy ready-cooked egg noodles from the supermarket, which make these even faster to fix. Serves 8For the dressing sesame oil 1 tbsp garlic oil 1 tbsp soy sauce 1 tbsp sweet chilli sauce 2 tbsp smooth peanut butter 100g lime juice 2 tbsp For the saladmangetout 125g beansprouts 150g, rinsedred pepper 1, deseeded and cut into small stripsspring onions 2, finely slicedready-prepared egg noodles 2 x 275g packets or 550g sesame seeds 20g fresh coriander 4 tbsp, chopped Whisk together all the dressing ingredients in a bowl or jug. Put the mangetout, beansprouts, red pepper strips, sliced spring onions and the noodles into a bowl. Pour the dressing over the noodles and mix thoroughly to coat everything well. Sprinkle with the sesame seeds and chopped coriander and pack up as needed.From Nigella Express by Nigella Lawson (Chatto & Windus, £25) This is my cousin Disha’s recipe for pav bhaji, a famous and much-loved street food in Mumbai. It’s a mash of spicy vegetables slathered in butter, mopped up with a hot “pav” – bread roll – while the juices escape down your chin. Serves 4mashing potatoes (desiree, maris piper) 200g unsalted butter 40g, plus extra knob to finish onions 2 large, choppedgarlic 4 cloves, crushedginger 4cm, peeled and gratedaubergines 2 medium (500g in total), cut into 1cm cubestomato passata 400g tomato puree 1 tbsp ground cumin 2 tsp ground coriander 2 tsp garam masala 1 tsp ground turmeric ¼ tsp amchur (dried mango powder) ½ tsp (optional)salt 1½ tsp chilli powder ¾ tsp cauliflower ½ a head (around 250g), broken into 2cm cubes To servesoft white bread rolls 8-12 butterred onion 1, finely choppedfresh coriander leaves a handful lemon wedges a couple, to squeeze overPeel and chop the potatoes into equal-size chunks, then boil them for around 10 minutes, or until tender. Drain, mash, then set to one side. Put the butter into a wide-bottomed, lidded frying pan on medium heat. When it starts to foam, add the onions and cook for 8-10 minutes, until golden. Add the garlic and ginger, and stir well. After a minute, add the aubergines to the pan and cover. Stir them every now and then until they’re soft – this should take around 10 minutes. Add the passata and tomato puree, and cook for around 5-7 minutes until it is a thick mash, rich and dark red. Add the cumin, coriander, garam masala and turmeric, the amchur if using and the salt. Stir and taste, adding the chilli powder if you’d like more heat. Finally, add the mashed potato and cauliflower. Stir to mix and put the lid on, leaving it to cook for around 10 minutes, or until soft. Taste and adjust any seasoning. Transfer to a bowl and use a potato masher or a fork to mash it. The consistency should be somewhere between mashed potato and thick pasta sauce – you can add some hot water to loosen the bhaji if need be. For a final flourish, add a generous knob of butter and stir it in. Pack the bhaji, rolls, butter, coriander and lemon wedges separately. To assemble, toast the bread rolls and spread with butter (if you don’t have access to a toaster at work, this can be done before you pack your lunch in the morning). Warm the pav bhaji (if you wish). Put a layer of bhaji in the middle of each roll and top with a sprinkling of finely chopped red onion, coriander and a generous squeeze of lemon juice.Adapted from Made in India by Meera Sodha (Fig Tree, £20) This is a traditional Bosnian loaf that I learned to bake from my dear friend, Olga. It is delicious warm but just as good cold and perfect in a packed lunch, either for sandwiches, a slice of bread to have alongside a salad or a soup, or more of an open sandwich. Makes 1 large loafdried yeast 2 tsp honey 1 tsp lukewarm water 200mlstrong white wheat flour 300g, plus 1 tsp, plus more to duststrong wholegrain wheat flour 200g sea salt flakes 1 tsp eggs 2, lightly beatenextra virgin olive oil 1 tbsp, plus more for the pandill 20g, finely choppedunsalted butter 15g soured cream 100g freshly ground black pepperhalloumi 250g, sliced a bit less than 5mm thick Mix together the yeast, honey and warm water and set aside for 15 minutes until a little foamy on top. In a bowl, combine the flours and salt; make a well in the centre. Add the yeast mix, eggs, oil and half the dill, and bring together with your hands, making sure all the ingredients are well combined. Knead the mix for about 5 minutes on a lightly floured surface and then return to the bowl, cover with a towel and leave to prove for 1 hour, or until doubled in size. Place the dough on a floured surface. Melt the butter. Mix the soured cream and remaining dill with a few pinches of black pepper. Stretch and pat the dough into an oval measuring 35cm x 21cm and a bit more than 1cm thick, using a rolling pin if necessary. Brush the right-hand side of it with a third of the butter, leaving 1cm of the edge uncovered, then top this buttered section with a third of the soured cream, then a third of the halloumi, again leaving the 1cm border. Fold over the left side without the topping, and press it around the edges to seal the filling in. Turn it over, then give it a quarter turn anti-clockwise, flattening out the dough. Use a rolling pin to form a rough oval again, rolling away from your body and making sure there is still enough flour on the work surface, and repeat the process twice more. After the third time, do not flatten it out, but instead shape the dough into a round. Oil a heavy-based ovenproof saucepan, casserole dish or frying pan (mine has a 20cm base and is deep), put the loaf in with the seal at the bottom and leave to prove for another hour. Preheat the oven to 200C/gas mark 6. Bake for 20-25 minutes until golden brown; when the bottom is tapped, the loaf should sound hollow. It is normal for this loaf to drop slightly in the middle, due to the moisture of the filling. It’s great with chutney.Adapted from The Natural Baker by Henrietta Inman (Jacqui Small, £20) The fennel sauce is more easily made in a blender, but the more authentic way of doing it (and how I learned thanks to Sam and Sam Clark of Moro) was with a pestle and mortar. It is less wasteful (small amounts in a machine don’t blend properly) and very therapeutic. Makes 1smoked mackerel 1 filletextra virgin olive oillemon 1 shallot ½, finely dicedfennel seeds ¼ tsp (optional)garlic 1 cloveflat-leaf parsley 1 big handful, pickedfennel frond small bunch or the top half of a fennel, finely diced white-wine vinegar (moscatel, if possible) a dribblemustard 1 tspcapers 1 tsp (optional)caster sugar to tastemix of robust salad, like chicory, watercress, dandelion, fennel, grated celeriac 1 big handfulfoccacia a 12cm squarehorseradish a couple of gratings (from a jar works fine too)roasted almonds 1 tbsp, roughly chopped Break up the mackerel to your liking and dress with a little oil and lemon juice to taste. Lightly mix through the shallot. Crush the fennel seeds in a pestle and mortar. Continue in the mortar or pour the crushed seeds into a blender. If using a pestle and mortar, finely chop the garlic, parsley and fennel fronds, or just add all to the blender. Bash or whizz, with a big pinch of salt and a glug of oil, till the consistency of a thick sauce or a thin-ish pesto, adding more oil if needs be. Add a good squeeze of lemon juice, the white-wine vinegar, mustard and capers. Season with salt, sugar (may be needed to counteract the vinegar) and pepper to taste. Dress your salad leaves with a tiny bit of oil and a squeeze of lemon. Lay your mackerel on your bread and season with pepper. Grate the horseradish over the top, then very lightly spoon about 2-3 tablespoons of sauce over the mackerel, scatter the almonds over the top and then finish with the salad. Place the other half of bread on top and carefully wrap in some lovely brown parchment.Rebecca Oliver is co-owner of The Dusty Knuckle Bakery, London E8 The Guardian and Observer aim to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US