Recently, my boyfriend and I toasted our seven-year relationship. That includes six years of cohabiting, one year of pet parenthood and – because we’re old romantics – four years of a shared Amazon Prime account. (“Do you take this man, to have and to hold, and destroy your ‘you might like’ algorithm with football books?”) It’s called true love, and it’s worth celebrating. But the question is, when? If you’re not married, which day do you commemorate: the day you met? The date of your first kiss? Or perhaps the day you exchanged those three precious little words: “I deleted Tinder”? It’s possible to choose wrongly. I learned this the hard way with my last boyfriend. It was a relationship that developed over many years, with no official beginning. So we agreed that meeting my family would become our beginning, the day we’d post on social media each year (#3YearsToday!) and make 20% of our friends post vomit emojis. But I was forgetting Auntie B. It’s not that Auntie B had a specific problem with me having a boyfriend; she just didn’t understand it as a concept. The expression on her face when I tried to explain that I was seeing someone and it was serious – but we were not considering marriage – was like my reading aloud a very long mathematical problem that she was trying to solve in real-time. She just looked confused. “So he is your friend?” she said, eventually. “No, he is my boyfriend. I love him.” “So you’re getting married?” “Not getting married. Absolutely not. Not even thinking about it.” “... So he is your friend?” And so on, until eventually she slinked off. In that moment Auntie B had made a decision to relegate my boyfriend to the friend zone, and therefore “not relevant”. After that, any time I told her news of him she’d treat it the same way as my telling her news about the bloke who sells tyres a few roads down. (“OK?” she’d reply, looking baffled.) The proper meeting went spectacularly: Auntie B set the tone by mistaking my boyfriend for the Freeview repair man and fell asleep midway through the afternoon. But still, I learned a valuable lesson. If traditions don’t work, make your own. Have three anniversaries and mark all the memories, or forget them all and toast only the present. It’s how life should be: a choose-your-own adventure. That’s the kind of adulthood I can get behind.