A star-studded voter registration drive launched by Michelle Obama will kick off its “National Week of Action” on Sunday with a rally in Las Vegas. The drive, When We All Vote, marks the former first lady’s return to the political stage, aiming to encourage voter participation and “spark a conversation about our rights and responsibilities in shaping our democracy”. The effort aims to be nonpartisan and to combat ambivalence and cynicism in the electorate. Co-led by several former Obama White House advisers, it will stage rallies in cities such as Pittsburgh and Houston, where celebrities like Tom Hanks, Lin-Manuel Miranda, Chris Paul and Janelle Monáe will deliver remarks about civic engagement and the need to participate in voter outreach. “There’s too much at stake to sit on the sidelines, not just in this election but in every election,” Obama said in a video announcing the drive. Her efforts coincide with Barack Obama’s re-emergence on the campaign trail earlier this month, when the former president delivered speeches that roiled the Trump White House. Normally, former presidents do not comment on their successor’s policies. The Obamas have stated that these are not normal times. Seven weeks remain before November’s midterm elections and the polls show Democrats in a strong position to take the House for the first time since January 2011. The path to taking back the Senate is tougher. “The truth is when we stay home things stay the same, or they get worse,” Michelle Obama said, announcing her registration drive. “But when we all vote, we get new ideas and new energy. We get leaders who share our values and listen to our voices –that’s how we change America.” The core purpose of When We All Vote is to convert casual supporters into grassroots organizers. Its website provides a toolkit to register voters and plan events. In a call to rally attendees on Thursday, Obama said: “There are some people who will listen to people that they know, like you, over somebody like me. It’s not just hearing from famous people. They want to hear from their friends and neighbors and colleagues, people who know them, to encourage them to do something that maybe they’re afraid to do, or don’t know how to do, or don’t think matters.” Sunday’s event comes three days after Donald Trump told a crowd in Las Vegas: “We have to have more Republicans in office. We’ll get everything we want so fast. We’ve got to have it.” Nevada will play a critical role in deciding which party holds power. Two of its four House seats are losing incumbents and it is the only state Hillary Clinton won in 2016 in which a Republican senator, Dean Heller, is up for re-election this year. At his rally on Thursday, Trump said of Heller: “We started out, we weren’t friends. I didn’t like him, he didn’t like me, and as we fought and fought and fought believe it or not we started to respect each other, then we started to like each other, then we started to love each other.” Widely seen as the most vulnerable Republican in the Senate, Heller is neck and neck in the polls with his challenger, congresswoman Jackie Rosen. Nevada’s governorship is up for grabs too, in a race that is also tied.