It has been a few weeks since he returned from a trip to the Edinburgh fringe and actor Paapa Essiedu is talking about how “amazing” it was to “see certain stories celebrated in what has been a huge arts festival, but not necessarily a representative one”. He sighs. “As is always the case when we have this conversation, it does feel like there’s steps being made, but there are so many steps still to go.” For many black British actors, particularly those from lower income backgrounds, the so-called “diversity debate” is one they’re often pulled into – whether they want to be or not. Instead of talk, Essiedu seems to prefer action, speaking in glowing terms about his work with Open Door, a charitable organisation that aims to widen access to drama schools for young people from working-class backgrounds. In the wake of his Ian Charleson-award winning turn as Hamlet in 2016, the first time a black actor played the role for the RSC, Essiedu admits frustrations with the way calls for a more representative arts industry can be framed, adding: “I try not to use the word ‘diversity’. It doesn’t mean anything.” So, sitting in a restaurant one night after his rehearsals for a new series of short Pinter plays, we don’t talk about diversity. Instead, we talk about his name. “The conditioning does mean I say [my first name] in an English accent. Pa-pa.” He scrunches up his face, before repeating the word, this time stretching out the first vowel: “Paa-pa.” He smiles. “It makes you feel dumb. All those years of people being like: ‘What what what?’, not understanding the cadence that’s involved. The musicality of Twi is completely different.” One of Ghana’s primary languages, Twi is a language Essiedu grew up hearing from his mother, who brought him up as a single parent in Walthamstow. She died when he was 20; his father, who had stayed in Ghana, had died when Essiedu was 14. Today, at 28, he goes “back” to Ghana as regularly as he can, though this closeness to the country wasn’t always the case, with a decade-long gap between visits. “You know what it’s like,” he says. “Being a teenager and British-Ghanaian in London, in 2004, when we didn’t have [musicians of Ghanaian origin] Stormzy or Fuse ODG? Those were the times people were like: ‘Ah no, I’m Jamaican.’ Combining that with the whole teenage rebellion thing, I kind of made the decision not to go. And I used to go with my mum.” He continues: “When I lost my mum, I was like I don’t want to go because it’ll be triggering in terms of memories or something, do you know what I mean? So it took a while. But it came to a point where I was like: ‘I need to now make a decision to do this as an independent adult, a Ghanaian man.’” Now, he says, cultural perceptions of Ghana in the UK have changed wildly. “In the last two, three years, the celebration of that dual heritage has really flipped from one side to the other. People want to be ‘Ghanaian-British’, instead of ‘British-Ghanaian’.” During his visits, Essiedu spends time with his cousin in Bukom, the part of the capital city, Accra, half his family hails from and a neighbourhood famed worldwide for producing champion boxers. Does he box? “With this physique?” He flexes an arm. “Course I do.” He smiles, then: “Nah, I’ve got very actor-ly wrists. Delicate.” He laughs. The more time you spend with Essiedu, the more his sense of humour comes out: dry, wry, and very east London. The Walthamstow in his voice also quickly becomes apparent; sentences begin with “Listen … ” or are punctuated with “Do you know what I mean?”, the words tumbling over one another. He’s charming, and likable too, something many of his reviews have been quick to point out, especially during the big Hamlet role. But a decade before the Royal Shakespeare Company, Essiedu was on track to be a doctor, a job he claims is more similar to his current one than people might think. “What turned me on was the thing of being able to meet people, speak to people, try and work people out, and help people. It was much more about the interface than it was about their physiology. I think there’s a crossover [with actors] in the way doctors are often quite charismatic. Their jobs are to get you to immediately trust them, or to immediately feel comfortable.” However, the year he was supposed to go to study medicine, he packed it in, went on a gap year, got involved with the National Youth Theatre and planned to train as an actor. He applied for “many” drama schools, and was rejected by them all, bar one. At his last audition, he won a place to attend Guildhall School of Music & Drama. How was Guildhall? He pauses for a long moment. “Difficult. So much of these vocational trainings are about your own confidence, there’s something intangible about what’s being taught. Or there’s something potentially primitive about what’s being taught, because it’s so much about what part of yourself you can bring to work. I was 19, I was in what felt like was an unfamiliar environment, and reading plays – I had never read a play before I was 16. So when you’re now looking at Milton [and] the syllabus is dominated by white men in terms of the people that are directing, teaching, creating? It’s immediately alienating. “In the long term it’s potentially a damaging experience … but I learned a lot, it was my kind of key into this world, this crazy and varied and rich world that is plays and TV and film and all that kind of stuff. So I’ve got huge amounts to be grateful for, but there were definitely big highs and big lows.” After graduating from Guildhall alongside the likes of Chewing Gum star and fellow British-Ghanaian Michaela Coel, Essiedu is, and has been, very busy. We meet on a Friday night after a long day of rehearsals for Pinter at the Pinter, a series of the famed playwright’s short plays at his namesake theatre. Essiedu is a Pinter fan, calling the writer “deeply political. We’re living in a time of political strife, it feels like an exciting time to be involved with it.” Of the four short plays, his favourite is a two-hander with actor Kate O’Flynn, which he describes as “a huge challenge, because … it’s not on the page for free. It involves a lot of thought, emotional investment and work. It’s not about how easy it is, it’s about how easy it looks in the end.” He laughs again. Also currently on is Press, a fast-paced BBC One drama series from Doctor Foster writer Mike Bartlett, where Essiedu plays a young reporter. “It explores the role of newspapers, particularly print newspapers in 2018 and what that means, and what it means to be a successful journalist in that world. It’s about the relationships of these people, and the trials, tribulations and challenges.” The filming experience was “amazing – great cast, great scripts. Ben Chaplin, Charlotte Riley, top, top actors.” Now he finds himself thinking a lot about the differences between stage and screen. “Do I want to do more telly? Yeah I do, but it’s got to be the right thing.” The right thing doesn’t always come along, with the actor admitting to trying to be selective in the pursuit of “challenging work that you actually want to do”. One big difference, however, is the accessibility of television in comparison to the stage. “If someone was like: ‘Oh, I’ve never been to the theatre before,’ and they come, and are stuck at the back, behind a pillar, they’d never come again!” It’s why the actor is “really pleased” about the Harold Pinter Theatre’s decision to make some of the best seats available for the cheapest price, for people under 30, key workers and those on jobseeker’s allowance. But Essiedu still feels frustration with theatre. “I feel definitely there are clear limitations … there is only a certain reach to what theatre is willing to do at the moment. More people have access to TV – you need £6 a month to watch Netflix, it is the most accessible medium, [but] it still costs 40 quid to get a good seat at your average theatre. And that’s all assuming you live in London.” Still, he says, “theatre is my first love. I really do think there is something hallowed about the live interaction experience between audience and actors, there’s something sacred about that. But I just wish more people could experience it.” Press continues on BBC1 on Thursday 13 September; Pinter at the Pinter is at Harold Pinter Theatre, SW1, to 23 February