The point of a Jeremy Corbyn speech is chiefly just to be Jeremy Corbyn. He doesn’t really do the big economic ideas – that’s more John McDonnell’s thing – and there isn’t always much of a grand argument connecting the various promises. But that’s not why people come. They come to be inspired and lifted up, reminded of why they were drawn to the energy of this movement in the first place – perhaps especially after a conference that has exposed some serious divisions, on Brexit and on deselections. And so that’s what they got. Corbyn’s performances are infinitely slicker now; better jokes, an altogether more prime ministerial demeanour. But he hasn’t lost the passion of the core material, from promising instant recognition for a Palestinian state to hammering the human consequences of mental health cuts or the “hostile environment” Corbyn said welfare policy had created for disabled people (although there were still no detailed commitments on how to dismantle it). Add in a juicy free childcare promise, and the manifesto for a possibly imminent general election is taking shape. But there’s still a big Brexit-shaped hole in the middle. Corbyn reiterated that Labour will almost certainly vote against whatever plan Theresa May produces, but oppose leaving with no deal; instead it would demand a general election. But failing that, “all options are on the table”. The words were muttered, almost as if he didn’t really want to say them, and that was that. Nothing ruled in, or out, should the Tories decline to help Labour out by calling an election they would expect to lose. After five days of shadow ministers furiously contradicting each other, we are no clearer on what Labour’s preferred Brexit solution would be, so presumably that’s exactly how Corbyn wants it: the strategy is to offer a blank slate, on to which both leavers and remainers can project whatever they want to believe. If the aim is to reassure supporters unhappy with the Brexit position by reminding them of everything they do like about Corbynism, it got him through conference. Let’s see how it survives the turbulent weeks to come. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist Labour has spent the past few months wrapped up in knots, under relentless siege, leaving the party demoralised from the grassroots to the very top. A barrage of attack drowned out a coherent radical message forged by last year’s general election campaign. It badly needed a reset button, and it got one. A conference featuring little disunity and an agenda-setting speech on workers’ ownership by John McDonnell climaxed with Corbyn’s best address to date. Three years ago, a relatively obscure backbencher, condemned to the fringes of politics for several decades, had been catapulted to the frontline, and it showed in a stumbling speech. This year, a mostly hostile press pack muttered reluctant praise: he looks the part of a prime minister-in-waiting. As Margaret Thatcher once used the podium to condemn the postwar consensus and sketch out a new order, Corbyn delivered a speech that was an unapologetic onslaught on a crumbling neoliberal ideology. Old-style, top-down nationalisation was junked: instead, there would be democratic ownership by workers and consumers. After a decade of austerity, which the latest polling shows the public is thoroughly fed up with, investment was championed as a means to modernise Britain. Climate change was identified as the greatest crisis facing humanity – but he made it a bread-and-butter issue, pledging to commit hundreds of thousands of “green” new jobs. It is the antisemitism crisis that has tortured Labour for the past few months, and Corbyn showed necessary empathy towards Britain’s Jews over the horrors visited upon them for centuries and the hurt caused by antisemitism, and he pledged to be an ally against racism. He was right, too, not to take any lessons from a Tory party responsible for the Windrush scandal, a “hostile environment” for immigrants and championing Viktor Orbán’s antisemitic far-right regime. But one of the most critical elements of the speech was a direct appeal to older people, “who built modern Britain”, and a commitment to repay their efforts and sacrifice by protecting the triple lock and a national care system. Labour has catastrophically low levels of support among older people, and the party has failed to build on the Tories’ attempt to abandon the triple lock in last year’s fateful election. If an all-out charm offensive among pensioners is successful, then Corbyn will be assured of becoming the next prime minister – and Britain’s leftwing answer to Thatcher. • Owen Jones is a Guardian columnist Brexit may have dominated Labour conference this week, but not so Corbyn’s speech. He couldn’t even bring himself to mention the second referendum that’s now Labour’s official Brexit policy. The meat of the speech was on much more comfortable territory. MPs in leave areas have been complaining the party’s policy offer has too much of a cosmopolitan feel, and not enough that speaks to their communities. The once-flagship policy to scrap tuition fees didn’t even get a mention. It was packed instead with announcements to appeal to those May once called the “just-about managing”, with a big pledge on free childcare for two-year-olds and rebalancing the economy towards workers a strong theme. “Join us in the new political mainstream,” Corbyn invited Jim O’Neill, a former Tory Treasury minister and chief economist of Goldman Sachs, who wrote that Labour has “stepped into the vacuum left by the government”. Although one had the sense he would relish a more full-blooded challenge from business. The muted nature of its opposition to Corbynomics – not to mention the absence of internal dissenters – shows just how much the ground has shifted. But there were gaps. Why didn’t Corbyn pledge to extend the “pure socialism” of the NHS to social care, telling people that if they are unlucky enough to get dementia they’ll get free care, as they do with cancer? Where was the offer for the predominantly working-class young people who don’t go to university? Where was the massive reskilling programme for people who lose their jobs to automation? And Corbyn went no further than he has done in the past in acknowledging the nature of left antisemitism, leaving questions hanging about his leadership qualities. But the subliminal message couldn’t have been clearer: Labour won’t be actively campaigning for a referendum any time soon. And no number of workers on boards will be able to fix things if Labour gets the keys to No 10 in the wake of a messy, no-deal Brexit. • Sonia Sodha is chief leader writer at the Observer and deputy opinion editor at the Guardian Last year’s conference was always going to be tough to follow. In 2017, Corbyn was riding high on the unexpected general election result; this year, his summer has been defined by accusations of antisemitism and Brexit disagreements. Popular policy announcements on the environment, childcare and housing in Liverpool this week depicted a party preparing for government. Corbyn’s task today was to prove he was, too. There was a marked improvement in Corbyn’s delivery. After a string of uncomfortable TV interviews, there was an air of confidence today from the leader. The jokes landed, as did the moments of high emotion. There was also a nod to the personal: Corbyn offered an emotional thank you message in Spanish to his wife. It showed a side he prefers to keep hidden. On antisemitism, the tone had already been set: yesterday, during her conference address, Emily Thornberry’s vocal support for the Palestinian people received rapturous applause. So too did her ultimatum to the few antisemites on the fringes of Labour. Today, Corbyn’s acknowledgement of the pain British Jews are in was met with his first standing ovation. Chuka Umunna’s assertion that Labour is institutionally racist? Again, disproved. In fact, “I” and “we” were used repeatedly on antisemitism – again, the personal – and a hand was reached out to the Jewish community: “I hope we can work together to draw a line.” Yes, it could have gone further: another apology for the hurt, for instance. But that’s a conversation Corbyn needs to have with Jewish people directly. Labour’s detractors, both inside and out, wanted this conference to be defined by internal warfare – but thresholds, trigger ballots and party splits got no mention. The Farm’s All Together Now played as Corbyn entered – there were no signs of division in the packed-out hall. Instead, this speech was an outward-looking message to the nation: an hour of policy, and plans to deliver them. A look to the Liberal Democrats or to the Tories would suggest that neither of their leaders would have enough material to do the same. And that should worry May, because on ideas Labour is winning the argument. Corbyn’s performance today suggests that on leadership Labour can win as well. • Michael Segalov is a contributing editor at Huck magazine, a freelance journalist and author Thus begins the general election campaign, and the battle lines are clear. Corbyn will join battle as the Great Repairman, answering a decade-old call to rebuild a fair economic structure upon the wreckage of the 2008 crash and to address the “social vandalism” of subsequent Tory policy. This will resonate, and the Conservatives need to brace themselves for what they will doubtless regard as the unmerited popularity of Corbyn’s economic populism. Like so many party leaders before him, he pledged a green revolution, “the biggest home-building programme in half a century”, free childcare, and the transformation of employees into company stakeholders. How he will accomplish this, afford it, and prevail where others have failed, he did not say. But that’s the essence of populism: the promise of straightforward solutions to complex problems. It’s the formula that got Donald Trump into the Oval Office. Like Trump, Corbyn has also carefully selected his enemies. The section on press freedom was properly sinister, especially delivered, as it was, by a past contributor to Press TV and Russia Today. His benign portrayal of Labour as a “broad church”, committed to “listening and learning”, will have baffled those centre-ground MPs who are now at a much higher risk of deselection thanks to reforms at this week’s conference. His pledge to Jewish people that “we are your allies” also sounded less like an apology than the voice of a leader impatient to move on from the headline-grabbing crisis of trust that consumed Labour’s summer. And Brexit? Keir Starmer had bounced him into leaving “all options on the table” – including, by implication, a people’s vote, with “remain” included on the ballot paper. But it is clear enough that Corbyn wants out of the EU so he can build socialism in one country. Will he get the chance? To my ears, this was the speech of a veteran campaigner rather than a prime-minister-in-waiting. I still don’t believe he has what it takes. But the game is certainly on. • Matthew d’Ancona is a Guardian columnist Sorry your browser does not support audio - but you can download here
and listen https://flex.acast.com/audio.guim.co.uk/2018/09/26-51111-gdn.pol.180926.podcast.mp3