Makes 1 sandwichrye bread 2 slices Colman’s mustard a generous amount pre-sliced emmenthal 2 slices pastrami 4 slices dill pickle 1 large, sliced thinly lengthways Spread both pieces of bread with a generous amount of mustard (or less, if you don’t want your eyes to water as you bite in). Lay the cheese, then the pastrami, then the pickle slices (if you start with the cheese it will act as a guard against sog). Sandwich together.From The Little Book of Lunch by Caroline Craig & Sophie Missing (Square Peg, £16.99) This makes twice the amount of pesto you need for this dish, but it’s not worth making less, and anyway, it keeps for up to three days in the fridge. You can make this anchovy-free, though if you do, add a little extra salt. Serves 4red onions 3, peeled and cut into wedges about 2-3cm wideolive oil 150ml salt and black pepperkale 300g, stems removed (save them for a vegetable soup), leaves roughly torn into 4cm-wide pieceshazelnuts 100g, blanched, lightly roasted and roughly choppedfeta 150g, roughly crumbled into 1-2cm piecesbasil leaves 40g, roughly tornanchovy fillets in oil 2, drained, rinsed, patted dry, finely choppedorzo 150g boiling water 1 litre lemon finely grated zest of 1, plus 1 tbsp juiceHeat the oven to 220C/gas mark 7. Mix the onion wedges in a medium bowl with a tablespoon of oil, a quarter-teaspoon of salt and a generous grind of pepper. Arrange on a 22cm x 33cm oven tray lined with greaseproof paper, and roast for 20 minutes, stirring once halfway so they cook evenly, until soft and caramelised. Remove from the oven and set aside to cool. Put 50g of the kale leaves in a food processor with half the hazelnuts, half the feta, half the basil, 75ml olive oil, all the anchovies, 3 tablespoons of water and a good grind of black pepper, and blitz to a rough paste. Heat 2 tablespoons of oil in a medium saucepan on a medium-high flame, then fry half the remaining kale and a pinch of salt for a minute or 2, stirring constantly, until it starts to brown and go crisp. Transfer to a plate lined with kitchen paper and heat the last 2 tablespoons of oil in the same pan. Fry the remaining kale with a pinch of salt as before, then add to the first batch. With the pan still on a medium-high heat, add the orzo and stir for 1-2 minutes, until it starts to toast and turn golden-brown, then carefully pour in the boiling water and add a teaspoon of salt. Boil the orzo for 6-8 minutes, until cooked but still with some bite, then drain. If you’re not eating straightaway, refresh under cold water. Put the drained pasta in a large bowl, add half the pesto and toss to coat. Gently stir in the roast onions, half the lemon zest, all the lemon juice, the remaining hazelnuts, feta and basil, fold in the crisped kale. Sprinkle over the remaining lemon zest, and pack into your chosen lunchbox. Refrigerate it if you can when you get to work, take it out 30 minutes before lunchtime.Yotam Ottolenghi is chef-patron of the Ottolenghi delis, Rovi and Nopi; recipe originally published in the Guardian, 1 April, 2017 It takes a little effort to chop all the vegetables and roll the crepes but it’s totally worth it. They also pack well in a lunchbox. Makes 10-12 crepesFor the carrot crepesrice crepe batter 1 quantity (see below)carrots 80g, peeledvirgin coconut oil or butter to fryFor the rice crepe battereggs 5 free-range plant-based milk of choice 500ml rice flour 150g butter or virgin coconut oil 1 tbsp, melted, plus extra to frysea salt 1 tsp For the raw veggie fillingcarrots 2, trimmed and peeledmangetout 100g, trimmedred cabbage ¼ small, trimmedavocado 1, ripe, flesh scooped outFor the marinated tofured chilli ½-1 fresh, seededtamari or soy sauce 3 tbsp rice vinegar 2 tbsp sesame seed oil 1 tbsp fresh ginger 1 tbsp, peeled, gratedorganic firm tofu 200g, drainedvirgin coconut oil or butter to fryTo servekimchi, coriander leaves, toasted sesame seeds, lime wedges, runny honey, nut butter of choice To make the crepe batter, crack the eggs into a blender or food processor, add the rest of the ingredients, blend until smooth. Grate the carrots, transfer to the blender with the batter, blend again until completely smooth and slightly orange. Pour into a jug and set aside in the fridge for about 30 minutes to rest. (You can leave it for up to 3 days.) Prepare the veg filling. Julienne the carrots and mangetout, thinly slice the cabbage and avocado, and transfer to a serving plate. To prepare the marinated tofu, roughly chop the chilli, transfer to a small serving bowl along with the tamari or soy sauce, vinegar, sesame seed oil and ginger, whisk until combined and set aside. Cut the tofu lengthwise into 1cm thick slices. Heat a little oil or butter in a 20cm non-stick frying pan on a medium-high heat. Once hot, add the tofu and fry for about 5 minutes or until golden on the underside. Turn the tofu over and fry for a further 5 minutes or so, until golden. Transfer to a serving dish, drizzle over some of the marinade, reserving the rest to serve, toss to coat and set aside while you cook the crepes. Heat a little oil or butter in the same frying pan on medium-high heat. Once hot, whisk the batter then ladle 80ml into the pan, tilting it to spread evenly. Fry for 1-2 minutes or until small bubbles form on the surface and the base is golden. Carefully flip the crepe with a spatula and fry the other side for a further 1-2 minutes or until cooked and golden. Transfer the cooked crepe to a plate and repeat with the rest of the batter (you may need to reduce the heat slightly after the first crepe). Serve the crepes topped with some veggies, tofu, kimchi, a scattering of coriander, sprinkling of sesame seeds, squeeze of lime juice and a drizzle of honey. Roll up, seal with a dollop of peanut or other nut butter and cut in half. Eat them with your hands, using the remaining tofu marinade as dipping sauce. TIP You can prepare the crepe batter in a large mixing bowl with a whisk or immersion (hand) blender; just be sure to finely grate the carrot first. Rice flour can easily be replaced with regular flour or spelt flour (although the pancakes won’t be gluten-free).From Green Kitchen at Home by David Frenkiel and Luise Vindahl (Hardie Grant, £25) This can be made the evening before, but it might go soggy overnight if you fill the baguette, so put the dressing on in the morning. You can also use crusty rolls and ciabatta, and replace fish sauce with soy for vegetarians and use a non-dairy spread for vegans. Serves 2fresh baguette 2 x 20cm lengthsbutter or non-dairy spread For the roast vegetablesbaby aubergines 4, sliced in 1cm ringscourgette ½, sliced in 1cm ringsfennel ½ a bulb, sliced in 1cm ringsvegetable oil or olive oil 1 tbsp For the sauceshallot ½, slicedvegetable oil for fryinghoney 2 tspfish sauce or soy sauce 2 tsplime juice of ½ and zest of ¼, sliced into tiny cubessesame seeds 1 tsp, toastedcoriander stalks of 1 bunch, 2.5cm in length, finely choppedfennel fronds 2.5 cm (optional)chilli ½, finely chopped (optional) For the garnishspring onion 1, thinly sliced lengthwayscucumber 10cm length, thinly sliced lengthwayscoriander with stalksfresh red chilli 1, sliced into rings or lengthways Preheat the oven to 160C/gas mark 3. Place the roasting vegetables onto a tray and, using a pastry brush, paint over the rings with a little oil, sprinkle with salt and pepper and roast for 25 minutes. You can roast any vegetables you like and have available and can even use leftover grilled or roasted vegetables. For the sauce, on medium heat, gently brown the shallot in the oil, then add the honey, fish sauce and lime juice and cook for about 5 minutes until it has slightly reduced and thickened. Cool for about 10 minutes, then add the lime zest, sesame, coriander stalks, fennel fronds and chilli if using. (You can double the amount and use the rest later in the week.) Once the roasting has finished, allow to cool for 20 minutes, then split the baguettes leaving one side attached. Tear out the middles of the baguette (optional), spread with butter (optional) and place a layer of each vegetable, then a spread of the sauce, then a layer of veg, then sauce and so on. Finally, stuff it with fresh garnishes and drizzle any last bits of the sauce onto the filling. To pack, wrap with greaseproof paper and tie with a string. Or place both in a small fitting airtight container.Uyen Luu is a food writer, and the author of My Vietnamese Kitchen (Ryland, Peters & Small, £16.99). Over the years we have produced countless versions of the chocolate brownie. They are particularly popular in the afternoon. We have given these an extra hit of energy by adding espresso to the mix; we think it adds great flavour. Makes 9-12unsalted butter 240g dark chocolate 320g eggs 4 medium caster sugar 400gplain flour 80g espresso 100ml, cooled hazelnuts 125g, toasted and smashed or roughly chopped Preheat the oven to 150C/gas mark 2 and butter and line a 20cm square baking tin, at least 3cm high, with baking paper. Place the butter and chocolate in a heatproof bowl and set over a pan of barely simmering water, making sure the bottom of the bowl doesn’t touch the water. Mix together until melted, then set aside to cool to room temperature. In a stand mixer fitted with the whisk attachment, whisk together the eggs and sugar on medium speed until the mixture has doubled in volume and is a pale colour. Let the mixture rest for 5 minutes and then bang the bowl a couple of times on the work surface to knock out some air. Add the flour to the mixing bowl and fold in by hand until all the flour is mixed in. Add the cooled chocolate mixture and cooled espresso to the bowl and fold through until completely combined. Finally fold the hazelnuts through the mixture and pour into the prepared tin. Before placing in the oven, drop the baking tin a couple of times onto your work surface to knock out further air. Bake for 30-35 minutes until an inserted skewer comes out with mixture on it, but the mixture is warm to the touch. Remove from the oven and leave in the tray to cool. You can eat this the same day but for a super-fudgy brownie, leave in the tray in the fridge overnight and cut into squares the following morning.From Caravan: Dining All Day by Laura Harper-Hinton, Miles Kirby and Chris Ammermann (Square Peg, £25)