The heatwave is dead, long live autumn. Which means we are due something fatty. I love butter and, until recently, coconut oil – although I stopped eating it after a Harvard professor called it “poison”. Caul fat isn’t new, but after a colleague (who once worked for a butcher) told me that “if you like faggots, you’ll like caul fat”, I started seeing it everywhere. Caul fat is mostly used as a casing for faggots and sausages, and comes listed under all sorts of exotic-sounding monikers, such as lace fat, crépine and fat netting. On menus, it goes largely uncredited, possibly because it is a membrane that surrounds an animal’s internal organs, but it is clearly the prettiest fat in the genre. By and large, fat tends to be a thick, white, inert grease. Stretched out like clingfilm, caul fat looks like Brussels lace. One of its main uses is in sheftalia, a traditional Greek sausage made from ground pork, lamb, onion and parsley. Emilio Stavrou, a second-generation Greek Cypriot, serves them at Éla, his two month-old restaurant which sits at the back of St John at Hackney Brewery. The east London brewery is named after the nearby church and fitted with real pews, but while the acoustics inside might be comparable to a chapel, that is where the similarity ends. At the back, Stavrou and his team quietly grill halloumi and meat for a congregation glazed on craft ale. Under the light of an iPhone, Stavrou gently wraps the outstretched caul fat around a ball of mince to make the sausage. Prepared, it is the size of a baby’s hand, but shrinks a little when grilled. He serves it on its own in a small dish for £5. Dan Doherty is soon to start serving game faggots made with caul fat at the Royal Oak in Marylebone in central London. Meanwhile, it’s wrapped around the pulled lamb at the Cartford Inn, near Preston in Lancashire, and around chorizo at Brixton’s Smoke & Salt. Stavrou spent his childhood summers eating the stuff in Lakatamia, Cyprus, with his grandmother. She would make the Greek version of a full English: curled cucumbers sliced and salted, loukanika sausages and smoked ham. Towards the end of breakfast, she would stand up and get the barbecue going for lunch. The fat, Stavrou says, is what makes his sausages so delicious; it’s the flip to the synthetic sausage casing we are used to. He is not shy about a kebab in the early hours, but he is keen to push this traditional food to a more elevated level. Hackney is a good place to start. Since Cypriots started arriving as Commonwealth citizens in the 1950s and 60s, it has become something of a heartland for this sort of food. The key is not to fear the fat. In truth, you can’t actually taste it. It’s there, though, holding the whole thing together like Alastair Cook. You just can’t see it until it has gone.