Typhoon Mangkhut has slammed into the northern Philippines, unleashing ferocious winds and blinding rain in a region where authorities have been rushing to evacuate tens of thousands of people from high-risk areas. The storm made landfall before dawn in Cagayan province on the northern tip of Luzon island, with gusts of up 255km (160 miles) per hour. More than 5 million people are at risk from the storm, which the Hawaii-based Joint Typhoon Warning Center categorises as a super typhoon with gusts equivalent to a category 5 Atlantic hurricane. In Cagayan’s capital city of Tuguegarao, tin roofs and other debris hurtled through the air and store signs crashed to the ground. With a rain cloud band 560 miles wide, combined with seasonal monsoon rains, there are fears the typhoon could trigger landslides and flash floods. Storm warnings were raised in 25 provinces across Luzon, restricting sea and air travel. Ricardo Jalad, the country’s civil defence chief, told an emergency meeting led by President Rodrigo Duterte that about 4.2 million people were vulnerable to the most destructive effects near the typhoon’s 78 mile eye. Nearly 48,000 houses in those high-risk areas are made of light materials and vulnerable to Mangkhut’s winds. Government forecaster Rene Paciente said that even if the typhoon weakened slightly after slamming ashore, its winds would remain very destructive. “It can lift cars, you can’t stand, you can’t even crawl against that wind,” Paciente told reporters late on Friday in Manila. Across the north, residents covered glass windows with wooden boards, strengthened houses with rope and braces and moved fishing boats to safety. Manuel Mamba, the governor of Cagayan, said evacuations of residents from risky coastal villages and island municipalities north of the province of 1.2 million people had started and school classes were cancelled. “The weather here is still good but we’re moving them now because it’s very important that when it comes, people will be away from peril,” Mamba said, adding that a change in the typhoon’s track had prompted authorities to rapidly reassess where to redeploy emergency teams and supplies. Ninia Grace Abedes abandoned her bamboo hut and took her four children to a school building serving as an emergency shelter. The 33-year-old laundrywoman said the 2016 typhoon blew away their hut, which they abandoned before the storm hit. “If we didn’t, all of us would be dead,” Abedes said. Duterte, who cancelled his appearance at a missile test firing aboard a navy ship off northern Bataan province, asked cabinet officials from the north to help oversee disaster response work if needed, but told reporters it was too early to consider seeking foreign aid. “It would depend on the severity of the crisis,” Duterte said. “If it flattens everything, maybe we need to have some help.” The typhoon is approaching at the start of the rice and corn harvesting season in Cagayan, a major agricultural producer, and farmers were scrambling to save what they could of their crops. Officials said other northern provinces started evacuating residents from high-risk areas, including in northern mountain provinces prone to landslides. On Guam, where Mangkhut passed, residents dealt with flooded streets, downed trees and widespread power outages. Government agencies were conducting damage assessments and clearing roads, according to the Pacific Daily News. About 80% of the US territory was without power but it was restored by Thursday morning. Mangkhut, a Thai word for the mangosteen fruit, is the 15th storm this year to batter the Philippines, which is hit by about 20 a year and is considered one of the world’s most disaster-prone countries. The storm is predicted to move on to China’s heavily populated southern coast this weekend. In Hong Kong, preparations were under way Friday, though the storm was not expected to hit until Sunday. The Hong Kong Observatory warned it would bring “significantly deteriorating weather”on Sunday and warned residents to take precautions. This story contains material from the Associated Press and Agence France-Presse