“I’ll tell you this though, Francis: when they bury me, it won’t be in my backyard. When they pay their respects, they’ll have to wait in line.” Those lines, spoken this week by Robin Wright’s Claire Underwood in the trailer for House of Cards final season, confirmed the fate of her co-star Kevin Spacey. Netflix will hope its decision to kill off Francis “Frank” Underwood will draw a line under its relationship with Spacey, who was fired from the show after allegations of sexual assault emerged in October 2017. The streaming giant will also hope it means that its first ever original show will be allowed to bow out cleanly and gracefully, without its legacy being further dominated by its former star. Roseanne spin-off The Conners, which will debut this October in the US, looks set to deal with the problem of Roseanne Barr, who was fired from the show after sending a racist tweet, by killing her character too. (When Dan Goodman asked if his character will be different on the spin-off, he told the Sunday Times: “I guess he’ll be mopey and sad because his wife’s dead.”) In the era of #MeToo, where careers can be brought to an end in the matter of a few days, successful shows – Roseanne was watched by 27.3m viewers when it debuted in April – need to be inventive when stars implode. Netflix has so far dealt with the Spacey problem by swiftly firing him from House of Cards and then trying to refocus attention on Wright taking over as the new ready-made lead. The problem with that approach is questions keep being asked about Spacey, and Netflix’s response. The weakness of that strategy was exposed when Guy Pearce, who is starring in another Netflix show The Innocents and worked with a “handsy” Spacey on LA Confidential, made comments about his co-star’s behaviour that provoked – in his words – an “explosive response”. “I think I said enough about that,” he told the Guardian when asked about his comments, but then added: “I don’t know how much it’s really changed yet. We’re realising things need to change, we’re in that phase. People need to feel like they’re able to speak up and other people will support them.” Wright said she “didn’t know the man”, when asked about Spacey, and was criticised last week for appearing to suggest he should be afforded a second chance. After saying that the online culture where people can be judged in an instant is “criminal, it really is”, she was asked about whether Spacey should be allowed to return. “I don’t know how to comment on that, I really don’t,” she said. “I believe every human being has the ability to reform. Has the ability to reform. In that sense, second chances, or whatever you are going to call it – absolutely, I believe in that. It’s called growth.” The problem for Netflix and the team behind The Conners is even after burying their controversial leads, their ghosts will still haunt the respective productions. For many, Spacey was the reason to watch House of Cards, with his breaking the fourth wall and scene-chewing. In the case of Roseanne, the show bore her name and was her baby. It remains to be seen if the goodwill afforded to the cast, including Goodman and Laure Metcalf, who distanced themselves from Barr, will extend to a spin-off that lacks a vital ingredient for many, the reason for watching: its star, Roseanne Barr. As some actors, such as Louis CK, attempt to make #MeToo comebacks, viewers and the TV industry are asking themselves whether there is a redemptive route back or whether that door should remain closed. For House of Cards and The Conners, the question isn’t can they continue but can they ever fully exorcise the ghosts of their former stars.