The Eurovision song contest has chosen Tel Aviv to host next year’s competition, despite the Israeli government previously declaring the event would be held in Jerusalem. Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, had wanted the international music competition to be held in the holy city as part of the government’s campaign for global recognition of Jerusalem as its capital. Israel won the contest last year with the beatboxing and chicken-dancing artist Netta Barzilai, earning it the right to host the 2019 edition. But following the backlash to the US opening of its embassy in Jerusalem two days later and concerns over anti-occupation international boycotts, which have convinced artists to cancel concerts in the past, Israel backtracked on its drive for Eurovision to take place in the city. The executive board for the event, watched by 200 million people a year, said on Thursday that the Israeli public broadcaster Kan also put forward Jerusalem and the Red Sea port city of Eilat as venue possibilities. “All the bids were exemplary, but in the end, we decided that Tel Aviv provides the best overall setup for the world’s largest live music event,” said Jon Ola Sand, the executive supervisor of the European Broadcasting Union (EBU), which sponsors the contest. The city’s mayor, Ron Huldai, said: “Eurovision is a perfect fit for our city, which has been internationally acclaimed for its vibrant energy, creative spirit, its lively cultural scene and its celebration of freedom.” Capital cities usually host the event, but Israel’s claim to Jerusalem is not internationally recognised and most world powers want the issue resolved in a peace deal. Israeli forces captured the eastern part of Jerusalem from Jordanian troops in 1967 and Palestinians claim the area as their future capital. However, Jerusalem has twice hosted the competition in the past, first in 1979 and again in 1999 after Dana International won with her song Diva, becoming a national hero. In Israel, the issue has become a sticking point among politicians, culminating with the culture minister, Miri Regev, saying the contest should not take place at all unless in Jerusalem. There were also concerns that ultra-Orthodox Jews would disrupt the event if it took place on the sabbath, when the city shuts down. Separately, Israeli media reported that the EBU had asked the government to promise to grant entry to people regardless of political opinions or religion. In its announcement on Thursday, the chairman of Eurovision’s executive committee, Frank-Dieter Freiling, appeared to send a similar warning. “We are expecting to receive guarantees from the prime minister this week in regards to security, access for everyone to attend, freedom of expression and ensuring the non-political nature of the contest,” he said. “These guarantees are imperative in order for us to move forward with the planning of the event and to uphold the Eurovision song contest values of diversity and inclusivity.” The grand final of Eurovision 2019 will take place on 18 May next year.