Once, it used to be said that conservatives start culture wars and liberals win them. That old dependable has felt … less convincing of late. But for those of us looking for runes to read, Nike signing a major endorsement deal with Colin Kaepernick is surely a positive sign. Nike’s market research department is larger and more sophisticated than the second Death Star, and if their cost-benefit analysis judges Kaepernick the one to back in a fight where the other side includes the US president, then frankly: I’ll take it. No, I don’t need the box. I’m wearing it out of the shop. But first, a recap: the Nike deal was announced via a picture of the former San Francisco 49ers quarterback turned activist Kaepernick staring unsmiling into the camera, superimposed with the words: “Believe in something. Even if it means sacrificing everything.” On social media, the viralissimo reaction was split – far from evenly – between those in raptures, and those doing things like setting fire to sneakers they had already paid for. (Streamlining your wardrobe to own the libs is my new favourite way to own said libs.) The president has already broken his silence, and this one will run and run. Once again, my tears fail to liquefy for the NFL owners, who not only wrongly chose to regard Kaepernick’s dignified bent-knee protest against racial injustice as bait, but then rose to that bait in a way that has seen him strangely unable to land an NFL contract since 2016. Consequently, the most influential NFL player does not play in the NFL. I don’t want to lose you with too much marketing technicalese, but that is an absolute bollock-drop by the owners. If they don’t want to monetise the noise around the cultural breakout star of their game … well, do forgive Nike for sliding in. All of us who admire Kaepernick for reasons other than the money he could make us should see Nike’s deal in the context of a priceless quote they once gave in reaction to Gary Neville’s concerns about commercialism in anti-racism campaigns. “This campaign isn’t about publicity,” one of their UK suits insisted. “It’s about racism, and the fact there still remains racism in football.” To which the lengthiest rebuttal I am prepared to offer is: LOL. It is always about selling sportswear, even when it’s really, really not. That’s what multibillion publicly traded corporations such as Nike do. And that’s fine! Unless we’re very naive, we know where we are. Thus we can simply sit back and enjoy peak Swoosh moments such as the Nike advert rushed out shortly after Tiger Woods’s raging cocktail waitress habit has been exposed. This features an unsmiling-looking Tiger staring straight into the camera, while the voice of his own dead father (!) delivered what appeared to be a character-building reproach. “Did you learn anything?” Earl Woods inquired. Even though you knew Woods was thinking: “Yes – that what happens in Vegas apparently doesn’t stay in Vegas,” he didn’t say it. He kept staring into that camera, taking it like a man to keep his sponsor. It is the high-water mark of big-brand bonkers, a piece of cynicism so breathtaking, and in such amusing bad taste, that I felt a sort of exhilaration each of the 937 times I watched it. Or perhaps you preferred what Nike rushed out when Liu Xiang, China’s biggest track and field star at the Beijing Olympics, had to pull out of the 110m hurdles because of injury? Within hours, hoardings and whole newspaper pages in China featured Liu – staring unsmiling into the camera – superimposed with the words: “Love sport even when it breaks your heart.” A timely reminder to the Chinese of both something-or-other about sport, and their obligation to buy more sportswear. Guys, it’s not enough just to make it for us in the factories. If only Nike had left it there. But when an anonymous internet user suggested Nike had pressured Liu to withdraw because he was going to lose, they announced: “We have immediately asked the relevant government departments to investigate those that started the rumour.” Well, if you want someone investigated properly, you ask the Chinese government. They’re arguably the brand leader in this stuff. So the short version is we know Nike are mostly shits. But they do pick winners, and just because it’s all about the money doesn’t mean that the money can’t tell us stuff. If they wade so dramatically into one side of contemporary American politics, they will have satisfied themselves it’s likely to be the winning one. As for Kaepernick, he is certainly not the first black athlete locked out of his sport during what should be his peak years. There was this boxer guy, maybe you heard? Frequently acknowledged to have been the greatest sporting figure ever, Muhammad Ali wasn’t plying his trade in the era of mega sponsorship deals, but if he had been, you know Nike would have sold their grandmothers to get a piece of him. And they would have been right. By the time he died, Ali was acknowledged as a “lifelong hero” by many to whom he had been anything but, rather as Nelson Mandela was. Both men were the sort of figures who moved many of their former detractors to rewrite their own histories, to cast themselves as having always been on the right side. It’s by no means a certainty that many people who now oppose Kaepernick will one day claim otherwise. But the fact Nike have bet on him being good business is at least a hopeful sign.