A former head of the Australian federal police has warned the proposed ban on amyl nitrite – an inhalant used for sex and short recreational highs – would be ineffective. The former AFP commissioner Mick Palmer made the comment in response to a question at the National Press Club on Tuesday, appearing alongside drug safety advocate Matt Noffs to urge a harm minimisation approach to the regulation and policing of all drugs. The Therapeutic Goods Administration has announced its intention to reclassify amyl nitrite because of “increasing reports of misuse and abuse” of the drug, commonly known as “poppers”, and cases of retinal damage as a side effect of use. The move has been opposed – particularly by the LGBTI community – on the basis amyl is not addictive and its effect of dilating the user’s blood vessels helps receptive sexual partners comfortably enjoy sex. A similar ban was considered in the United Kingdom but rejected by the conservative government after its advisory body found the use of poppers was “not seen to be capable of having harmful effects sufficient to constitute a societal problem”. Asked about the proposed ban, Palmer said he was “not an expert” on amyl nitrite but “I don’t think that a ban would be effective”. “No other ban has been effective,” he said. “Why would this one? … Nothing we’ve banned for the illicit drug marketplace has had much difference and this will be no different.” Noffs – the chief executive of the Noffs Foundation, Australia’s largest drug and alcohol treatment service provider for young people under 25 – agreed with that response. “The simple answer is: we don’t get any control by banning a substance, by prohibiting it,” Noffs told Guardian Australia. The sale of products containing amyl nitrite or its related counterparts for recreational use is technically illegal in Australia but poppers are available for purchase behind the counter at many adult shops, labelled “leather cleaner” and “nail polish remover”. Reclassification would mean criminal penalties for the use, sale or possession of poppers. Earlier, Palmer told the press club he is personally in favour of drug decriminalisation. Drug law reform depends on the appetite of the government but decriminalisation for “use and possession” of drugs should be “a fundamental step”, he said. “Without question, it seems to me that the perception of community fear drives political resistance to change,” he said. “As a leading European politician said some years ago, we all know what to do, we just don’t know how to get re-elected after we do it.” Noffs agreed that “a perfect world is a world where we have total control over all drug markets” but acknowledged that was “idealistic” and “impossible” in the short term. Nothing we’ve banned for the illicit drug marketplace has had much difference and this will be no different. Noffs is spearheading a campaign called Take Control, which advocates a range of harm minimisation measures including pill testing at festivals and safe-injecting rooms. Palmer said that if Australia takes a “zero tolerance approach” to drugs “it should be zero tolerance to the needless loss of any young Australian life”. “It’s not about giving the green light to drug use … but rather shining a light on protecting people’s lives and supporting those in need.” Palmer said that despite “pretty effective policing” and “some very significant seizures”, law enforcement cannot change “the nature of the marketplace”. There is “too much money” and “too much power that goes with the illegal drug marketplace”, he said. Noffs said the government will “never get rid of black markets” but when drugs like tobacco are legal and regulated the black market “is so small that the police are able to go in and effectively control that”. Debate about harm minimisation has been sparked by two deaths at the Defqon.1 music festival in Sydney in September. Harm minimisation advocates have called for the national rollout of pill-testing at festivals after a successful trial at the Groovin the Moo festival in the Australian Capital Territory in April.