Harry Kane suggested the referee had “bottled it” as England were denied a stoppage time equaliser and opened their Nations League campaign with a first competitive home defeat in 11 years at the hands of Luis Enrique’s Spain. The substitute Danny Welbeck was penalised for a foul by the Dutch official, Danny Makkelie, as David de Gea, leaping above the Arsenal forward, dropped the ball in the seventh of nine minutes added on after Luke Shaw required lengthy treatment for a head injury early in the second half. The striker converted the loose ball only for his celebrations to be cut short, with English protests continuing long after the final whistle. “In those big moments, you need the ref to stay strong but, unfortunately, he’s just bottled it,” said Kane. “In the big moments you need a firm referee who doesn’t get decisions wrong under pressure. Danny Welbeck’s just stood there, De Gea went up, he caught the ball but, as he went down, he fell on Danny – no foul or anything – and the ball dropped. Sometimes goalkeepers get better treatment than the rest of us, and that’s unfortunate for us. “I think we deserved a draw at least. It was a good game, a good test against a team that keeps the ball well. It was difficult, but we had good spells in the game and we probably created the better chances. We tried to press and play with high intensity. There’s a lot of stuff we can learn from but I think we can hold our heads up high.” Southgate conceded his team may have been denied a late equaliser, but acknowledged the Spanish had been the better side as his team succumbed to a third successive defeat for the first time in 30 years. “The two defenders tried to block Danny out of it, De Gea came over the top and just dropped it,” he said. “It’s clear for everyone to see. It should have been a goal. But over the 90 minutes, Spain were better than us for long periods of the game. “We know the quality they possess. Their retention of the ball was top class. We were a little bit disjointed with our pressing, particularly in the first half, but when you’re playing against players who can wriggle out of situations and play their way out as they did … I’m very proud of the way the players finished the game. It was a night playing against a top team. I’ve seen teams fold in that situation, but we finished really strongly, created a couple of really good chances, probably had as many shots on target as they have. Given where we’re at, we need those experiences to improve. I couldn’t ask any more of the players.” Shaw, on his first start for his country in three years, was caught inadvertently by Dani Carvajal early in the second half and fell awkwardly, hitting his head on the turf, and was taken from the field on a stretcher. He was assessed by medics in the dressing room and x-rayed, and was described as “awake and alert”. He was to be monitored overnight within the England setup but is expected to return to Manchester United on Sunday for further assessment, with Leicester City’s Ben Chilwell his likely replacement for Tuesday’s friendly against Switzerland. “He’s sat up in the dressing room, talking and seems fairly comfortable,” said Southgate of the 23-year-old defender. “We’ll have to assess him a bit more overnight and tomorrow, but that’s definitely a good sign. It’s difficult to tell (if he had been knocked unconscious), but there’ll be tests. We won’t take any chances, it was a nasty-looking fall, but he is awake and talking.” Marcus Rashford, who scored England’s fine opening goal, may also withdraw from the party after limping away in stoppage time as the hosts slipped to a first competitive defeat at Wembley since Steve McClaren was left sodden on the sidelines and Croatia won here in a European Championship qualifier in 2007. “I think it’s likely we’ll have to call some players in, most likely from the U21s,” added Southgate. “We’ll look at it in the morning. Marcus was feeling something. He’s another we’ll assess, and we’ll have a better idea in the morning.”