Last month, Alison (not her real name) says she was accosted on her way into the Marie Stopes clinic in Ealing to discuss a termination. She was approached by a man asking her for help; it was only when he started showing her anti-choice leaflets that she twigged that he was a protester. As she went to leave, he put his hand towards her, saying that he wanted to give her something. In his palm was a tiny model foetus. Now, in a landmark decision, Ealing council voted to instigate a buffer zone around the clinic, the first of its kind. This radical implementation of a public spaces protection order – now also being considered by other councils – marks an important first step in protecting the rights of women from this kind of harassment. Amber Rudd has launched a national consultation on the introduction of new powers to protect women. It is an example of how a community, led by pro-choice activist group Sister Supporter, set up by 25-year-old Anna Veglio-White when she was horrified by the protesters’ tactics, can rally together to fight antisocial behaviour. Because this isn’t about freedom of speech. This is about women’s legal rights to access medical treatment being impeded. It is about women being harassed and intimidated by groups of religious fundamentalists whose ideas about female bodily autonomy are rooted in misogyny. If the protesters were interested in changing the legislation on abortion, you might think they’d be lobbying parliament. Instead, they opt to intimidate and sometimes traumatise individual women, especially when they are alone. “Imagine if men were going to pick up a Viagra prescription and someone was there holding up a massive sign saying ‘floppy dick’”, Veglio-White says. Anti-choice campaigners have protested outside the clinic in Ealing for 23 years. In that time, there have been a variety of horrible tactics used to try to prevent women from accessing medical services to which they are legally entitled. They have had had “holy water” thrown on them. If patients are alone, protesters holler, “does he know you’re killing his baby today?” Some ask women to choose a blue or a pink rosary, depending on the sex of their “baby”. Leaflets make dubious medical claims, such as that a termination will give you breast cancer. Some call the women murderers, or tell them it isn’t a clinic, so they don’t go in. “One woman we saw, they called her ‘mum’”,” Veglio-White tells me. “She ran off into the park in tears. Her partner begged them to move. She had wanted her child but there was a foetal abnormality. She didn’t end up going in that day. We don’t know if she went back.” Who knows how many other women, over two decades, have had their lives changed by these callous obstructions. But at least on the UK mainland we have reached the point where columns like this one no longer need to defend abortion. Women’s legal rights to access it have been recognised since 1967. Most citizens believe abortions should be allowed by law and that opinion is growing, even among Catholics. Even those who are anti-abortion would rarely advocate the tactics outside the clinic in Ealing. Sadly, in the Republic of Ireland such language and behaviour are not limited to fundamentalist fringe groups, but are part of the mainstream national discourse. One campaign group has been claiming that if the eighth amendment in the country’s constitution, which restricts abortion to cases where the life of a pregnant woman is at risk, is repealed, women will seek abortions because they conflict with their holidays. Another campaigner claimed that women would be depressed for the rest of their lives. The Save the 8th group has launched a poster campaign calling for a no vote if terminating an “unborn baby at six months bothers you”. “Little dead babies” which “don’t feel loved” are referenced. Online propaganda and fake news are spreading. I cannot believe I am writing this, but we are seeing unborn foetuses on beer mats and posters in pub urinals (the latter are not placed in the ladies’ toilets, naturally). So, though we trundle forwards, the battle for reproductive rights is by no means over. Veglio-White has said she believes anti-abortion groups have been emboldened by regular challenges to the Abortion Act, and the fact that it hasn’t been updated in 50 years. A woman seeking an abortion here still needs to convince two doctors that carrying a pregnancy to term will affect her long-term health. Women are still unable to administer abortion pills in the safety and comfort of their homes, and so are miscarrying in transit. Jacob Rees-Mogg says publicly that he is against abortion in cases of rape, but privately profits from the sale of abortion pills. Anti-choice MP Maria Caulfield has been appointed Conservative vice-chair for women, and has called for a reduction of the time limit. Women in Northern Ireland continue to have their human rights violated by the abortion ban there. Groups continue to picket clinics elsewhere in the UK. But there is cause for optimism. “With this move, progress in Northern Ireland, and the referendum of 25 May in the Republic of Ireland, 2018 is set to be the biggest in reproductive rights history since 1967,” says Veglio-White, who has good reason to be proud about her achievement in campaigning for Ealing’s decision. But we need to keep fighting to ensure she is right. • Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett is a Guardian columnist