Theresa May has refused to rule out further action against targets in Syria if Britain finds further evidence of chemical weapons attacks, but faced down calls for an immediate vote in parliament on the overnight British military strikes.In Downing Street after military action was authorised in a joint offensive by the UK, US and France, the prime minister said the strikes were “right and legal” and would “significantly degrade the Syrian regime’s ability to research, develop and deploy chemical weapons”.May said the allies had hit a chemical weapons storage and production facility, a chemical weapons research centre and a military bunker involved in chemical weapons attacks.However, pressed on whether she would authorise further strikes if chemical weapons stockpiles had survived, May said the Syrian regime should not doubt Britain’s resolve to prevent the normalisation of chemical weapons. Amid accusations from the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, that the attack was legally questionable, the prime minister said the attorney general, Jeremy Wright, had produced legal advice presented to the cabinet on Thursday. Officials said it had made the case that strikes were necessary to prevent humanitarian catastrophe. May said she would return to the House of Commons on Monday when MPs return from the Easter recess to give a statement and answer questions about the attack. Pressed on whether she would grant MPs a vote if further action was taken, the prime minister declined to give any guarantees.“This decision was taken because I think it was the right thing to do,” she said. “The power to take this decision is obviously a prerogative power and, at the first opportunity, parliament will have an opportunity to question this. I will be in parliament on Monday in order to do so. The intent of this action is that it does degrade, and it does deter, the Syrian regime from taking action. We will be following up with further diplomatic action.”The Salisbury chemical attack on Sergei Skripal and his daughter Yulia was explicitly linked by the prime minister as a reason behind her decision to take action, explaining her fears about the erosion of the international norm of using chemical weapons. “I believe it should also be a message to others that the international community is not going to stand by and allow chemical weapons to be used with impunity,” she said, saying the nerve agent attack in Britain was “part of pattern of disregard for these norms”.May hinted at a deep frustration with the effectiveness of the UN security council in the run-up to the strikes. Asked if she was concerned about the security council’s relevance given Russia’s repeated vetos on censuring the Assad regime, May said: “Permanent membership of the security council is given only to a limited number of countries. I think it is important those who sit around that table take extremely seriously the responsibility they have to the wider international community for decisions that are taken.”The prime minister returned to Downing Street on Friday night after making final arrangements for the strike overnight from her country house, Chequers. Government sources said the phone calls were made late in the evening to finalise arrangements, including one between May and the French president, Emmanuel Macron. Party leaders, including Jeremy Corbyn, were informed shortly after midnight. As President Donald Trump announced US strikes in Washington, May announced that Britain had joined the action at 2am on Saturday. May revealed that the UK had not informed Russia of the strikes in advance. “This is not something that the United Kingdom has been involved in,” she said.Speaking to reporters in No 10 at a press conference hastily arranged in the early hours of Saturday morning, May described the decision as the gravest a prime minister could take, the first time she had done so, but spoke about how the images of the victims of the chemical attack had affected her.“We have seen the harrowing images of men, women and children lying dead with foam in their mouths,” she said, calling them “innocent families ... seeking shelter underground, in basements.” NGO workers had described “horrific suffering”, she said, including burns to the eyes, suffocation and skin discolouration.May said the UK had significant intelligence that the Syrian regime was responsible for the attack, including the use of an army helicopter and a barrel bomb to deliver the chemicals.  “The opposition does not operate helicopters or use barrel bombs,” she said. “No other group could have carried out this attack. Indeed, Daesh for example does not even have a presence in Douma.” Throughout the press conference, where she was pressed on whether the country backed her decision and on the ultimate aims of the escalation, May stressed the decision was based on the use of chemical weapons alone.“This was not about interfering in a civil war. And it was not about regime change,” she said, saying it was a “limited, targeted and effective strike with clear boundaries that expressly sought to avoid escalation”.