The deputy attorney general, Rod Rosenstein, explicitly authorized special counsel Robert Mueller to investigate allegations that the former Trump campaign chair Paul Manafort colluded with the Russian government, according to a court filing made late on Monday night. Mueller’s prosecutors included that detail in a memo defending the scope of their investigation, which so far has resulted in criminal charges against 19 people and three Russian companies. Manafort, who led the Trump campaign for several months in 2016, is one of four aides charged in the Mueller investigation. Former national security adviser Michael Flynn, Manafort’s deputy, Rick Gates, and the foreign policy adviser George Papadopoulos have entered plea deals. Manafort has challenged Mueller’s authority and asked a judge to dismiss an indictment charging him with crimes including money laundering conspiracy and false statements. He said Mueller, who was assigned to investigate potential coordination between Russia and the Trump campaign, overstepped his bounds by charging him for conduct that occurred years before the 2016 election. But in their new filing, prosecutors revealed that Rosenstein – who appointed Mueller after the attorney general, Jeff Sessions, recused himself, over contacts with Russians during the election campaign – wrote a memo last August that outlined the scope of Mueller’s appointment. The memo, which remains redacted in parts, said that Mueller was empowered to investigate allegations that Manafort “committed a crime or crimes by colluding with Russian government officials” to interfere with the presidential election. None of the charges Manafort faces alleges coordination with the Kremlin, and Manafort’s attorneys had used that point to argue that Mueller exceeded his authority by accusing him of financial crimes and acting as an unregistered foreign agent on behalf of Ukrainian interests. But Monday’s filing appears to undercut that argument. In addition to authorizing the Russia collusion investigation of Manafort, Rosenstein also authorized Mueller to investigate any crimes related to payments Manafort received from the Ukrainian government under former president Viktor Yanukovych. The description largely outlines the charges against Manafort, which mostly relate to allegations he conspired to launder tens of millions of dollars received from Ukrainian political consulting including his work on Yanukovych’s behalf. Manafort has pleaded not guilty and denied any wrongdoing related to Russian election interference. Prosecutors say in their court filing that given their mandate to investigate links between Trump associates and Russia, it was appropriate to investigate Manafort for ties to Russia-backed politicians and oligarchs. “It would also naturally look into any interactions they may have had before and during the campaign to plumb motives and opportunities to coordinate and to expose possible channels for surreptitious communications,” they wrote. “And prosecutors would naturally follow the money trail from Manafort’s Ukrainian consulting activities.”