Late-night hosts on Thursday discussed President Trump’s invitation to the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, to visit the White House, while Jimmy Kimmel responded to an attack from Sean Hannity about a joke he made at Melania Trump’s expense. “I woke up this morning and I did two hours of pilates, as I do every morning,” Jimmy Kimmel began. “And then I open my computer and find out I’m at war with Sean Hannity and Fox News.” “Because there’s nothing important going on in the country right now,” the host continued, “Sean Hannity and his fellow Fox News people spent a lot of time talking about me today. Hannity apparently took issue with a joke I made on the show on Monday night.” Kimmel then showed a clip from Hannity’s broadcast, in which the Fox News anchor calls Kimmel a “despicable disgrace” and an “ass clown” for joking about Melania Trump’s accent while covering the White House Easter egg roll. Hannity defended the first lady, adding that English is her fifth language. “Sean Hannity’s problem is for eight years while Obama was president, he was unable to get an erection,” Kimmel joked. “He tried everything: Viagra, Cialis, he tried looking at pictures of Paul Ryan with his shirt off. He went to office Christmas parties with Bill O’Reilly.” “Now that Trump is president, here’s the twist: Sean Hannity is unable to have anything but an erection,” Kimmel said. “He’s had an erection since November of 2016. It’s driving him mad.” Kimmel went on to call Hannity “the guy who defended the multiply alleged paedophile Roy Moore,” alluding to Hannity’s dogged support for the former Alabama judge in his Senate race last year. “I’m a despicable disgrace? If I’m an ass clown, and I might very well be, you, Sean, are the whole ass circus.” “You know what I think is disrespectful to the first lady?” Kimmel concluded. “Cheating on her with a porn star after she has a baby.” Meanwhile, Seth Meyers covered Trump’s recent statements regarding US relations with Russia and the potential for further personnel shake-ups at the White House. “Despite Trump repeatedly bending over backwards in every possible way to kowtow to Russian president Vladimir Putin, Trump this week insisted that he has actually stood up to Putin more than any previous president,” Meyers began. He continued: “Trump says no one’s been tougher on Russia, which is true, as long as you don’t count his initial refusal to impose congressional sanctions on Russia, his refusal to blame Russia for election hacking, the time he met privately with the Russians in the Oval Office and gave them classified information, or the time he literally invited Putin over to the White House.” The host was alluding to a 20 March phone call between Trump and Putin, in which the president reportedly discussed the possibility of a White House meeting with Putin. “All this comes amid an escalating investigation into the Trump campaign’s ties to Russia,” Meyers explained, noting that Trump has been upset with his attorney general, Jeff Sessions, for recusing himself from the Russia investigation. “Which is why it was alarming today when CNN reported that Trump floated replacing Sessions with Scott Pruitt, the head of the Environmental Protection Agency, as recently as this week.” “Trump just keeps moving staffers around. It’s like he’s rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic after it already sank,” the host quipped. “Our only hope is that he gets carried away and accidentally replaces himself.”