Broadway star Patti Murin opened up about mental health to fans in an Instagram post on Wednesday, explaining that she missed a recent show due to an anxiety attack. “I’ve learned that these situations aren’t something to ‘deal with’ or ‘push through’,” Murin wrote. “Anxiety and depression are real diseases that affect so many of us.” Murin, who plays Anna in the musical version of Disney’s Frozen, went on: “Even Disney princesses are terrified sometimes.” Murin credited Disney with being supportive over the missed date, and the role was filled by stand-in Aisha Jackson. Murin’s candor was met with praise from commenters who said the post helped them feel better about their own struggles with anxiety. “I was hospitalized last September because of my anxiety – EKGs and blood work, the whole nine yards. So, thank you,” one commenter wrote. “Needed this reminder that it’s okay to not be okay.” According to the Anxiety and Depression Association of America, 40 million Americans over the age of 18 are affected by anxiety – roughly 18% of the nation’s population. Murin wrote that her attack “had been building up for a while”, and that all of the ups and downs and stress and excitement of starring in a broadway production “really takes a toll on my mental health”. “Just remember that you’re not alone, your feelings are real, and this is not your fault.” So last night I called out of the show because I had a massive anxiety attack in the afternoon. It had been building up for a while, and while the past month has been incredible, all of the ups and downs and stress and excitement really takes a toll on my mental health. I’ve learned that these situations aren’t something to “deal with” or “push through.” Anxiety and depression are real diseases that affect so many of us. It requires a lot of rest and self care to heal every time it becomes more than I can handle in my daily life. While I hate missing the show for any reason at all, Disney has been nothing but supportive of me as I navigate my life and work, and I’m so grateful to them. Just remember that you’re not alone, your feelings are real, and this is not your fault. Even Disney princesses are terrified sometimes. A post shared by  Pattimurin (@pattimurin) on Apr 18, 2018 at 7:32am PDT