The title of Janelle Monáe’s third full-length outing – a frontrunner for album of the year – suggests compromised hardware, the gunk in the machine. And really, a tech fetish would have come as little surprise for Monáe’s return to music. Machines have long been her thing. Well before her performances in the films Moonlight and Hidden Figures, and before her features on records by Grimes and fun., the singer-turned-actor came to renown with her own stylish, sci-fi concept album. Set in a futuristic dystopia, The ArchAndroid (2010) starred a saviour robot, Cindi Mayweather, and disdained easy categorisations, combining R&B, pop and rock with Fritz Lang’s Metropolis and southern states sass. The early Monáe offered up dazzling avatars, embraced the speculative and swerved the lanes often assigned to young black women. She sang about far-fetched ideas, not sex; she wore black-and-white, uniform-style outfits that did not bare skin, but instead bore witness to her parents’ service industry jobs. She was cerebral, thought-provoking and refreshingly original, if, perhaps, a little distant. She even had a workshop-cum-label, Wondaland, in her adopted Atlanta, which mirrored Prince’s Paisley Park. During the filming of Black Panther, the cast would gather there for downtime and to listen to early cuts of Monáe’s newest songs. Now, with her profile burgeoning from screen roles, and stirring speeches at last year’s Women’s March and this year’s Grammys, Dirty Computer seizes Monáe’s moment. It is emphatically about people, and not our best metalwork. When Monáe offered a sneak peek at it in London last March, she frolicked and mimed her way through five tracks from the album’s midsection in the company of a bevy of dancers, in a celebration of joyous #blackgirlmagic. Hearing the songs again on headphones, without themed cocktails, their brio is undimmed. Ditching Monáe’s earlier sci-fi tropes, Dirty Computer retains some vestigial allegory. Co-starring Monáe and her Are-they-aren’t-they? muse Tessa Thompson, a short film – Monáe calls it an “emotion picture” – screened on MTV and BET in the US the night before this album’s release. Although the plot is set in another nearly now dystopia, the album is very much set somewhere pink and engorged and vulnerable. We are the dirty computers, with our corrupted drives, although Monáe’s liberating message here is on behalf of those who don’t fit the Trump-era matrix: the marginalised, “highly melanated”, the non-straight, the poor. The track Django Jane, released a couple of months ago, best displays Monáe’s fearlessness: every rapped line is barbed and brilliant, taking in her background, her success, its possible tokenism (“Prolly give a Tony to the homies”) and concluding with a salvo on behalf of creative black womanhood; even calling it “a salvo on behalf of creative black womanhood” can’t kill how great her flow is here. The politics of fear of the last few years (not to mention the inequity of ages) are woven through these songs of freedom and self-belief. Screwed (ft Zoë Kravitz) is, on the surface, a fruity pop tune that mulls how far south things have gone. But Monáe turns it into an analysis of power dynamics that takes in Prince (the Kiss-like opening riff), and Madonna (the dominatrix spoken bits). “Everything is sex, ’cept sex, which is power,” warns Monáe, a cultural studies professor manqué. “Now ask yourself, who’s screwing you?” The personal has long been political, but here Monáe is calling songs sweeping things such as Americans – the closing track, not the album’s most convincing – and singing pointed lyrics such as: “I am not America’s nightmare/ I am the American dream.” In one of the album’s most subversive acts, these bouts of flag-waving often come in the stadium pop vernacular, not hip-hop or R&B. This album’s most obvious lodestone is 80s Prince, a Monáe collaborator and sounding board before his death in 2016, most audible on the terrific purple tribute, Make Me Feel. Here and there, though, there are faint and unexpected echoes of Taylor Swift. Released earlier this month, the song Pynk (ft Grimes) divided opinion, not least because of its high sugar content. It remains a sensational cut about cunnilingus, intimacy, and how all our insides are the same colour; Peaches for millennials. Most specifically of all, though, Dirty Computer concerns Monáe, who is now wearing colours, baring skin and singing about herself and not Cindi Mayweather. Long-time fans might miss the steely distance of all the Afrofuturist conceptualising, Monáe’s rigorous otherworldliness. But the aim here is to rocket-propel Monáe into the mainstream, and on that count Dirty Computer succeeds: it is a juicy, genre-crossing pop record ripe with the funk, which somehow combines Beyoncé’s Lemonade and St Vincent’s Masseduction with lashings of Lauryn Hill. The price? A lot of these songs are about sex, often in swimming pools, the kind of R&B Monáe used to define herself against. Crazy, Classic, Life is a case in point: here, Monáe is “young, black, wild and free, naked in a limousine”. There is huge joy in R&B and hip-hop depictions of partying, contrasting as they do with the deprivations that often preceded them. However, the jolt here – Monáe going from buttoned-up sphinx to party girl – is a little startling. But Monáe doesn’t care; she is sure of her tastes. I Like That is a declaration of individuality that is – paradoxically – hugely accessible, quoting TLC’s CrazySexyCool. Secondly, for all Monáe’s long-time campaigning to “Fem the Future” and her impeccable girl-positive credentials, there are a lot of chaps at work on this feminist tour de force: Prince; Pharrell Williams, squelchily frontin’ on I Got the Juice; the sage advice of Stevie Wonder on Stevie’s Dream; Brian Wilson on the title track’s harmonies. These reservations are offset by the depth of Monáe’s offering. You get a lot of her game face but you also get her insecurities. Drill down into the track listing and there are song titles such as Don’t Judge Me (airy psychedelic soul) and So Afraid (a grunge-like ballad that builds into more psychedelic soul) that get to the nub of things. Not Monáe’s sexuality per se, pretty much declared in the amazing vagina-trousered video for Pynk, but her fear: of letting the vast, trolly public in, of alienating the people who love her, as she points out in the sleeve notes to Don’t Judge Me. Monáe has cast off her carapace, and she’s frightened of the consequences. Somehow, it makes this album about fearlessness all the more inspiring.