At the opening of the Formula One season, Max Verstappen was as confident in his own abilities as he ever had been. The young Dutchman has carried this self-assurance since he began in karting and it has been part and parcel of his career in F1. With the new season about to begin, he told my colleague Donald McRae that he felt no need to overthink his craft. “I never even think of the mental side of things because I never had any issues,” he said. But his poorly judged attempt at overtaking Sebastian Vettel in China suggests perhaps now is the time for the youngster to add a more considered, cerebral approach to his undoubted raw talent. The season has not begun well for the 20-year-old Red Bull driver. He spun at the opener in Melbourne, albeit after taking damage to the rear diffuser, and then in Bahrain he crashed in qualifying. During that race an over-ambitious move on Lewis Hamilton caused the puncture that forced his retirement. Hamilton referred to him as a “dickhead” when he watched the incident immediately after the race. However, it was his move on Vettel in Shanghai that has once again brought into question his credentials as a potential title winner. On fresher, softer tyres than the German, Verstappen was on a charge and determined to make up for the error that led to his going wide earlier in trying to pass Hamilton. Vettel was circumspect and, with the big picture of the championship in mind, he gave Verstappen room up the inside but the Dutchman still clipped him, causing them both to spin. Verstappen’s hopes disappeared and Vettel, with damage, ultimately finished in eighth. Verstappen has since held his hands up and apologised to Vettel, accepting that it was a mistake. But now in his fourth season in F1, the unnecessary clash in Shagnhai is not an error that he should be making. The contrast with his team-mate Daniel Ricciardo, who scythed from sixth to victory without incident, was hugely instructive, the question is whether Verstappen has learned from it. Without doubt his self-belief and confidence in his own ability has enabled him to deliver some stunning races, Brazil in the wet in 2016 and his debut victory in Spain that year, not least. His overtaking has marked him out as a future champion. He knows the hairpin in China well, having dispatched Sergio Pérez and Marcus Ericsson there with superb moves in 2015. The pass round the outside of Nico Rosberg at Becketts at Silverstone in 2016 was breathtaking and, rightly, taking Felipe Nasr round the outside of Blanchimont at Spa in 2015 was voted overtake of the year. All of which he summed up in March before Melbourne, emphasising he was sticking to trusting his racing instinct. “I just enjoy it and drive as fast I can,” he said. “But so many people think your psychology is such a massive thing. For me, it’s not necessary.” If he wants to win titles, however, a little bit more thought and mental awareness is without doubt going to be necessary. His father Jos, who competed in more than 100 grands prix, was blunt in summing up where his son was going wrong. “The overtake on Vettel really wasn’t on,” he said. “That wasn’t possible. It was an error of judgment. In some circumstances Max just has to think more. I don’t want him to change his driving style. He passed two people at the start. He did that perfectly. That’s what we all want to see. But we don’t want to see these kinds of actions. He needs to have it under control. He needs to think.” Verstappen may not be interested in the psychological battle that is often part of racing but inherent to it is the honing of mental skills to measure risk and reward in split seconds, to see a bigger picture beyond just the next corner and, if necessary, show patience as well as verve. The Red Bull team principal, Christian Horner, has compared what Verstappen is going through to Vettel’s early career at the team, which was marked by similar errors of judgment. But Horner also believes the Dutchman is taking on board the lessons from these incidents. “I think he’d have learned a lot. He will put that to good use in the future, in the coming races,” Horner said. “His talent is extremely obvious, his bravery and racing instinct is not in doubt. Obviously he was too impatient, and he will for sure learn from that, I’ve got absolutely no doubt.” Jos has refereed to the critical attention his son is receiving as being “butchered by the press”. Which is unfair. He has attracted attention because of his talent. There is so much hope that if Verstappen fulfils expectations he will be one of the most exciting drivers in Formula One, long after Hamilton, Vettel and Fernando Alonso have departed, and it is only fair that he faces scrutiny when failing to match his own lofty ambitions.