What were you hoping for?Good food and company. First impressions?Polite, friendly, nervous. What did you talk about?The criminal barristers’ and junior doctors’ strikes, port and Couch to 5K. Any awkward moments?I may have inadvertently drawn attention to the 10-year age gap. Good table manners?Impeccable. He likes to try everything you order. Best thing about Daniel?He saves lives, even on a night out. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yes. Describe him in three wordsGenuine, considerate, lovely. What do you think he made of you?Very chatty, hopefully friendly. Did you go on somewhere?We live near each other, so we went for another drink. On the way, he stopped to assist a man who had collapsed on the street. And… did you kiss?No, just a hug. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?That our local was still serving when we got there. Marks out of 10?8. Would you meet again?Sure. What were you hoping for?I had an open mind. First impressions?Polite, friendly and funny. What did you talk about?The death penalty in the US and how social media is changing behaviour. Any awkward moments?We sat at different tables for 10 minutes before we realised. Good table manners?Yes, and we discussed the food options carefully, so neither of us went for soup or mussels. Best thing about Becky?Intelligence. Would you introduce her to your friends?Yes. Except my work friends, because they’re weird. Describe her in three wordsIntelligent, sharp, funny. What do you think she made of you?I hope not too awful. I had a bit too much to drink, but hopefully wasn’t too bad. Did you go on somewhere?We headed home in the same direction, and when one pub was closed, we went to another. We spent about six hours together. And… did you kiss?No. An awkward hug was all we managed. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I’d drink more water and less wine, and remember to take paracetamol before bed. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again?Most likely as friends, but we did exchange numbers (and they’re real, not fake). • Becky and Daniel ate at Brasserie Blanc, London W1, brasserieblanc.com. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com