Claude Puel has conceded that Leicester City’s players have appeared distracted over recent weeks, with results tailing off alarmingly as the Frenchman seeks to convince the club hierarchy that he should oversee a summer overhaul of the squad. Leicester remain in the top half but the 5-0 thrashing at Crystal Palace on Saturday left Puel with only four wins in his past 18 league games amid growing unease at the club over the 56-year-old’s management style. The Guardian reported this month that players had been left increasingly bemused by his chopping and changing of the team, and frustrated at a perceived lack of intensity to training, with communication apparently an issue. Certainly an opportunity to build on Puel’s impressive initial impact after taking over in October has been passed up, with a top-seven finish and Europa League qualification now out of reach. “I took over this club in a difficult situation, 14th in the table,” Puel said. “I try to give more opportunities to players to give a good response. But, at the end of the season, of course we have some difficulties to finish with a good concentration, a good focus. “I know it’s difficult and perhaps the players have the World Cup in their heads or different things. My only concern is my team and my squad. We deserved the last result and it is important to correct this. There remains three important games for us: West Ham, Arsenal, Tottenham. Two great teams to finish and West Ham, also, at home. We need a strong reaction, to try together to give a good response.” Leicester are expected to invest heavily again this summer having recruited Adrien Silva, Vicente Iborra, Kelechi Iheanacho and Harry Maguire last year. There will be an overhaul of the playing staff, with Riyad Mahrez’s future in doubt and up to six others likely to move on. Maguire, who cost £17m from Hull City last summer, has suggested the fault for the recent dip in form lies more with the players. Asked if the team were still behind the manager, he replied: “Yes, definitely. He puts us out in shape. At the end of the day it’s 11 players that go on the pitch to perform, and the 11 who went out on Saturday didn’t perform.” Leicester will await news on the severity of the hamstring injury sustained by Wilfred Ndidi at Selhurst Park, with the 21-year-old’s participation for Nigeria at the World Cup finals this summer cast into doubt after he pulled up early in the second half.