It’s 6pm at the Chinnaswamy Stadium in Bangalore. A drowsy sun has already slunk below the stands, kites glide overhead and after three hours of intense training in the heat, where he has batted twice, thundered in with the ball for the first time in weeks and stayed late to work on his flying boundary catches, Ben Stokes strolls over for a chat. There is of course one almighty elephant in the ground. We both briefly acknowledge this but it remains just that. This is his first in-depth interview since the incident in Bristol on 25 September last year but regarding events that night Stokes must wait to have his say in court this summer after he and two other men pleaded not guilty to affray. For now it is only cricket, both England and Indian Premier League, that can be on the agenda in the Garden City. The Indian Premier League first, where the 26-year-old is in his second season and at his second side, Rajasthan Royals. Eoin Morgan, one of his two international captains, has recently credited the all-rounder’s MVP-winning stint with the runners-up Rising Pune Supergiant last year for “breaking down barriers” and causing the English invasion that has a record 12 players spread across six of the eight franchises. Stokes appreciates their presence in Twenty20’s great tamasha, rather than with their counties, is not to everyone’s taste back home. The subject of his £1.7m deal with Pune last year – a record for an overseas player – and new price tag at just a shade under, is one he squirms at. “Last year there was so much said about me and the money. I just shy away from it. I don’t want to come across as arrogant. I don’t know how to answer it. It’s just weird,” he says. “Some people think we’re going for one reason but as a sportsman, that is genuinely not what it is about. It’s about being exposed to the best T20 players in the world in front of capacity crowds every three or four days. I don’t think people understand that or see it for what it is. We don’t quite get that in our T20 right now – they aren’t many international matches – but when the new competition kicks off [in 2020] maybe that will happen more.” Stokes is clearly enjoying his time with the Royals. The inaugural winners of the IPL in 2008, they are now trying to rebuild public trust in their first season back as the result of a two-year ban for the spot-fixing scandal that cost three players their careers. He has struck up a particular rapport with Shane Warne, the team’s mentor, while Jos Buttler is a familiar face in the ranks. But as is the case with England, all team-mates tend to gravitate towards him. His only off-field struggle in India has come from some of the commercial demands that pack out the schedule on non-match days. “They ask you to do things that are so far out of your comfort zone – it’s just not me,” he says, perhaps in reference to some lively Bollywood-style dancing of his that can be witnessed during the IPL’s numerous TV ad breaks. The feet are moving better on the field even if the returns do not yet jump off the page. His third match against Royal Challengers Bangalore – a high-scoring 19-run win on the day after the interview – is the most impactful yet, with a 21-ball 27 from No 4, his first wicket of the campaign and a leaping boundary catch to remove Brendon McCullum that kickstarted the RCB struggle in their pursuit of 218. While the latter was a classic case of Stokes making the ridiculous look sublimely simple – his extra training 24 hours earlier sprung to mind as he sprung high – it is likely the bowling that will have given Stokes most satisfaction, purely for the fact he was charging in at full tilt for the first time in a long time. A pre-Christmas spell in New Zealand with Canterbury notwithstanding, the general lack of action leading into his return for England in February had affected his body. Bowling in the one-day series saw wickets follow but he found his legs seized up after spells. Then, just before the Tests that followed, some historical stress fractures in his lower back suddenly began to cause him grief and injections were required. Just 10 laboured overs were sent down in the two Tests that followed the jabs but Stokes says he is feeling himself again; to prevent a recurrence he is remodelling his bowling action. The late step into the crease that pointed him to fine leg and left him needing to twist in order to straighten up is being eased out. He is happy with the results but the true test is in the middle. The return to the England camp – he has been restored to the side until the end of proceedings – was probably as smooth as he and his employers could have hoped for. Stokes says the squad’s response felt no different to before from his perspective – “it’s not like we hadn’t stayed in touch” – but admits watching his Test colleagues among them go down 4-0 in Australia was tough. “I lived every moment of the Ashes. I’m sure it was nowhere near the emotions of the guys out there but I was just as gutted.” Readjustment batting-wise took little time either, with one low-key score of 12 in the first one-dayer at Hamilton – “I was anxious. I was guilty of thinking too far ahead and trying to make an impression. It was like I was at the start of my career,” – before a less flustered unbeaten 63 steered Morgan’s side to a series-levelling win at Mount Maunganui. “I was really emotional after getting man of the match in that second game back. It was such a relief to perform and be there at the end. I had five minutes to myself after getting back to the dressing room, sat in my bubble and taking it all in. The lads appreciated that and gave me space. It was a great feeling.” For the Test matches that followed that eventual 3-2 win, a setback – albeit one that was widely expected – took place when Stokes was told by Joe Root and Trevor Bayliss he would not return to the vice-captaincy. “They just said they wanted to stick with Jimmy [Anderson]. But regardless, I know my role and it won’t change how I go about things. It won’t be in the back of my mind and I won’t hold it against anyone,” he says. The thing about Joe Root is he doesn't bat for himself. People have a go at him but when it clicks his scores will be 150s and 200s “It’s all about what I’m going to do in the future. I just want to get us back to playing the way we want to play. We were so close to being one of the best teams in the world. We’ve slacked off in the past two years but knowing how close we were gives you that desire to get back there.” That slacking off, as he puts it, bottomed out with the 58 all out in Auckland – “It was like the pins in a bowling alley falling down in slow motion” – from which a 1-0 series defeat followed. From being one Test win away from holding all nine bilateral Test trophies in 2016, only for Pakistan to win at the Oval and square the series, England have five in the cabinet to match their world ranking of fifth. Root, Bayliss and the as-yet reformed selection panel have a job on their hands. The former is battling to turn half-centuries into three figures too – his last nine have gone unconverted – and it is a topic Stokes has been discussing with one of his new friends in India. “I have seen a lot of people saying he shouldn’t be captain – I won’t say who – and that his batting is being affected by it. I had a chat with Warnie about this, because I don’t see it. Look at his average [52.6] and all the runs scored – why do people have a big thing about not converting? He said Joe is a great player but this is what can make him one of the greatest. I sort of understand it … “But the thing about Joe is he doesn’t bat for himself. If he thinks it is time to take a team down, he will go for it. That’s how he wants us to play as a team and as captain, he feels he has to set the standard. People can have a go at him but the bigger picture, that’s what he is trying to build. When it clicks – and that is coming – those scores will become 150s and 200s. Hopefully when people read what I have said here they will understand a bit more.” Doubtless much of the heat from the end of England’s sorry Test travails this winter was drawn by Australia’s ball-tampering scandal and before Stokes heads up to the dressing room at the Chinnaswamy, before his new team’s departure from the ground, his views on the topic are sought. “I’m keeping my mouth shut. Certain people said some things and it then comes back to get you …” he says, before stopping himself from elaborating on who and what he means. Given the aforementioned elephant, it is probably for the best.