Difficulty: easy/moderateSuitable for 16-plus (with accompanying adult)Wilderness Scotland has an introductory kayaking trip in the Torridon region, which blends kayaking with gentle hiking, making it ideal for beginners and those looking to hone their paddling skills. As well as four days on the water, paddling past remote bays and the uninhabited islands of Scotland’s west coast, potentially spotting sea eagles and porpoises, the trip includes a guided walk from the village of Gairloch, a good place to spot whales.• Five nights from £1,325pp including transfers and most meals. Trips depart 12 May, 9 June, 14 July, 18 Aug, 22 Sept, wildernessscotland.com Difficulty: challengingSuitable for 16-plusClean, calm water flanked by countryside makes an open-water swimming trip on the Thames a tempting prospect for anyone looking to dip their toe in the sport. Unlike with sea swimming, this itinerary from SwimTrek takes place in sheltered water. It traces the riverbank from Buscot Lock, near Lechlade, to Buckland Marsh, near Faringdon, along England’s most famous waterway. You should have a basic understanding of open-water swimming and be capable of completing the daily distance of 6km, which is broken down into smaller sections. Guides and a safety team are on hand throughout. • One-day from £120pp, various dates in August, swimtrek.com Difficulty: easySuitable for all agesFor a true sense of freedom, it’s hard to beat wild camping. Pitching up away from designated sites is illegal almost everywhere in England and Wales but it’s legal in much of Scotland. A night under canvas in Glenfeshie, with its tumbling waterfalls and mountain vistas, offers an uplifting sense of remoteness. Home to one of the country’s most successful “rewilding” projects, it’s also the starting point for many walking routes, so you can hike straight from your tent. Scope out your potential pitch on an OS map, keep away from paths and bogs (green slashes), and check guidelines in the Open Access Code.• Outdooraccess-scotland.scot10 of the best wild camping sites in Scotland Difficulty: moderateSuitable for 7-plusCombining the skills of kite-flying and go-karting, kite-buggying is a thrilling way to spend a day at the beach, zipping across the sand at up to 50mph in a low three-wheeler. With miles of flat, open beach, Camber Sands is the ideal place to try this extreme sport. The Kitesurf Centre runs lessons with qualified instructors, teaching you everything from how to fly the kite to using it to power you along in the buggy, with options of 2½- and 4-hour courses.• £59 for 2½ hours, thekitesurfcentre.com Difficulty: moderateSuitable for 10-plusSee the Lake District from a thrillingly different vantage point – clipped to a mountain by cable, 2,000 feet above the valleys of Buttermere and Borrowdale. Honister Slate Mine is home to England’s first via ferrata, a series of steel ladders and bridges drilled into the rockface that follow a Victorian miners’ route to the summit of Fleetwith Pike. Choose from Classic and Xtreme options, which each last around three hours and require a reasonable level of fitness, and a head for heights – the Xtreme promises to scale heights seven times those reached by Big Ben and twice as high as the London Shard. Whichever option you pick, this award-winning company offers an adrenaline-packed day out in the fells.• honister.com, £40pp Difficulty: moderate/challengingSuitable for 7-plus (with accompanying adult)Coasteering involves exploring the shoreline by leaping, scrambling and swimming – with optional cliff jumping. Causeway Coasteering offers guided sessions along the rugged Causeway coast, with its basalt columns and turquoise water. Clad in wetsuits, buoyancy aids and helmets, you’ll plunge and splash your way through hidden coves and islands, with a local guide pointing out interesting objects and giving tips. As well as testing your limits, it offers a refreshingly different, up-close angle on the coastline and its wildlife.• Three hours from £40pp, causewaycoasteering.com Difficulty: easySuitable for 18-plusFrom getting stranded in fog to losing your way in the fells … whatever your worries regarding hill walking, a navigation course that covers the essentials should give walkers added confidence. Run by expert mountain leaders and rock climbing instructors, this one-day course takes place in the pretty Peak District village of Foolow, close to Cressbrook Dale, with its limestone landscape and spring orchids. It teaches map reading, compass navigation, route planning and walking on a bearing. Once you’ve got the basics, there is the option of moving onto a more advanced course. • £45 for a one-day introductory course, peaknavigationcourses.co.uk. Introductory courses run 2 & 9 June, 7 & 28 July, 15 Sept, 6 & 13 Oct Difficulty: moderateSuitable for 10-plusEver wondered whether you could master your fears and learn to ascend vertical rock walls? Gaia Adventures offers bespoke climbing taster days for those who are new to the sport, covering everything from rope skills to belaying (holding the rope for others) and abseiling safely down the rock face. Guided by an experienced instructor (maximum group size of six to each guide), it will challenge your brain and body, as you climb smaller mountains and cliffs, such as Tryfan, and slate quarries on the flanks of Elidir Fawr, overlooking Snowdon. Technical kit is provided – and hopefully you’ll feel confident enough to climb without supervision at an indoor climbing wall after the course.• £50 (B&B can be included in booking for an extra £55), gaiaadventures.co.uk Difficulty: challengingSuitable for +17sScampering across a desolate landscape, rarely using footpaths, beats the monotonous pounding of city pavements – it is an exhilarating form of escapism. Wild Running offers bespoke, guided trail runs for all abilities around Dartmoor and Exmoor national parks and on the South West Coast Path. Founded by former international athlete Ceri Rees, the company also offers group holidays, including a weekend Dartmouth Running Holiday that sees you run between six and 12 miles daily, staying in a riverside apartment overlooking the Dart estuary.• Trail runs from £75pp; two-night running weekend from £270pp half-board (add a third night for £20pp); 18-20 May, wildrunning.co.uk Difficulty: moderateSuitable for all agesThe rugged Yorkshire Dales offers some of the UK’s best walking, though knowing how, when and where to go can be daunting for first-timers. Ease yourself in with a trip led by experienced guides from walking specialist HF Holidays, which offers a range of holidays, such as three-, four- and seven-night guided walking breaks at Malhamdale. Guests choose from three different walks each day, ranging from easy six-mile stretches to more challenging 13-milers. Highlights include Malham Tarn, with its ancient limestone pastures, and the panoramic views from Simon’s Seat.• Three nights’ full-board from £329pp, April-December, hfholidays.co.uk Difficulty: moderateSuitable for +8sFew things leave you feeling as connected to nature as surfing – whether you’re floundering about in the breakers or riding the waves. One of the original centres of the north-east surf scene, Saltburn-on-Sea may be a few degrees chillier than Cornwall but in the right conditions it can be world class. Decent beginner waves are usually found on either side of the pier and the vibe is friendly on the water, even when it’s busy. Saltburn Surf School has been operating since 1983 and its staff are the go-to people for advice on boards and conditions. • Two-hour group lessons from £30pp, saltburn-surf.co.uk Difficulty: moderateSuitable for all agesArm yourself with a map, compass and electronic dibber and navigate through the wilderness as fast as you can. Orienteering (racing over a course between a number of “controls”) is increasingly popular and clubs across the UK hold recreational and competitive events. Remote spots include Primrose Woods near Sledmere, east Yorkshire, and Great Mell Fell in the Lake District. • britishorienteering.org.uk, worldorienteeringday.com; prices typically from £5-£10pp, with discounts for under-21s Difficulty: easy/moderateSuitable for all ages (under-18s need parental consent)If soaring 500ft above the Surrey countryside while hanging from a material canopy sounds like your idea of fun, paragliding is the sport for you. Thankfully, no experience or skills are required if you book a tandem flight with an outfit such as Green Dragons, in Woldingham (eight miles south of Croydon), which has been operating for 44 years. Strapped to a qualified instructor, the hardest part as a passenger is quelling your nerves as you swoop through the air, riding thermals in almost total silence, watching the landscape of the North Downs unfold beneath your shaking feet. • One flight £89 (duration determined by weather conditions), greendragons.co.uk Difficulty: moderateSuitable for 6-plusFossil hunting may be the Jurassic Coast’s main claim to fame but its ancient crags are also home to some fantastic climbing routes. Bouldering is a good place for newbies to start, as you scale smaller rocks without needing to learn how to use ropes. Jurassic Climbing runs introductory days for groups of up to 10 people, with guides choosing the best crags around Swanage and Portland to suit your ability, teaching you how to land safely and climb properly. These sessions are available for all abilities, with coaching offered on a one-to-one basis, or with one coach for groups of up to four climbers.• Introduction to Bouldering course from £50pp, jurassicclimbing.co.uk Difficulty: easySuitable for all agesThe Morecambe Bay sands are notorious for quicksand and fast-flowing tides. Guide Over Sands Trust provides guides offering safe passage of both the Kent and Leven estuaries on sponsored charity walks, setting off from Arnside and Canal Foot respectively. They last around three to four hours, depending on the weather, and lead you into the Lake District. • Around £10 adult, £5 child, walks May-September, guideoversands.co.uk Difficulty: easySuitable for all agesSnapping stems, nibbling leaves and discovering where things grow … wild food gives you a taste of a place that you won’t find in restaurants. Wild Food UK holds foraging courses in locations including Suffolk, Wiltshire, Kent, Edinburgh and Cardiff. The courses help identify edible shoots, plants and flowers in your surroundings before they are cooked up and transformed into dishes such as wild garlic pesto, elderflower champagne and mushroom pasta. • 3½-hour trips from £45 adults, £22.50 under-16s (under-12s go free), wildfooduk.com Difficulty: moderateSuitable for +11sFringed by gold sand beaches, the north coast of Norfolk boasts stellar windsurfing spots stretching from Hunstanton to Great Yarmouth. Beginners can learn in safe, shallow waters with Hunstanton Watersports, where initial lessons take place on a sheltered lake before you transfer your skills to the sea. Half-day, group taster sessions cover kit basics, as well as launching, landing, sailing across the wind and turning around. Equipment, wetsuits and buoyancy aids are provided.• Three-hour taster session £40pp, hunstantonwatersports.com Difficulty: easy to challengingSuitable for +8s and +12sPackrafting – which involves trekking into the wilderness with a small, stowable boat in your rucksack – allows you to reach places that are normally too remote. Husband-and-wife team Jason and Marianne Taylor set up Tirio in 2017, offering options from half-day tours (ideal for families and those looking for a basic intro), to 25-mile multi-day trips with wild camping in secluded woodland in the Conwy valley – requiring a decent level of fitness to hike, paddle and carry around 12kg of equipment.• £200pp for the two-night Mountains to Sea trip, tirio.co.uk Difficulty: easySuitable for 8-plus (under-16s must be accompanied by an adult)The Oban and Lorn coastline has an abundance of wildlife to discover, which you can do on a snorkel and wildlife tour with Basking Shark Scotland. Departing from Oban, the two-day tour (one-day tours for 2018 are sold out) is based on the 13 mile-long Isle of Coll, just off Mull, where there are 23 beaches and plenty of wildlife, including basking sharks, otters, grey seals, porpoises and bottlenose dolphins. The most memorable encounters happen underwater, as you snorkel past starfish, sea-urchins, kelp forests and rays, with a guide and marine biologist on hand throughout. • £395 including B&B, spaces still free on 29 August and 1 Sept trips. Three- and four-day trips also available, baskingsharkscotland.co.uk Difficulty: easySuitable for accompanied children but aimed at adultsStretching for 9.5 miles through the Vale of York, from the foothills of the Yorkshire Wolds to the river Derwent, Pocklington Canal is one of the UK’s most important waterways for wildlife. So it’s the perfect place for the Canal and River Trust to run an Introduction to Birdwatching morning, with opportunities to spot the blue flash of a kingfisher and dragonflies darting amid the reeds. Experienced guides will help novices identify species by sight and sound, and explain signs of bird courtship and nest building.• £2, booking essential, 13 May, 10am-12pm, canalrivertrust.org.uk