Late-night hosts on Tuesday discussed Sean Hannity’s connection to Trump attorney Michael Cohen, who appeared in court on Monday, and James Comey, who was interviewed by Stephen Colbert as he promotes a tell-all book about his tenure as FBI director. “Everyone’s still reeling from yesterday’s court hearing about Trump attorney and guy-who-looks-as-tired-as-a-Trump-attorney, Michael Cohen,” said Colbert. “Trump asked to look at all the evidence seized from Cohen’s office before the government had a chance to and the judge said, and I quote, ‘No.’” The judge is considering turning the evidence over to a “special master”, which Colbert joked is “also what Trump called Stormy Daniels while she was spanking him with that magazine”. “Trump’s got to be concerned about what the Feds are going to find,” added Colbert, who noted, citing a report from Axios, that Cohen’s work is “all side deals and off-the-books stuff”. “There was also an appearance from porn star and major historical figure Stormy Daniels,” the host added, showing the illustration, done by a forensic sketch artist, of the man who supposedly threatened Daniels not to discuss her affair with Trump. “There he is, the man who threatened her: the lovechild of Willem Dafoe, Tom Brady and Bon Jovi.” Colbert also conducted an extensive interview with James Comey, who’s currently promoting his book A Higher Loyalty. The former FBI director, in response to a question about Trump calling him a “slimeball” on Twitter, said: “I’m like a breakup he can’t get over.” When Comey compared Trump to a mob boss, noting “the leadership style is actually strikingly similar”, Colbert asked then why he was surprised he got “whacked”. “I actually was quite surprised because I thought, ‘I’m leading the Russia investigation’,” Comey said. “Even though our relationship was becoming strained, there’s no way I’m going to get fired or whacked.” “Why wouldn’t you get fired?” Colbert added. “Because that would be a crazy thing to do. Why would you fire the FBI director who is leading the Russia investigation?” Comey replied. Colbert shot back: “Because you’re leading the Russia investigation!” The two also briefly discussed rumors of a “pee tape”, alleged in the infamous Steele dossier. Colbert, who recently stayed at the same hotel suite in Moscow where Trump allegedly slept with Russian prostitutes, asked Comey if he’d like to ask anything about the room. “Is it big enough for a germaphobe to be at a safe distance from the activity?” Comey asked, referencing Trump’s claim that, because he is a germaphobe, the rumors of golden showers with Russian hookers cannot be true. “The bedroom is very long,” Colbert replied. “You’d definitely be out of, what we call at Sea World, the splash zone.” Meanwhile, Trevor Noah focused on the revelation that Michael Cohen’s third, previously undisclosed legal client is Fox News anchor Sean Hannity, who in the last year has frequently covered Trump and Cohen’s mounting legal troubles without disclosing his relationship to Cohen. “Even though yesterday might have sucked for Hannity, it helped his ratings because everyone tuned in to see what creative excuse he’d come up with to explain his Michael Cohen relationship,” Noah began. “And the answer was: ‘it’s complicated’.” Noah then showed clips from Hannity’s Monday night show, in which he said he’s “never received an invoice” from or “paid Michael Cohen for legal fees”. Hannity claimed he’d only discussed real estate with the attorney. “What gets me the most is how casually Hannity is trying to brush off his connection to Michael Cohen as not meaning anything. He's the guy who can bake a conspiracy cake out of nothing more than an egg and the word ‘Hillary.’"Full episode: https://t.co/XhujYMXcq3 pic.twitter.com/7NdIx9PCjs “He wasn’t your lawyer, he just answered your legal questions? Giving legal input and perspective is exactly what a lawyer does,” Noah said, noting that Hannity’s real estate excuse “makes what he said a few hours earlier on his radio show all the more confusing”. The host then played audio from Hannity’s afternoon radio show, where he said, in reference to Cohen, “I might have handed him 10 bucks” to suggest “I definitely want attorney-client privilege on this”. Noah continued: “You know, what gets me is how casually Hannity is trying to minimize his connection to Michael Cohen, like it means nothing, especially when every other day of the year he’s the guy who can bake a conspiracy cake out of nothing more than an egg and the word Hillary.”