In 1968, Argentinian artist Graciela Carnevale created an unlikely art exhibition: she invited people into an empty gallery, locked them inside, and left. But Lock-up Action, as the artwork was called, came to a swift end when the trapped gallery-goers flagged down a pedestrian, who broke a glass wall and set them free. To Carnevale, it was a comment on freedom in Argentina under a military dictatorship, and the broken glass was a metaphor for political resistance. Photos from the event are displayed as part of Radical Women: Latin American Art, 1960–1985, an exhibition of feminist activist art at the Brooklyn Museum in New York. Featuring more than 120 artists from 15 countries, this group show is the first to bring together some of the most groundbreaking contemporary art by Latin American and Latina artists. It made its debut last year at the Hammer Museum in Los Angeles, and aims to showcase political pioneer artists. “It’s an exhibition that delves into radical art-making, it’s a timely show,” said co-curator Catherine Morris. “It covers a lot of politics and social realities through their lived experiences.” The Brooklyn Museum exhibition has added a New York spin to highlight local trailblazers, like Sophie Rivera, who made a photo series of Puerto Ricans in New York in the 1970s. The artist sat on her porch in Harlem and asked people who walked by: “Are you Puerto Rican?” For those who said yes, she invited them into her studio and shot their anonymous portrait. “It was a time when local newspapers were scapegoating Puerto Ricans for crime, fear and urban issues,” said co-curator Carmen Hermo. “It was an antidote to a lot of the negativity she was seeing.”  The exhibition is divided into seven sections, from Feminisms, featuring Latin American women who made feminist art amid political turmoil, to Mapping the Body, where the female form became the battleground for political conversations. A breather in the often heavy show is Erotics, which subverts the male gaze. “Some of these women didn’t even consider themselves feminists,” said Morris. “The women who were organizing against patriarchal conditions were not necessarily embracing what was sometimes seen as ‘an American export of feminism’. The artists at the time didn’t always think that it always applied to them.” The exhibition delves into the power of resistance art in a time when much of Latin America – countries such as Argentina, Brazil and Chile – was under military rule. “Many of the artists documented or confronted human rights abuses; the violent conditions of so many realities of these countries,” said Hermo. “These women were using powerful words and phrases in their art in a time when they were surveilled and censored by the government.” But it wasn’t always so direct – it’s not like each artwork was a capitalized protest placard. Chilean artist Cecilia Vicuña, for example, used wool to weave the audience into a collective body. It was one way artists found a way to subvert oppression while still remaining activists. “These artists often communicated in veiled language through their performances,” said Morris. “It was very clever.” The show is the first of its kind to unite Latin American artists with Latina artists working in the US, and taps into the issues American artists with Latin descent faced. From oppression to racism, some artists in the show documented the forced sterilization of Chicana women, which was held throughout Los Angeles in the 1970s. “It’s surprising for a lot of people that there has not been an exhibition that looks at these things before,” said Morris. There are also artworks that tap into the cliche of Latin maids by Panama artist Sandra Eleta. “She makes photos that draw a line between documentary and a social statement,” said Hermo. “The look on the woman’s face holding a feather duster is different than what you might expect from a domestic worker.” For the uninitiated, there is a timeline on the walls of the museum, which outlines the history of political upheaval in the 15 countries these artists worked in. It covers US interventions to women’s right to vote, marches for safe and legal abortions and protests demanding governments to share information on people killed under these dictatorships. “Resistance and political action are a huge part of the artwork here,” said Morris. “Families were going into exile and artists were responding to the political moment and making art about it.” While some of the artists in the show didn’t always label themselves feminist or particularly political, they did want to break barriers. “They wanted to document what the government did not want you to document,” said Hermo. “There is a strong feeling of shining a light on a horrible situation that would have otherwise been swept under the rug.” By showing an alternate history some might not suspect, the artists on show here might not be blockbuster names, but putting them center stage is the point. “Their history is not unknown, but its little known,” said Hermo. “People can not only see a lineage of their political realities, but how these women were and are heroines.”