A Southwest Airlines jet blew an engine at 32,000 ft and was hit by shrapnel that smashed a window, setting off a desperate scramble by passengers to save a woman from getting sucked out. Passengers dragged the unidentified woman back in as the sudden decompression of the cabin pulled her partway through the opening. One person died and seven others were injured in the incident. The pilot of the plane, a twin-engine Boeing 737 bound from New York to Dallas with 149 people onboard, took it into a rapid descent and made an emergency landing in Philadelphia as oxygen masks dropped from the ceiling and passengers braced for impact. The National Transportation Safety Board’s chairman, Robert Sumwalt, said one person died, the first passenger fatality in an accident involving a US airline since 2009. He gave no details, but the woman who nearly got sucked out was the only one seriously injured and was taken off the plane by emergency workers. The person who died was identified by her children’s school as Jennifer Riordan, a bank executive and mother of two from New Mexico. In an email to parents, assistant principal Amy McCarty of Albuquerque Catholic school, wrote: “The family needs all the prayers we can offer.” Photos posted by passengers showed a heavily damaged window near the damaged engine. In audio recording of the exchange with air traffic controllers, the crew member is heard to say the plane needs to slow down and an unidentified crew member reports that there is a hole in the plane and “someone went out”. “I just remember holding my husband’s hand, and we just prayed and prayed and prayed,” said Amanda Bourman, a passenger from New York. “And the thoughts that were going through my head, of course, were about my daughters, just wanting to see them again.” Bourman said she was seated near the back of the plane and was asleep when she heard a loud noise and oxygen masks dropped from the ceiling. She said the plane was fairly quiet because everyone was wearing a mask. Some passengers were in tears and others shouted words of encouragement. “You had a few passengers that were very strong,” she said, “and they kept yelling to people, you know: ‘It’s OK, we’re going to do this.’” Another passenger, Marty Martinez, did a brief Facebook Live posting while wearing an oxygen mask. He posted: “Something is wrong with our plane! It appears we are going down! Emergency landing!! Southwest flight from NYC to Dallas!” After the plane landed, he posted photos of a damaged window near the engine. Bourman said everyone started shouting to brace for impact when the plane started to land. Everyone clapped and praised the pilot after he set the aircraft down. Bourman said she also saw a man in a cowboy hat rush to cover the broken window and that the man had a bandage around his arm after the plane landed. The Philadelphia fire commissioner, Adam Thiel, said passengers had done “some pretty amazing things under some pretty difficult circumstances”. Tracking data from FlightAware.com showed flight 1380 was heading west over New York’s southern tier at about 32,200ft and traveling at 500mph when it abruptly turned toward Philadelphia. Southwest has about 700 planes, all of them 737s, including more than 500 737-700s like the one involved in Tuesday’s emergency landing. It is the world’s largest operator of the 737. The Boeing 737 is the best-selling jetliner in the world and has a good safety record. John Goglia, a former National Transportation Safety Board member, said investigators would take the Southwest engine apart to understand what happened and would look at maintenance records for the engine. “There’s a ring around the engine that’s meant to contain the engine pieces when this happens,” Goglia said. “In this case, it didn’t. That’s going to be a big focal point for the NTSB: why didn’t [the ring] do its job?” 