Name: Marsbees Age: Embryonic. Appearance: Apian. It sounds like a new chain of mid-priced family restaurants. It is not. Sports store? No. What, then? They are robotic bees with giant wings, wireless comms and sensors that can be sent to explore Mars. I think I’ve seen this movie. It did not end well. No, these are being developed by Nasa and Japanese scientists. Again, I have seen this movie. It does not end well. They are going to fly out from a mobile base – probably a rover like Curiosity – map terrain, take samples and search for signs of life. That all sounds very borderline-sentient of them. We’ll just have to hope for the best. What signs of life could a robot bee detect? Methane emissions, mostly. Good God, is there nothing more seemly we could try to use to unravel the mysteries of the universe than farts? He who smelt it dealt it is an intergalactic truth. Whose idea were these fart-following bees anyway? They were one of 25 proposals shortlisted from 230 submitted to Nasa’s Innovative Advanced Concepts programme, which receives $125,000 each and nine months to make them ready for phase II. Has anyone made a joke about the winners getting quite a buzz out of it? No one would possibly demean themselves so. No, quite right. Umm … who were the other successful applicants? Spider droid makers? Nano bird builders? Ooh – is someone making centipedes with little boots on? That’s not high-tech – I just really want to see it. Other proposals that made the cut include a steam-powered jumping robot. I’m sorry, what? One minute we’re talking about futuristic bee-bots, the next we’re in a Victorian fever dream. It will be perfectly designed to traverse icy ocean surfaces such as that of Saturn’s moon, Titan, thought to be the most likely harbourer of extraterrestrial life. So it’s not a film I’ve seen, but I bet Pixar’s on it. What else is in development? A biobot that will enable astronauts to spend longer on the red planet and a shapeshifting robot. I’m gonna need to know a little more about that last one. Oh, it’s simple – it becomes a ball when it needs to roll over ground, a flying thing when it needs to be airborne and torpedo-shaped when it hits liquid. What a time to be alive! Let’s hope. Everything will be fine. Almost certainly, everything will be fine. Do say: “I will develop this robot with the utmost care and build in a variety of protective fail-safes.” Don’t say: “I think you should just welcome your new overlords.”