It pains one to say it, but Gyles Brandreth is absolutely right. Of course the Queen shouldn’t have to sit through Shaggy. And since the reggae star is appearing at the Queen’s 92nd birthday party with Sting, she shouldn’t have to sit through Sting, either. Or Shawn Mendes or Kylie or Craig David or any of the other acts appearing at the Royal Albert Hall on Saturday. That is not to criticise any of the artists in question, more a reflection of the fact that few 92-year-olds, monarchs or otherwise, would be desperate to hear Sting and Shaggy playing live at their party. If the bill had been left up to the Queen, it would have looked very different. Not least because most of her favourite singers are dead. The one sop to her own tastes this weekend is the band of the George Formby Society (we know she likes Formby because Leaning on a Lamp-post was one of the 10 songs she named as her favourites for her 90th birthday), but Howard Keel, Fred Astaire, Dolores Gray and Bill Johnson are unavailable, owing to commitments in the afterlife. Plus, it is probably unreasonable to expect Vera Lynn, aged 101, to commit to a gig. But what if the rest of the royal family had helped with the booking? As heir to the throne, he gets first choice. His favourite, Leonard Cohen, is dead and hardly party central anyway, so Charles can have the Three Degrees. Sadly, Sheila Ferguson – with whom Charles had a close friendship and who claims she once turned down his advances – is no longer in the group, but maybe that’s better for the Duchess of Cornwall’s peace of mind. Let’s not exclude another of the Queen’s sons, either, a fan of will.i.am. “He is a major inspiration to a lot of young people from all sorts of backgrounds,” Andrew said in 2014, evidently having never met any young people from any sort of background. Wills and Kate would bring the star power: they had Ellie Goulding perform at their wedding reception, while William used to sing Coldplay songs to baby George. Lock those two in and you have something to justify the whole shebang being broadcast on BBC television and radio. These two could try to add a touch of cool. He is a fan of UK grime star Skream (we don’t know if he has moved on to Skepta and Stormzy since), while last year she posted on her now-defunct blog, The Tig, about her listening habits, which included Crystal Fighters, Maggie Rogers and Janelle Monáe. So, there we have it: Coldplay headlining, with Ellie Goulding, the Three Degrees in the “legends” slot, Janelle Monáe, Skream, Crystal Fighters and Maggie Rogers. will.i.am can MC and make pointless guest appearances. It is still not much to the Queen’s taste, probably, but at least we can be certain that the royals could be trusted to book a typical V festival lineup.