Arsène Wenger was mindful of the pitfalls, the potential for anti-climax, as he put it, in his final home European tie as Arsenal manager. He wants what would be a first European trophy more than anything right now. Would this Europa League semi-final, first leg prove too demanding, particularly against opposition as streetwise as Atlético Madrid? Happily for him, his players played with verve and personality from the first whistle, pouring everything into the challenge and there were times, especially in the opening period of the first half, when they subjected Atlético to a gruelling examination. The team that sit second in La Liga and has established a stellar reputation on the European scene under Diego Simeone were reduced to 10 men after only 10 minutes, following Sime Vrsaljko’s two yellow cards. They were rattled and Simeone was sent to the stands after overheating at the referee, Clément Turpin, in the 13th minute. Arsenal could not find a goal during their period of ascendency but they broke through on 61 minutes thanks to Alexandre Lacazette. A stirring occasion had lift-off. And yet what Wenger feared most deeply would come to pass. Arsenal failed to put the 10 men away and they would be undermined by a darkly familiar defensive error. Laurent Koscielny had the position on Antoine Griezmann following a high punt forward but he erred badly and, suddenly, the Atlético striker was in. His first shot was saved and Shkodran Mustafi looked to have taken up a good covering position. But Mustafi slipped, Griezmann scored on the rebound and it was advantage Atlético. Vrsaljko’s dismissal shaped the tie, setting a combustible tone, and the Croatia right-back was certainly guilty of a rare form of recklessness, even if both of his cautions were defined by the strictest application of the law. The first one was for a lunge on Jack Wilshere, after Vrsaljko had been played into trouble by José Giménez and with that in mind, he ought to have thought twice about stretching into a tackle on Lacazette in a non-threatening area. He did not. Vrsaljko was late and he trod on the top of Lacazette’s foot. He gave Turpin a decision to make and the referee made it. The notion of a final warning so early in such a big game did not appear to enter Turpin’s thoughts. David Ospina Had barely anything to do. Good in possession. Was the only one who did his job on the goal. Unlucky 6 Héctor Bellerín Consistent outlet on the right. Made the visitors work, though delivery could have been better. 6 Shkodran Mustafi The last man between Griezmann and goal, the German fell over. Always looked vulnerable. 4 Laurent Koscelny (c) Had a decent game for the most part, maybe unlucky his clearance came back to him. But still. 5 Nacho Monreal Matched Bellerín for an attacking presence and involved in goal. Also played Griezmann onside. 5 Granit Xhaka The odd half-decent set-piece, but that was about it. Not nearly assertive enough. 4 Aaron Ramsey Could have scored twice from headers, the rest of his game a bit loose. Worked hard. 6 Mesut Özil The only forward who looked anything near sharp, but still did not deliver the end product. 6 Jack Wilshere Assist for the goal, everything else was tidy to the point of inconspicuous. 6 Danny Welbeck Imposed himself initially but ultimately never delivered the quality. Lost the ball for Griezmann’s goal. 5 Alexandre Lacazette Scored with a powerful header but should have had more, especially in the first half. A frustrating night. 6 Ratings by Paul MacInnes Simeone was incandescent and, moments later, after Héctor Bellerín had hacked at Lucas Hernández, the Atlético manager took his protests too far in demanding censure for the Arsenal right-back. His hackles had also been raised by Mesut Özil appearing to go to ground too easily in a separate incident. Simeone had demanded a yellow card for Özil. Banished to the stands, he paced about the back of the directors’s box – his face a mask of thunder. The atmosphere had crackled at the outset and Arsenal tore into Atlético. How the scoreline remained level at the interval was a mystery. Arsenal had created a fistful of chances by the midway point of the first half and they were clear ones, too. Jan Oblak Two fantastic saves from Lacazette and Ramsay. Everything else looked easy for the Slovenian. 8 Lucas Hernández Came off second best in his duel with Bellerín but held his shape and kept his cool. 6 Diego Godín (c) When Atlético were wobbling Godín stood firm with block after block. He has done this many times before. 8 José María Giménez Followed the lead of his captain. One fantastic stretch to stop Özil, launched the ball for the goal. 7 Sime Vrsaljko Earned two deserved bookings within 10 minutes of a crucial European fixture. Nothing more to say. 2 Thomas Partay Went from midfield to right‑back after Vrsaljko’s departure and acquitted himself well. Assertive. 7 Koke Saw little of the ball but ran his legs off to keep Arsenal from penetrating through the middle. 6 Saúl Ñíguez Another display more about commitment than technical contribution, but that was what was needed 6 Ángel Correa An irritant in the first half, as much for his theatrics as anything, disappeared in the second. 5 Antoine Griezmann Far from his best game, but swung the tie. Willed his way past a wilting defence when it mattered. 7 Kevin Gameiro Struggled to get into the match. Never properly linked up with Griezmann. 5 Subsitutes: Gabi (for Gameiro 65) Calming presence from the old head proved important 7. Fernando Torres (for Griezmann 85) N/A. Savic (for Correa 75) N/A Ratings by Paul MacInnes Lacazette had two of them before the sending-off. The first was a volley from Danny Welbeck’s cross, which he chopped down and watched it spin up and graze the outside of a post; the second was a header from Nacho Monreal’s centre from which he extended Jan Oblak. Arsenal poured bodies forward against the 10 men. Welbeck bustled into the area to tee up Aaron Ramsey, whose shot was blocked by Diego Godín; Wilshere headed tamely at Oblak; Welbeck, having exchanged passes with Wilshere, shot at the goalkeeper from a tightish angle and Koscielny, in yards of space after Lacazette flicked on Granit Xhaka’s corner, stretched and sliced wide. At the time it seemed imperative that Arsenal capitalised on their purple patch, but they did not. Apart from a miscued Monreal volley on 31 minutes, they rather ran out of steam before the interval. Lacazette was also guilty of making too much of a penalty area contact that he initiated in the 23rd minute. Atlético might have hurt Arsenal in the final part of the first half. Twice Griezmann drew saves out of David Ospina, the second after a powerful run by Thomas Partey. This Simeone team have proved a difficult nut to crack for many years and they had to rely on all their know-how with 10 men. Partey, the central midfielder, was moved to right-back; Koke came inside from wide midfield and Griezmann switched to the flank. They worked tirelessly to compress the space between the lines. It became a test of Arsenal’s temperament as much as anything else. Wenger’s team continued to press in the second half, and they continued to probe, but the gaps they had enjoyed in the frantic opening no longer looked so pronounced. The manager stalked his technical area or rocked forward on the bench. The strain was clear. The breakthrough goal lanced the tension. Griezmann was guilty of trying to play out from the back and when Monreal tackled him, the home crowd sensed opportunity. Wilshere stood up a cross to the far post and Lacazette, having timed a towering leap, summoned power and direction in his downward header to beat Oblak.