Jackfruit is a giant, gravity-defying tropical fruit that looks like an ancient weapon, with blunt, green spikes. It’s found in countries from India and Sri Lanka to Brazil, but is now also available in tins from supermarkets elsewhere. When jackfruit is fresh, it is sticky and sweet, but when it is brined and canned (as in this recipe), it tastes more like artichoke and has the texture of pulled pork (making it a popular ingredient among vegans). It’s perfect for stuffing into tacos. Tinned jackfruit often comes in salted water, so season with care. You can buy ground chipotle in large supermarkets and online, but you could use hot smoked paprika instead. Tortillas made with Mexican masa are delicious, if you can find them – I get mine at coolchile.co.uk. You’ll need a blender to make the sauce. Prep 15 minCook 1 hr 5 minServes 4 For the hot cashew sauce 100g cashews1 garlic clove, peeled2 tbsp rapeseed oil ½ tsp salt 1 tsp ground chipotle powder For the jackfruit 1 ½ tsp coriander seeds 1 ½ tsp cumin seeds 3 tbsp rapeseed oil 2 red onions, peeled and finely chopped 4 garlic cloves, peeled and minced 1 x 400g tin plum tomatoes 1 tbsp demerara sugar1 tsp ground chipotle ¾ tsp salt ¼ tsp cinnamon 2 x 400g tins jackfruit in salted water, drained For the fried corn2 tbsp rapeseed oil 2 x 195g-200g tins sweetcorn, drained½ tsp salt 1 tbsp lime juice, or more to taste¾ tsp ground chipotle To serve2 avocados, peeled and cubed Fresh coriander leaves, roughly chopped2 limes, each cut into 6 wedges 16 small or 8 large corn tortillas For the sauce, put the cashews in a pan, cover with 300ml water, bring to a boil, then turn the heat to low and simmer for 10 minutes. Add the garlic, turn off the heat and leave to cool. Once cool, blend with the oil, salt and chipotle powder, and scrape into a small bowl. For the jackfruit, put the coriander and cumin seeds into a mortar and bash until fairly well ground. Heat the oil in a frying pan on a medium heat, add the ground seeds and onions, and fry for 10 minutes, until the onion is soft. Add the garlic, fry for two minutes, then add the tomatoes and their juice, crushing them between your fingers before dropping them into the pan. Cook for 10-12 minutes, until the sauce reduces and thickens. Stir in the sugar, chipotle, salt and cinnamon, then add the jackfruit and 200ml water. Bring to a boil, cover, turn down to a simmer and cook for 15 minutes, until the jackfruit is soft enough to smash with the back of a fork. Test the sauce for salt and chilli, adjusting it to taste. For the corn, heat the oil in a nonstick pan on a high heat, then fry the sweetcorn for eight minutes, leaving it undisturbed for a couple of minutes at a time before stirring, so it blackens. Stir in the salt, lime and chipotle, then transfer to a bowl. To serve, spoon the jackfruit into a bowl. Put the avocado, coriander and lime wedges in separate bowls, and heat the tacos. Put everything on the table and encourage guests to build their own.