The launch of a new Nintendo product always generates excitement, because you never quite know what you are going to get. In 2004, Nintendo abandoned the wildly successful Game Boy portable consoles in favour of an ugly silver clamshell with two screens, the DS. Two years later, when other games companies were focused on improving their consoles’ graphical power, Nintendo popularised motion control with the comparatively underpowered Wii. Both announcements attracted scepticism and even mockery from players and market analysts alike, and both sold more than 100m each. The company’s experimental approach is not always successful, however. Though Nintendo’s most recent console, the Switch, has been a huge success so far, its predecessor, the Wii U, was one of the worst-selling games machines of all time. Nintendo Labo, out today in the US and on 27 April in the UK, is one of Nintendo’s weirdest ever ideas: a set of cardboard construction kits that, combined with the game software packaged with it, can be used to create interactive toys. The key to this magic is the Nintendo Switch’s little controllers, which snap away from the screen. These JoyCons contain a bundle of sensors and feedback mechanisms including gyroscopes, an IR motion camera and rumble. Slotted into a cardboard fishing rod, they can sense movement and velocity; tucked in the back of amini cardboard piano, they can see stickers on the back of the keys that tell the console which note to play. The game cartridge includes specially built games for each model, instructions for building them, and a “Discover” section that explains how they work in a kid-friendly but unpatronising manner. 'The most important thing for us was that consumers would find it exciting and fun' “After the development of Nintendo Switch, we worked on creating all kinds of different prototypes, with the theme of creating something that was straightforward and that only the Nintendo Switch and Joy-Con could make happen. Nintendo Labo came out of this process,” says Koichi Kawamoto, producer on the Labo team. Abandoned prototypes during that two-year effort included a model tank and a music box, according to Labo’s creators. “We made a music box prototype where you rotated a cylinder with reflective stickers stuck on it in a spiral shape,” elaborates Tsubasa Sakaguchi, project director. “By using the IR motion camera to detect the movements of the stickers, we could make the rotation speed of the cylinder determine how fast the music played. It was an interesting mechanism, but we thought that consumers wouldn’t actually have that much fun playing with it. The most important thing for us was whether consumers would find it exciting and fun.” The five models that have made the cut at launch include a little house with buttons and dials, a fishing rod with a string attached to an elastic-band reel, a simple remote-control car that judders across the floor powered by the controllers’ vibrations, an approximation of a motorbike with handlebars and a brake lever, and a working cardboard piano. There is also a cardboard robot suit, available in a separate kit, that can translate your movements into a game in which you are a giant robot smashing up a city. Cardboard came to our minds instantly, as a material that’s easy to modify, shape, and attach on to JoyCons The Labo software has a garage mode that lets you experiment with elements of programming, opening up the possibility for players to create their own cardboard contraptions. One example from Nintendo is a cardboard guitar with elastic-band strings. Expect to see a flurry of these sorts of creations from the maker community in the months after Labo’s launch. It was during the prototyping stage that director Sakaguchi first felt that the team might be on to something. They found that building the models and customising them with pens and stickers was as appealing as playing with them. “When we were making prototypes, for one Toy-Con [cardboard model] we made, players were picking the nose of something shaped like a human head on the game screen,” he recalls. “The IR motion camera detects movements, so as you move your finger, the finger on screen moves too. When one member tried the prototype Toy-Con, they looked at their finger to check if there was anything on it. I found that really funny to watch, and that’s when I felt the product’s potential.” “The fundamental concept of Labo came from thinking how we could leverage the JoyCon controllers,” elaborates Shinya Takahashi, GM of Nintendo’s development division. “We wanted to see if there were any attachments that we could put on them, and cardboard was the material that came to our mind instantly. It’s a material that’s easy to modify, shape, and attach on to JoyCons – trial and error and repair are all easy. Through the experiment our development team realised that selling already created cardboard attachments may not be fun enough – the process of creating and learning the process and the mechanics behind it is rewarding in itself.” Like all of Nintendo’s products, Labo is oriented towards families and children. A six-year-old might spend three hours using pens and glue to make the perfect RC car, whereas an older child (or parent) might spend more time learning how the models work. The more complex models would be demanding for many children to assemble by themselves, but with parental help the process is collaborative and fun – reminiscent of hours spent with Airfix models or dolls’ houses in previous generations. When Nintendo announced Labo in January, the reactions ranged from perplexed delight to qualified scepticism: will people really pay £60 (or $70) for some cardboard? It might only be £10 more expensive than a “normal” game, but Nintendo’s madcap ideas often take some explaining before people buy in to them. The next few months will determine whether Labo becomes a fondly remembered curiosity, or another of the Switch’s big sellers. •Additional interviews by Keith Stuart.