There are few things as good as bread fresh out of the oven or off the grill. Yet in our relentless busyness, we can convince ourselves that homemade bread will take too much time. My four‑year‑old came running home yesterday having made some at school. They mixed the dough, wound it around sticks and cooked it over a bonfire. These za’atar-flecked, quick flatbreads were inspired by her. They are a doddle, and a delight. Chargrilled bread, griddled broccoli, creamy yoghurt and a crispy egg with runny yolk: almost my desert‑island dinner. Prep 15 minCook 15 minServes 4 1 small garlic clove, peeled250g Greek yoghurtSalt and black pepper500g purple sprouting broccoli3-4 tbsp oil, olive or rapeseed4 eggs1 small handful mint leaves, chopped1 small handful parsley leaves, chopped2 pinches of pul biber (Turkish chilli flakes) or other dried chilli flakes For the flatbreads200g self-raising flour, plus extra for dusting1 tsp baking powder¾ tsp salt1 tbsp za’atar200g Greek yoghurt 1 ½ tbsp extra-virgin olive oil, plus extra to serve4 lemon wedges, to serve Make the flatbreads first. Put all the ingredients in a food processor and pulse until they just come together (you can also do this by hand with a wooden spoon). Transfer to a lightly floured surface and knead for three to five minutes, until smooth and elastic. Divide into four balls ready for cooking. Next, make the garlic yoghurt. Crush the garlic with a few pinches of salt using the flat of a large knife until you have a puree. Stir this into the yoghurt, along with a splash of water to loosen it slightly, and season to taste. Put a griddle pan on a medium-high heat and allow it to get smoking hot. Meanwhile, trim the ends from the broccoli and cut any thick stalks down the middle into halves or quarters, so it all cooks evenly. Toss the broccoli in one or two tablespoons of oil, then griddle for five to seven minutes, turning over once or twice until evenly charred and the stalks are tender. Remove, season and keep warm in a low oven. With a rolling pin, roll the flatbreads until they’re the thickness of £1 coins. Rub each side with a little oil, griddle for a minute or two on each side, until lightly charred and cooked through, then remove and keep warm in the low oven. Heat the remaining tablespoon of oil and, when hot, fry the eggs to your liking – a minute or two. Put the warm flatbreads on plates, spoon over a big dollop of garlic yoghurt and a few stalks of broccoli. Top with the fried egg, scatter with the chopped herbs and chilli flakes, drizzle with lots of extra-virgin olive oil and serve with lemon wedges. The Turkish chilli flakes are mild but deep in flavour. I always have lots in the cupboard because they are delicious sprinkled over almost anything. The same flatbreads can be cooked over a barbecue in the summer with grilled courgettes and aubergine. Eat alongside an array of salads and the same garlic yoghurt, flecked with chervil and mint.