In setting the stage for the climactic showdown between Negan and Rick, Worth had a lot to get through. Simon’s mutiny happened, and then didn’t. Negan’s ethos of “live-and-let-live” towards the Hilltop was abandoned in favour of the cull Simon had always pushed for. Dwight’s turncoatery was exposed. Any possible redemption for Eugene’s supreme mullet was quashed. The Woodland Clan were finally, finally given a purpose. And Rick regained some semblance of morality, as Carl reminded him from his cold dark grave that he was fighting for peace, rather than the Saviors’ total annihilation. It was a dialogue-heavy episode, but because there was so much going on it felt brisk, tense and urgent, and left behind the promise of a finale with all the extraneous gristle removed. From the off, Simon’s push for the Savior presidency was only ever going to end badly for him. You have to assume that the Savior top brass are all probably going to meet violent ends next week anyway, but it’s still a huge shame to see the mustachioed madman go. He’s been great. Praise must also go to Xander Berkeley, who’s imbued Gregory with all the unctuous and self-preservatory punchability of Aliens’ Carter Burke, which isn’t a benchmark I use lightly. Gregory’s time is presumably up too, once the Hilltoppers accuse him of feeding them porky-pie pants-on-fire intelligence. If that happens, I’m really going to miss his clammy little head. When Negan announced that rumours of his death had been greatly exaggerated, Simon ostensibly played his role of contrition perfectly. He kneeled. Apologised. Owned it. Promised never to be naughty again. Throughout, our knowledge of the undercurrents of Simon’s apology and Negan’s apparent acceptance of it gave it all an enjoyable sense of hanging-sword inevitability. The coup was still coming, and Negan intended to let it, to root out all the traitors in his ranks. It played out like high-stakes political drama, and quite an enjoyable one at that. Dwight’s motivations for betraying Simon, particularly after Dwight had been offered the killshot, were a little muddy – “he’d win” is all Simon, and we, got. Shooting Negan in the head when he isn’t looking surely can’t be that hard, so Dwight clearly had a longer game in mind. Sadly for Dwight, it looks like we’ll never get to see what that was. Negan offering Simon the opportunity to Queensberry Rules his way out of his bind did seem like an odd move. It probably only happened to a) give viewers a bit of fisticuffs they’ve wanted to see for a good long while, and b) to remind us that Negan can throw down with the best of them when he needs to, ahead of he and Rick facing off next week. And I’m fine with this. The fight itself was weirdly frictionless, with punches having little visible effect on their recipient’s noses and surrounding face-areas. Dwight ushering Gregory away halfway through also broke the momentum entirely. But it was a big, loud, all-swinging rumble, and it ended in a neck-crushing. No major complaints here. To top it all off, after the dust had settled, Steven Ogg grabbed the opportunity to play Zombie Simon (neither Zomon or Simbie work, so let’s leave it) with both hands. So fair play to him. And, lo, so passes Simon. RIP. You were a right bastard, and we’ll miss you. Negan had couple more aces up his sleeve, of course, and the dangling thread of Dwight’s treachery was snipped in twisty, satisfactory fashion. Quite what’s going to happen to Dwight that’s worse than death is something we’ll have to wait until next week to find out, though now Negan knows Sherry is alive and well I’d wager she just became a seriously endangered species. After Negan assured Dwight his spot as No 2 was a done deal, the revelation that Negan knew Dwight was the mole was a well-handled switcheroo, even if we knew it had to come at some point. I hope Dwight manages to get some payback for “every little indignity” he’s absorbed – he’s alright, Dwight, he’s a good lad, leave him alone – but things look likely to get a lot worse for him before they get any better. Outside Savior HQ, Eugene’s brief kidnapping once again proved that the Saviors really need to consider hiring a few lookouts, though it did clear up once and for all where the wordy wazzock’s loyalties lie. You can’t blame him either, given the grim alternative existence of lifelong indenture waiting for him at the Hilltop. Eugene appears to have settled into his role as the Saviors’ Master of Arms rather comfortably, holding draconian sway over his subordinates through the brutal application of mac’n’cheese’n’sardines, the unhinged monster. Even Gabriel is still trying to fight the good fight in his own way, but not Eugene. He’s gone. He’s Negan. His comeuppance is surely due. Though you have to give him credit for one of the most spectacular improvised escapes in the recorded history of being sick right in someone’s face and possibly mouth. The weakest thread of the episode was thankfully its least prominent, and essentially involved Aaron wriggling around in some mud with a load of zombies until the Woodland Clan felt sorry for him. But whatever. Even this was fine, considering the amount of groundwork laid elsewhere. Bringing more guns to the final battle can only be a good thing, so at least none of this vaguely ridiculous time cocking about in the trees was entirely wasted. Worth was an episode in which what actually happened wasn’t nearly as important as where it had left things by the time the credits rolled, and as a stepping-stone into the finale it did exactly what it needed to. No more, but certainly no less. Everyone knows where they stand. Negan’s feint is afoot. Jadis is conspicuous by her absence, and possibly in possession of a helicopter. Everyone’s fair game, just as they should be, because in a finale plot armour is left at the door. Let’s see who’s for the chop.