Pop into any branch of high-street clothes shop Urban Outfitters and you will be presented with a paradox. Stroll through the clothes racks and towards the checkout, past the mini cacti, glittery photo frames and avocado bed linen, and you’ll find a selection of books. “READ THIS IF YOU WANT TO BE INSTAGRAM FAMOUS,” screams one in all-caps, while next to it whispers another called The Little Book of Self-Care. It’s emblematic of an identity crisis that is engulfing a whole generation – the so-called fame-hungry narcissists v hyper-aware over-thinkers – and one that’s increasingly being reflected by its pop stars. Recently, it gained its anthem in the shape of We Are Fucked by 18-year-old Noah Cyrus (featuring Mø), a surprisingly self-lacerating, Max Martin-produced nihilistic banger that simmers with frustration at Cyrus’s generation’s social media addiction and her fears for how it might hobble their future. While the likes of Arcade Fire’s Win Butler and authenticity’s Jack White grumble about youth culture’s iPhone exploits (“Fools desire distraction … Their faces to their gadgets fall south/ Ignoring the beauty of fog on a hill,” groans one recent White lyric), We Are Fucked’s anger and self-awareness – the opposite of the accusations often levelled at generation “snowflake” – add far greater potency. “I’m saying there’s a problem, but I’m also part of the problem,” Cyrus explains when we chat over the phone. “I’m not pointing any fingers here. I don’t want people to think I’m being hypocritical; I’m being 100% real with you. I’m saying ‘we’. We are fucked; we are fucking each other up. We want to make things happen but there are things in our way that are causing us to backtrack from our full potential.” For Cyrus, her personal social media addiction is Instagram, which she first started using when she was 12. “I wake up and the first thing I check is Instagram and I don’t think that’s a healthy state of mind,” she says. “Youth culture is wrapped up in social media. Instagram tells us you need to look a certain way to be famous. Everybody’s obsessed and I think it’s endangering young people and what we think youth culture has to be.” So why is it Cyrus’s generation specifically (Generation Z is roughly marked as those born anywhere between the mid-1990s and mid-00s) who are starting to sing about it, and why with such anger? How does it fit alongside previous acts of musical nihilism that grew out of the punk scene in the 70s, grunge in the 90s and hip-hop’s recent downbeat turn? Recent Universal Music signing, the Swedish singer-songwriter LOVA, AKA 19-year-old Lova Alvilde, actively eschews writing about some of pop’s typical themes (love, heartbreak, being “in da club”). Her forthcoming EP will focus instead on the false idea of perfection generated by social media, with forthcoming single Insecurities being the first taste. “For me, writing about social media and its effect on people has always felt like a very natural and important thing to do,” she says. “I think it’s going to be hard not to write about it, especially for younger, upcoming artists. Social media is such a current factor, not only in my life but for almost every person of my generation, so that makes it a more obvious thing to write about. I want to open up to conversations about how society is shaping us into not talking about the things that actually matter.” Alvilde’s frustrations with social media’s addictive cycle of false affirmation also chime with We Are Fucked (the chorus of which runs “We are fucked/ These days we only follow/ These days we’re feeling hollow”). “We have basically been told to believe and trust that the ‘perfect’ life that social media is portraying is the one we should all strive for,” she says. “That then makes it harder for us to break free from it and see how far from reality it actually is.” While skewed-pop duo Let’s Eat Grandma, AKA teenagers Rosa Walton and Jenny Hollingworth, set their 2016 debut album I, Gemini in otherworldly landscapes, recent single Hot Pink came with a video that played on that falsity referred to by Alvilde. Their new album I’m All Ears comes peppered with references to mobile phones. “I really enjoy TV shows and music and media generally where they reference the fact that people spend time on their phones,” says Hollingworth. “It seems odd to me in films where they don’t use their phones once, when it’s set in 2018. That’s not what people’s lives are like now; we connect with each other through the internet whether you like it or not. We’ve always been interested in playing with the idea of people’s perceptions being altered by the media and phones and the internet.” For Generation Z, the whole approach to social media in the first place is different to how the baby boomers or Generations X and Y approached it in the past. Ruban Nielson, frontman of psych-pop experimentalists Unknown Mortal Orchestra, whose new album Sex & Food investigates what we as a society consume and how it affects us, thinks this is a key point as to why it’s becoming more of pressing concern. “When you talk to someone who is a baby boomer or Generation X about all this they would say: ‘This is the real me, and this is the version of me on social media,’” he says. “But the thing that is really monstrous about it is that for younger people who have it as a more formative part of their identity, you might end up with no real ‘me’ behind the social media. All the emphasis will be put on social media to actually represent the full scope of who you are and there might not be a identity behind that. That’s more terrifying. I have two children and I protect them as much as possible from that stuff but there’s no way to socialise your children without acknowledging that these things are out there.” While Dr Aaron Balick, author of The Psychodynamics of Social Networking, agrees that “for Generation Z, social media is more embedded into the social fabric than previous generations”, he also sees this as not wholly negative. “On the one hand, the social self as represented online is in some ways a fundamental, but young people are savvy too, and are capable of engaging with it critically.” Balick sees We Are Fucked’s attack on ruptured identities as more of a wake-up call than a shrug: “This song represents that criticism, drawing attention to the fact that a postured presentation of self could be a direct road to being fucked.” Even within the song, Cyrus offers an olive branch when she sings: “We’ve got hearts in the right places/ But we’re still a danger to ourselves/ Maybe it’s cuz we are young”. “We are good people,” she tells the Guide. “I would like to consider myself an amazing person but I’m still an addict. Not just Instagram, but all social media. We’re wasting time.” It’s this sense of acting on frustration, of wanting to change, that not only distinguishes Gen Z from the more stereotypically spoiled millennials, but sets Cyrus’s We Are Fucked apart from more typical teenage nihilism. “There’s a lot of self awareness [in the song],” says Balick, “but nihilism is not new in the world of the teenager; you could say it’s a pretty unchanging feature. My generation was expecting to see mushroom clouds on the horizon any minute. It’s much better to hear this nihilism expressed in relation to its supposed source – the hollowness of narrow self-presentation online – than to imagine a generation of social media zombies all drinking the same digital Kool Aid.” Songwriter Savan Kotecha, who co-wrote We Are Fucked alongside Cyrus and Swedish pop alchemist Max Martin, agrees. “The youth are so articulate and bright and aware. We’re going to see more of that, I think; they can sense when something’s wrong, even if they don’t have all the answers.” Kotecha says that, from other sessions he has been in, more and more artists of Cyrus’s age are starting to write not only about the identity crises social media inflicts, but wider issues affecting their generation. “I’ve noticed that in the last six or seven months: more artists wanting to discuss things they wouldn’t a year ago,” he says. “For American artists, there’s a sense of responsibility. Pop should be fun and escapist, of course, but it’s the artists who feel they can be heard who want to put some of that in the music.” He lists the likes of Ariana Grande, Camila Cabello, Lorde and Cyrus as examples. “It’s hard for a pop artist who’s known for doing fun songs to get super political, but they’re figuring it out.” We Are Fucked should be taken in a wider context of the next generation of pop stars becoming more aware of, and critiquing, their surroundings. It is also part of a conversation about the positives and negatives of social media that’s as blurred and seemingly contradictory as Urban Outfitters’ books selection, and more complex than Jack White is willing to understand. “I truly believe that the older generation have more to learn from us than we have to learn from them,” says Alvilde. “Today’s society is constantly changing and evolving and I think they have a harder time keeping up with that.” Balick agrees: “The speed at which social technologies change makes it a bit more difficult for older generations to understand the nature of the challenges of the younger ones because the generation gaps get smaller and smaller.” Pop, as it always has done, reflects society, and at the moment there’s a generational shift towards a youth culture raised in a prism of self-evaluation and self-recognition. “I wouldn’t say we’re lazy or don’t have potential, we’re just not channelling it correctly all the time,” states Cyrus. “We can do more than just social media. We can change the world.”