 Bill Cosby will face a second jury of his peers in 10 months on Monday as his retrial for alleged sexual assault gets under way in a Pennsylvania court. In what is likely to be remembered as the first major celebrity trial of the #MeToo era, the TV comic will return to the Montgomery county court of common pleas in Norristown, Pennsylvania, on three charges of aggravated indecent assault dating back to 2004. His first trial collapsed last June after the jury was unable to reach a verdict. Much has happened in the intervening months, not least the explosion on social media of the #MeToo movement prompted by revelations of sexual harassment and assault involving prominent men in Hollywood, the media, politics and many other walks of life. How that new public climate affects the retrial may have a large bearing on Cosby’s fate. He faces up to 10 years in prison on each count, having pleaded not guilty to all charges. Cosby, 80, was once lauded as “America’s Dad” for his role in the popular TV sitcom The Cosby Show. He has been accused by more than 50 women of sexual assault, though he denies the claims. Both his trials have focused on a single individual – Andrea Constand, a Canadian massage therapist who forms the center of the prosecution case. She alleges that in 2004, when she was helping run the women’s basketball team in Cosby’s alma mater, Temple University, he invited her round to his home outside Philadelphia. Constand, 44, alleges that he drugged her with three pills that made her drowsy, then sexually molested her. She reported the alleged attack a year later and when the local district attorney declined to press charges she brought a civil lawsuit against Cosby that was settled for an undisclosed sum in 2006. Constand’s claims, and the defense attorneys’ efforts to discredit her credibility, were at the heart of the first trial last June. On that occasion, Cosby faced a jury of seven men and five women. On Monday the panel will have exactly the same gender balance, with 10 members being white and two African American. In pre-trial deliberations, the presiding judge Steven O’Neill has made rulings on the evidence that can be presented to the jury that could be critically important. In particular, he has allowed the size of the 2006 financial settlement between Cosby and Constand to be disclosed in court. Instead of permitting just one other woman who alleged she was drugged and molested by Cosby to give testimony, as in the first trial, the judge gave the green light to five women being heard this time. O’Neill was himself the issue of legal proceedings after Cosby’s attorneys called on him to step aside on grounds that his social worker wife is an advocate for assault victims. He dismissed the demands, saying he was “not biased or prejudiced” by his wife’s work.