The Matildas were left ruing numerous missed chances after losing the Asian Cup final 1-0 to Japan. After dominating for the majority of the match, Australia were left shattered as Frankfurt forward Kumi Yokoyama raced clear on the break to score the winner in the 84th minute. Getting to the final had not been plain sailing for either side, who drew 1-1 in their final Group B game to progress on goal difference. While Japan dispatched China in their semi-final, Alen Stacic’s much-changed side needed a 91st-minute equaliser from Alanna Kennedy before beating minnows Thailand on penalties. If concerns about the Matildas’ erratic form throughout the tournament had dominated the build-up, then Australia quickly put those worries to bed in the showpiece game in Amman. Stacic’s star players were on the pitch from the off and their strength showed. Bursting out of the blocks, they were more recognisable as the buccaneering side of recent years. Defending champions Japan proved equal to the task though, and what resulted was an end-to-end battle from start to finish. After just 14 minutes, a high ball into the area was fumbled by Japanese goalkeeper Ayaka Yamashita and Tameka Butt blasted the ball at defender Saki Kumagai’s arm. The referee pointed to the spot but Yamashita made amends, saving Elise Kellond-Knight’s penalty to keep the scores level. Both sides missed plenty of chances in the remainder of the first half. Forward Mana Iwabuchi was the linchpin of the Japanese attack but Emi Nakajima and Aya Sameshima were both caught offside when racing onto her pinpoint through balls. Portland Thorns’ Clare Polkinghorne was magnificent at the back for Australia, nullifying the direct threat of Iwabuchi. The second half got off to a cagey start, but after five minutes the Matildas started to stretch their legs and push at the Japanese defence. After 52 minutes Emily van Egmond caught Yamashita off her line but her stunning long-range strike struck the crossbar. Sam Kerr struggled to find space in the box as Nana Ichise and Kumagai kept her crowded out. With Japan defending deep, space was at a premium and Seattle Reign’s Steph Catley epitomised the effort of the Aussie side as a smart step-over and nutmeg saw her weave her way past three players. With the Matildas creating chance after chance, they ran the risk of being punished for their wastefulness up front. With 10 minutes left on the clock the game started to open up, Kellond-Knight going in the book as she stopped Yokoyama – a substitute who came on for Yuika Sagasawa and had three goals in the tournament already – from racing clear on the break. From another breakaway four minutes later, Australia were punished. With just six minutes of normal time to play Yokoyama sped away and then cut inside, leaving Polkinghorne and Kennedy in her wake, and fired a screamer past the outstretched Lydia Williams to put Japan ahead against the run of play. The Matildas piled forward in the closing minutes but were unable to find the reply to Yokoyama’s fourth goal of the competition – and a goal worthy of winning the tournament – as the holders retained their trophy with an incredible defensive display. Despite the defeat, Australia played their part in a thrilling game, and can take plenty of positives from a performance where they dominated possession. Onwards to the 2019 World Cup.