Cathy Wilkes, a Northern Irish artist whose sculptural installations sometimes confound as much as they delight, has been chosen as Britain’s artist for the world’s biggest contemporary arts exhibition. The British Council announced on Monday that Wilkes, who is based in Glasgow, had been selected to fill the British Pavilion at the 58th Venice Biennale in 2019. The event is seen as an Olympics for the visual arts and runs for six months every two years. Wilkes makes works that are often intimate and autobiographical, sometimes using mannequins to create domestic scenes that are not immediately fathomable, and subject to interpretation. Hugh Mulholland, senior curator of The Mac in Belfast and a member of the selection panel, said he thought Wilkes’s work addressed “an emotional deficit at the core of society … a preoccupation which could not be more apt for the current world order.” Fiona Bradley, director of the Fruitmarket Gallery in Edinburgh and also on the panel, said she loved Wilkes’s work because “it doesn’t shout, it’s not bombastic. But it doesn’t need to be. In the hustle and bustle of Venice it will be a moment of quiet and of wonder.” Wilkes’s show will be curated by Zoe Whitley, a curator of international art at Tate Modern who was selected after the British Council invited curators to apply. Whitley said there was something wonderful in being able to revel in what Wilkes’s work means, whether that provoked thoughts about family, love or loss. “In these times where we’re always thinking about what something means, or how we present ourselves, Cathy is very comfortable with a kind of not knowing, an ambiguity, these open questions that you are left with.” Wilkes was nominated for the Turner prize in 2008, exhibiting a tableaux featuring two supermarket checkouts, glass bowls, jam jars, burnt wood, hair and leftover food. There were two female mannequins, one with horseshoes around her neck sitting on a toilet and the other with a birdcage over her head. The Guardian’s Adrian Searle had said: “I don’t know how to read the half of Wilkes’s installations. Unless, that is, I’m thinking too hard. Inarticulate stumbling towards meaning is part of her subject, and a way of speaking.” Wilkes is far from a household name but she is well known in contemporary art, winning the inaugural Maria Lassnig prize in 2016, an award recognising the achievement of mid-career artists. She was chosen by a panel of nine curators each of whom had six suggested artists. After a full day of debate at the British Council that number was reduced to one. Representing your country in Venice is considered an honour and Wilkes follows in the recent footsteps of artists such as Phyllida Barlow (2017), Jeremy Deller (2013), and Tracey Emin (2007).