In a Los Angeles parking lot, Barry Berkman (played by former Saturday Night Live comedian Bill Hader) is telling Gene Cousineau (Henry Winkler, the Fonz, cue whooping) what he is good at. (Barry, Sky Atlantic) “I’m good at killing people,” he says. “Yeah, when I got back from Afghanistan, I was really depressed, I could hardly leave my house for months. This friend of my dad’s, he’s like an uncle to me, he helped me out and he gave me a purpose. He told me that what I was good at over there could be useful here, and, er, it’s a job.” There is so much going on – and so much of what Barry is about – in the scene. Barry is an army vet, now depressed and unhappy in his work as a hitman based in Cleveland. It’s tough for him to adapt to life after war. He is in LA to dispense with his latest mark, Ryan, a personal trainer who – very stupidly – is shagging the wife of a Chechen mob boss. It was the gang – specifically the boss’s bald, camp, deputy Noho Hank (played hilariously by Anthony Carrigan) – who commissioned the hit. Anyway, as well as being a physical trainer (plus extras), Ryan – like everyone else in LA – is an aspiring actor. He takes an acting class with Gene: method acting from the Fonz. Barry follows Ryan in to the building, to put a bullet in his head, but instead finds himself on stage, doing a scene with him from True Romance. Barry also finds potential love, with lovely but seriously self-obsessed and actorly Sally (Sarah Goldberg, also screen-bossingly excellent), and, potentially, new meaning in his life. Hey, maybe he could phase out the killing and get into acting instead? Break a leg. Only thing is, he can’t act – really can’t act. “What you did was dogshit,” Gene tells him, which is harsh but true. Hader does very bad very well, wooden like a giant redwood. But then, in the parking lot, he tells Gene what he is really good at (killing people). Gene thinks it is his audition monologue and sees the raw authenticity (because it is authentic, but Gene doesn’t realise it), and suddenly he is in. The only worry is how easy it is going to be to give up the day job. Clue: not easy at all. So there you have it, the two strands of Barry. A violent crime drama about contract killing, hits and mobsters one minute, and comedy about a lonely lost guy who accidentally ends up on a stage and likes it, the next. There is no danger of this going romcom, though. Right from the start we know the boy-meets-girl storyline isn’t going to be straightforward. We know what Barry is capable of. I don’t mean Hader and his SNL stuff, although that as well. But Barry the character, who can put a bullet in a man’s head without blinking (deadpan is a new – and surprisingly successful – departure for Hader, although surely we are going to see him lose his cool at some point). This is Hader’s baby – he doesn’t just star in it, he is also co-parent (with Alec Berg). He directs the opener, too. And it is fabulous. Somehow, those strands, which don’t have any right to be spliced together in any meaningful way, are. It is one of those unlikely flavour combinations – mango plus chilli; strawberries plus pepper; satire about LA people and actor people plus a dude lying on his bed with his brains blown out (the opening shot, as it happens). It works because of that fabulous juxtaposition, a perfect storm of horror and hilarity. Because it is smart: there are references all over the place (including a place over my head). Because the characters are convincing, three-dimensional people you end up caring about. And because of the performances I’ve mentioned and loads more I haven’t, such as Paula Newsome who plays Detective Moss drier than Death Valley. Oh, yeah, there is a whole police investigation going on, too. Sometimes there is a lot going on in some of those performances. Like Hader’s in that parking lot scene. Here is an actor playing someone who wants to be an actor but isn’t, and he isn’t acting now, although the person he’s talking to – an acting coach – thinks he is acting … Got it? Oh, and Winkler looks like he is having a ball in his role. Did I mention that Fonzie’s in it? Ayyy! This one gets the thumbs up.