When I got into the van with a group of strangers on the way to a mysterious psychotherapy retreat in rural New South Wales, there was man wearing a branded T-shirt with an unfamiliar name. “Osho, hmm, I haven’t heard of that brand, it must be new,” I thought. Osho – as I was to find out – wasn’t a new clothing label. He was a famous guru who had been rebranded, which is unsurprising because his previous brand had become toxic. Osho, formerly known as Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh, was the leader of a group known as the Orange People. He is also the subject of a fascinating new six-part Netflix documentary, Wild Wild Country. As a child growing up in the 1980s, the spectre of the Orange People loomed like a bogeyman although there were none that I knew of, hiding out in Warrnambool. Despite this, for a while our favourite playground taunt was “tough titties”: the catch cry of the Baghwan’s chief bag carrier, Ma Anand Sheela, who uttered the memorable phrase while being interviewed by Ian Leslie on 60 Minutes. (When told the Orange People weren’t welcome in Australia, she replied: “What can I say? Tough titties.”) Fast forward to 2016 and the week I was away at the camp with the guy in the Osho T-shirt was the most intense week of my life. The camp was not connected to Osho but his influence and some of his techniques were used. We gave up our phones and submitted to a mysterious schedule that started early and finished late. Many of the activities involved therapies of the sort I had never encountered: screaming, hitting things, swearing, jumping up and down on the spot for ages, dancing while blindfolded, making strange sounds. The noise and the emotional distress of the other participants freaked me out. I dislike yelling, and hearing people scream and cry was frightening. The big sounds and big emotions were frightening to me initially because so much of what I had around me in daily life – from smartphones, to television to alcohol – were effectively numbing agents. It would be a few days before I adjusted and could lose my inhibitions to also scream, and only on the last day did I cry. But after I loosened up, I found I could not stop screaming. I became a champion screamer and hitter of things. In sessions lasting for hours, others at the camp were lying on the ground, spent, and I was still at it – hitting and hitting and hitting stuff with a foam bat, drenched with sweat. Energy burst geyser-like from me from some secret source. There are psychological theories behind this process of letting go in a contained and safe space. In some ways it’s like a self-exorcism: you release your own demons and suppressed emotions and afterwards, feel lighter for it. It worked for me. This week watching Wild Wild Country, I was reminded of my week away at the camp. At one point in the series, a young Christopher Hitchens narrates a BBC documentary about Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh. It was the screening of this BBC documentary which initially turned the small US farming community where the Orange People had settled against them. In the Hitchen’s doco were scenes of what looked like demonic possession: naked people screaming, crying, swearing, hitting each other and hugging each other, a more hardcore, violent version of what I had done at camp. But it was essentially for the same purpose – a form of purging. (Violence in the Rajneesh therapy groups ended in 1979. Violence “had fulfilled its function within the overall context of the ashram as an evolving spiritual commune”, said a press release at the time.) When I returned to Sydney from the camp, I felt a level of happiness and contentment that I had never before experienced. It was a feeling I think about now – wistfully – because it didn’t last long. The night I returned I went to dinner with some friends in Sydney, who quickly clocked my new blissful state. One of them was scathing: this was a cult, she said, I needed to be careful. I was in no danger of joining a cult (the retreat was not a cult anyway). I was reporting on the experience for a magazine and was hyperaware of what was going on – yet she still managed to bring me down. The great feelings would have faded eventually but they die quicker when people tell you that you only feel great because you’ve been “brainwashed”. Using news footage and interviews with people involved in the Orange People, and those in the town of Antelope where the group made its uneasy home, Wild Wild Country walks the middle line between showing the Orange People as progressive and enlightened and yet depicting how unsettling their presence was in rural Oregon. It also shows the moral panic of conservative, Christian America, and how a movement that gets branded a cult becomes demonised. Yet unlike many traditional cults, most of the former Orange People interviewed by the film-makers had the time of their lives. According to a review in Vulture: “The Rajneesh faithful who appear on camera all sound perfectly rational and look like the kind of graying, progressive adults you might accidentally bump your cart into at your local Trader Joe’s. They still talk in glowing, tearful terms about their time living on the ranch and the impact that the Bhagwan, later renamed Osho, had on their lives.” In many ways he is the perfect guru of the Silicon Valley age. Like Osho, tech entrepreneurs also believe that mindfulness and meditation can mix well with money But there is no doubt that some lives were ruined by the experience. One Australian woman featured, Jane Stork, was in deep before souring on the whole enterprise after she was charged with attempted murder. She said in Wild Wild Country that she had been raised under the commandment ‘Thou shalt not kill’ and was deeply shocked that she had “crossed a line”. Much has been written about the dark (very dark) side of life for Rajneesh followers – including forced sterilisations and abortions. The documentary is compelling because it shows how what was intended as a peaceful community based on love and freedom devolved into a weaponised death cult charged with the largest bioterrorism plot in US history. After it all died down and the compound dispersed, a rebrand was necessary. The Bhagwan died in 1990, but he lives on today as “Osho”. Before Wild Wild Country was released last month, Osho was enjoying something of a resurgence among the younger generation. In many ways he is the perfect guru of the Silicon Valley age. Like Osho, tech entrepreneurs also believe that mindfulness and meditation can mix well with money, that you don’t need to be poor to be enlightened, that a fast track to really knowing yourself can be had by taking some A-grade ayahuasca at a clinic in Costa Rica. (Osho’s stance on drugs was that they should be good, legal and available and if you wanted to take LSD, you should just go to a special room in a hospital and take it.) In his book God Is Not Great, Hitchens talked with some disgust about Osho’s “sibilant voice usually deployed through low volume microphone at early morning darshan, (which) possessed a fairly hypnotic quality”. And that is true, he looked and sounded like a cult leader from the playbook. But Osho’s teaching on certain things, including sex, nature, sleep and work, are great. He was funny, modern and dirty – switching between eastern religions and Christianity with ease. He swore a lot and didn’t take anything too seriously. This is him on sex: All religions have destroyed the sacredness of love – they have destroyed it as a sin and the conditioning has gone so deep in the human mind that people are making love in such a hurry – as if they want to finish it as quickly as possible. Naturally if it is a sin, it is better finished soon. And friendship: Friendship is the purest love. It is the highest form of love where nothing is asked for, no condition, where one simply enjoys giving. Last year I dropped into an upmarket yoga studio in Manhattan, squeezed between Marc Jacobs stores and cupcake franchises and there were shelves of Osho books and Osho-branded clothing for sale. And in Pune, India, thousands of westerners still attend his ashram and Osho centre. He’s been dead since 1990 but his lectures are available for download online and are doing brisk numbers. Separated from his crazy context, Osho has a lot of interesting teachings that are applicable today. My book Wellmania ends with a chapter on my experiences at the camp but there is nothing really about the soft-softly-omm-good-vibes yoga retreat that fits it into my theme of the modern wellness industry. Instead of repressing your own violence, shadow side and pain, you bring it in from the cold. It’s strong medicine. I couldn’t do it again but am forever grateful for the experience. • Brigid Delaney is a Guardian Australia columnist