The government of the Democratic Republic of Congo has boycotted a key donor conference in Geneva, accusing aid agencies of exaggerating the extent of the crisis in the vast central African country. The conference, which opened on Friday, aims to raise $1.7bn (£1.2bn) for humanitarian assistance to millions suffering from war, displacement, disease and hunger. The United Nations has declared the situation in parts of the DRC to be at level 3, the world body’s highest level of emergency. Léonard She Okitundu, the DRC’s foreign minister, said last week that Kinshasa would not participate in the conference, claiming the humanitarian community had exaggerated the crisis. Officials in the DRC claim only 230,000 people have been displaced, a fraction of UN estimates of 4.5 million, and say the higher assessments will discourage investment at a time when the government is attempting to stabilise the volatile economy. “Activating the highest level of humanitarian emergency based on facts that are not real constitutes a hindrance to development,” the government said in a statement last month. The UK has announced an additional £22m of humanitarian assistance, bringing its total to £227m, and called on the DRC “to fully recognise the scale of suffering”. “This is a major humanitarian crisis and I have pressed for the DRC to … cooperate with international efforts to help the millions of Congolese people affected,” said Harriett Baldwin, the UK’s minister for Africa. The DRC has been hit by waves of violence, rebellions, protests and political turmoil in recent months, leading to fears over fresh unrest. Five million people died in the civil war between 1997 and 2003. The security situation has deteriorated markedly as government authority has collapsed, emboldening rival militia groups who hold sway over large areas of territory, often competing for the DRC’s rich resources. More than 13 million Congolese need humanitarian aid, twice as many as last year, and 7.7 million face severe food insecurity, up 30% from a year ago, according to the UN. The crisis is most acute in the central Kasai region and in the east. Six rangers in the Virunga national park were killed earlier this week in an ambush, underlining the growing threat. The instability has been aggravated by Joseph Kabila’s refusal to step down as president at the end of his elected mandate in 2016. Kabila, in power since 2001, is barred by term limits from standing for re-election. But opponents suspect he intends to try to change the constitution to run again, or further delay the poll, which was originally due in 2016. Opposition activists have criticised the government position. In a joint statement, a coalition of Congolese civil society groups said they welcomed the decision to hold the conference “in spite of Kabila government’s campaign of blackmails and smears”. The statement said: “This humanitarian crisis is not a result of an unpredictable natural disaster; it is a man-made tragedy. It has been marked by violence, often state-sponsored, harsh political repression, and flagrant and repeated violations of our people’s most basic rights.” Moïse Katumbi, a leading opposition politician, called the government’s stance “criminal”. Last year’s UN appeal for $812m was poorly funded, forcing many agencies to cut back or discontinue providing clean water, food and safety for people forced to flee their homes due to violent conflict. Jose Barahona, Oxfam’s DRC country director, said his organisation had been forced to halve food rations to 90,000 people in the conflict-ridden Kasai provinces. “The lack of funding forces us to make choices we shouldn’t have to make. Last month, we had to restrict the rations even further with over a quarter of people receiving no food at all,” Barahona said. In the Kasai region, only 39% of people needing aid received help between October 2017 and the end of January 2018, aid agencies say. In Ituri, a province bordering Uganda, thousands are being forced from their homes by violence. Since December 2017, more than 100 people have been killed as villages, schools and health centres have been burned. 