The government has delayed its final decision on who makes the post-Brexit blue UK passports to allow the British firm De La Rue more time to challenge plans to award the contract to a Franco-Dutch rival. The Home Office said the so-called standstill period between the choice of a preferred contractor and the official announcement had been extended. Downing Street said the period was being lengthened by two weeks at the request of De La Rue so that the UK firm could get more information about the tender process under which it lost out to Gemalto. A No 10 spokesman made it clear Gemalto remained the government’s preferred bidder. “The preferred bidder demonstrated they were best able to meet the needs of our passport service, with a high-quality and secure product and best value for the taxpayer,” he said. Gemalto has not yet been formally announced as the winning bidder but is understood to be the preferred choice. The Home Office has previously said changing the contractor would save UK taxpayers £120m but the decision has been met with a storm of criticism from Brexit-backing MPs as well as Labour and trade unions. Confirming that it was starting the process of challenging the Home Office, which awards the contract, De La Rue said in a statement: “Based on our knowledge of the market, it’s our view that ours was the highest quality and technically most secure bid.” It said its tender represented a significant discount on the current price, but added: “We can accept that we weren’t the cheapest.” Ministers said the tender process was a “rigorous, fair and open competition” and the new passport would be “a high-quality and secure product at the best value for money for our customers and the taxpayer”. The immigration minister Caroline Nokes said in the Commons last month: “In a fair procurement process, we had to look at quality, security and price, and this was the contract that provided the best value on all counts.” De La Rue’s chief executive, Martin Sutherland, has previously expressed outrage at the decision to award the contract to the rival firm, telling the BBC that Theresa May should “come to my factory and explain to my dedicated workforce why they think this is a sensible decision to offshore the manufacture of a British icon”. He said: “Over the last few months, we have heard ministers happy to come on the media and talk about the new blue passport and the fact that it is an icon of British identity. But now this icon of British identity is going to be manufactured in France.” The former international development secretary Priti Patel, a prominent Brexiter, said at the time of the reports that it was a humiliation that the passports would be made abroad, calling the decision “simply astonishing”. Sir Bill Cash, the chair of the Commons European scrutiny committee, said it was “symbolically completely wrong”. The blue and gold passports will be issued from October 2019, when the £490m passport contract begins, to British nationals renewing or applying for a new passport.