I have been with my boyfriend for a while, and we have had plenty of sex but he has a hard time finishing. He says that he is very close to ejaculating but just can’t. We have each done research online, and looked into switching condoms, lubes, taking supplements and more. He often says that he used to masturbate very regularly and thinks that he may have become desensitised. The frustration is taking a toll on him and it would be so nice to find something that will help him. Your sexual connection has been erroneously labelled “a problem”. Unless you need to become pregnant tomorrow, it is really not. Many people think there is only one right pattern to follow for lovemaking: a bit of foreplay followed by a session of intercourse that should lead to climaxing for both partners – ideally, at the same time. But any couple that sets such a goal will face disappointment. The human sexual response pattern can take many forms, and it is better to do what is most exciting at any given moment rather than try to fit a pattern. For example, a couple that enjoys 20 minutes of passionate kissing and nothing else is still having a fabulous sex life. Equally, a couple that skips the warmup and goes straight to penetration is not at fault if that is what both partners want. A couple that spends an entire weekend merely flirting and touching is still having a massively exciting and fulfilling sexual experience. Instead of trying to force a finish, think more restart. Masturbation is unlikely to have desensitised your partner, but the fact that he often mentions his ability to ejaculate through self-pleasuring could even be a hint he would like to do so in your presence. Be open to change. Stop taking sex so seriously and try to have some fun. It doesn’t have to be A-B-C, and no one should feel they have to climax. If you can focus on the delicious sensations you are experiencing in the moment, and avoid any shoulds , then not only are you likely to experience heightened eroticism, but you also are both more likely to orgasm. • Pamela Stephenson Connolly is a US-based psychotherapist who specialises in treating sexual disorders. • If you would like advice from Pamela Stephenson Connolly on sexual matters, send us a brief description of your concerns to private.lives@theguardian.com (please don’t send attachments). Submissions are subject to our terms and conditions: see gu.com/letters-terms