In a new anthology, Not That Bad: Dispatches from Rape Culture, the award-winning writer Roxane Gay collects first-person essays about rape, sexual assault and the patriarchy, including this essay, The Ways We Are Taught to Be a Girl, by the writer known as xTx. Later, you will turn it into a points system. You won’t call it a points system and there won’t be any actual points, but regardless, you will keep score. You imagine other girls have their own ways of keeping score: in diaries, in shiny-smooth scars, in how they raise their daughters, in the ways they are lost. It’s an odd tallying; the girls who have the most points are not the winners and the girls who have the lowest points do not win either. Nobody wins. Ever. I am a girl with low points. The ways we are taught to be a girl start when you are very young. When you are being taught, you don’t know about the points. When you are being taught to be a girl, the lessons are simply accepted – the price you pay for your curves, your holes. It’s only later, when you are older, after you’ve been taught, that you find out about the scoresheet. Prior to that, it’s just what happens when you are a girl. We had a place in the country we’d go each summer, an old place on a half acre on the outskirts of a one stoplight, white trash town. Woods, river and railroad tracks; free-range roaming, sunburn, snakes, tadpoles, cray fish, filth, mosquito bites. I had made a same-age friend who lived with no father, two older brothers and three sisters in a house too small for its

captors
 inhabitants. It was a six-minute walk from our place, the length of a neighboring horse pasture. The girls’ room had pink spray-painted dots on the walls. The mom kept a giant jar of homemade pickles in the kitchen that my friend and I would eat from, wrapping the dripping, tangy green meat in paper towels and chewing them down to stubs. We walked barefoot a lot. We swam in the river. We climbed trees. We made up adventures. We played dolls sometimes. We were tomboys but we were girls first. Her oldest brother liked to give me hugs. One time we were riding a horse together. It spooked and ran and we fell off when it took a sharp turn. Her body fell into a wood post. Mine did not. I remember her crying, taking her shirt off, the pale white side of her scraped and bleeding. I remember thinking, She has her shirt off and she doesn’t care. I remember bathroom Bactine and bandages and never wanting to ride a horse again. Adventures. A fort down by the river. Fiberglass. Aluminum. Boards. Dirt. It had bunk beds. And boys. Her brothers. She brought me there one day. I was maybe 7. Now I wonder, did she lure me? Was this the plan all along? Adventures. They kissed her with tongue to show me how easy it was. “See? No big deal. Now you try it.” I didn’t want to try it. The fort was hot. The door was blocked. I didn’t want this. Seven years old? Eight? Nine? Six? Which age makes it better? “Just do it!” These weren’t the words. These were the words. I was a child. I was scared. She said them too. Three against one. I didn’t do it. They did it. I did nothing except endure my first lesson on how to be a girl. I remember not being able to breathe and crying while they felt my perfectly flat chest, their slimy hot tongues pushing into my mouth, alien and gross. I remember pushing and running because I was suffocating, scared, because it all felt like speeding downhill without brakes and if I didn’t run I would crash and that crash would cost too many points. I didn’t know about the points, but somewhere, deep down, I knew. I told my parents when I got home. Not everything. We learn not to tell everything. We know telling everything will make them see the bad in us. How it is our fault. How we contributed. We fear repercussions, albeit lighter than the ones we will administer to ourselves; slut, bad, ugly, weak, whore, trash, shame, hate. We tell just enough, if we tell at all. I wasn’t allowed to play with her after that. I was okay with that. Summary Sometimes you will be forced into things you don’t want to do. Sometimes you will be made to feel bad you don’t want to do the things. After the things are done, you will feel like a bad person. These feelings will never go away. They enter the wet plaster of you and harden into the mold of you. The way you are taught to be a girl will become how you are as a woman – a woman who is, at her core, not good enough, without worth, tarnished. Points: 2? 3? 1? Why was it always friends, friends of? Maybe because the door was already open, less work? Sitting ducks? Easy prey? That same summer place. The back porch. After swimming. My older brother’s friend. My brothers. All of us wrapped in towels, sitting around. I was an age where there is no pubic hair and you’re aware there’s none, embarrassed about it. Whichever age that is. My brother’s friend overlapping his towel onto mine, his hand snaking in, snaking under, trying to get to the girl of me. But my brothers are there! Nobody is there. I cement my legs closed. I press so hard and plead so hard with the thighs I will learn to hate for the rest of my life simply because of their roundness. Why is he doing this? Why can’t anyone see? Why am I not moving saying yelling screaming? Why me? The fingers go as far as he can get them, which isn’t as far as he wants to get them, and he gives up. They go play. I release. My thighs quiver, spent, mostly victorious. Summary If they want it, they can take it. What you want or don’t want is irrelevant. Points: One? A half? The same summer place. A father’s friend, drunk. A master bedroom during a party he sneaks away from. I’m watching cartoons. Still no breasts, no pubes, only a summer tan, shorts, halter top. Risque? Did my lying on my side, head on my hand, lounge pose siren-seduce him? Or maybe it was my long tan legs? Slut child. I was watching cartoons. In a room. By myself. He lay down on the bed, his pose mirroring mine. He begins stroking the mountain- range length of me; head, hair, cheek, shoulder, arm, waist, hip, thigh, calf. An endless petting. I watch cartoons. His sour breath, garbled words. His hand. Slow and stroking. Feeling him inch closer, narrowing the valley between us. I want for bedsheets, a night-light, a way to hide, shrink away. Monsters aren’t always in closets, under beds. I watched cartoons, unsure. Uncle ****. He’s nice, right? My dad’s friend. This is okay, right? Then why does it feel wrong? Why can’t I move? Get up? Run? My body betraying me once more. Once more, a car without brakes. The door opens and another father’s friend rages, rips him off the bed. What the fuck do you think you’re doing? he asks. And that’s when I know, for sure, that was a wrong thing. I am left alone with the bed, the cartoons, feeling a partner in the wrong thing. If I was a good girl, I would’ve left. I didn’t do anything. I let him. I let him. I let him. I. Let. Him. My fault. Summary If you do nothing, it’s your fault. Even if you are a child. Even if you are scared. Even if the man is your dad’s good friend who you’ve known since growing up. Pay attention. Take notes. This is how you are

shamed
 shaped into a woman. Points: None? One-half? Summer again, but this time, a two-week lakeside camp. The foxiest counselor: dark brown curls, dark brown eyes, summer-tan skin, a cute boy smile. Was I 12? Thirteen? Eleven? Yes. He must’ve recognized my young girl longing. The look away and smile. The turn, giggle blush. All the puppy love behaviors. I was chubby. Unpretty. Plain. An easy mark. He was a god and he knew it. I was only prey. He taught sailing and when he asked if I’d like to take the boat out with him – just him and me – of course I said yes. He was beautiful. He was a counselor. An adult. Looking back he was probably only 19 or 20 but he was a COUNSELOR. To me, that was akin to a teacher. There was no need to worry. I obviously had forgotten my previous lessons. Bad student. Bad girl. He took the boat from the dock out into the lake. Once we were clear, he had me take the rudder and pointing to a spot on the other side of the lake, instructed me to aim for it. He lay on his back, closed his eyes. It occurred to me that maybe this was his clever way of being able to take a short nap. I was right and also wrong. As I steered, I stared. His tan body, clad in only swim trunks. His brown, hairless chest, muscled thighs, the smell of him. Not believing my “luck” at being “chosen” by such a cute guy. Me! The chubby, plain girl! The one-piece-swimsuit-with-a-long-T-shirt-over-it girl! So many bikini-cute girls left behind, unpicked. My girl’s heart fluttered! After a while he woke up. Checked how I was doing. Praised me with that smile. Told me I’d done a fine job. Called me a good girl. He lay back down. But he reached up and started caressing my face. He took his thumb and pressed it all over my lips, then into my mouth. Again, I froze. I did not know what this was. What was this? In and out of my mouth and I sucked on it. Automatically. I sucked his thumb. I didn’t know what to do but I felt that was what was wanted FROM ONE OF MY COUNSELORS so I sucked on it. Like a sleepy baby. Even though it all felt wrong. I was in the middle of a lake, alone. Not alone. I saw the brakeless car then. It was headed toward the crest of a hill. My stomach. I couldn’t see his eyes. He had on sunglasses. But I saw he had a hard-on. I had brothers. I had my dad’s Hustlers, his Joy of Sex. I knew exactly what it was, what it could do. He began rubbing it over his shorts, while I took his thumb. And then, after a short time, he reached under his shorts and started working himself. Faster and faster until an abrupt groan and stop. I wasn’t sure what happened but I was sure nonetheless. He jumped in the lake. Swam around for a minute. Then we sailed back. In silence. He never took me sailing again. Summary If a boy treats you like you’re special, it’s probably because he wants to come and not because you are a treasure he discovered. You are not a treasure. You are a thing a boy can use to make him ejaculate. This makes sense because you already believe this at your core. You have been taught. Points: two. I loved playing arcade games. My brothers and I would spend our allowances at the mall arcade every week. I was a pro at Donkey Kong. But not on this day. On this day, I had the best game of Galaga ever. Preteen or so, I plugged my quarters in and started killing the insect aliens. As was typical back then, to claim “next game” you’d put your quarter onto the top ledge of the machine, stand behind the current player, wait. So it wasn’t alarming at first, having a body behind me. Not at first. But shortly after I cleared level one, that body got close. Really close. Something hard was pressing into my rear. A constant, noticeable pressure. I thought, maybe the guy – because it was a guy – had bought something at the mall, something long that would stick out of a bag that he might be holding at his side; a roll of wrapping paper or a poster. I wasn’t sure, but these were the first things that came to mind. I kept shooting the alien insects. The hard pressing into my ass continued. My shooting continued. And then he put his arm up onto the top of the machine and suddenly his entire body was curved against mine and I instantly knew what was not pressing into me. It was not a poster. It was not wrapping paper. I looked to my right, tried to turn to look at him but his arm had me locked in. He was too close for me to see his face. What I saw instead was an Asian boy standing about 10 feet away, staring at us. I thought to myself, What must this look like? Where are my brothers? Why is nobody seeing I need help? I played the game. While he rubbed against me. Level after level. While he rubbed against me. I was having the best game of my life. While he rubbed against me. I couldn’t die. While he rubbed against me. I got extra lives. While he rubbed against me. My score went up, up, up. While he rubbed against me. All I wanted was the insect aliens to kill me. While he rubbed against me. All I wanted was for my brothers to see me and know and help. While he rubbed against me. I was frozen, heartbeat ballistic, petrified, body-betrayed once more. While he rubbed against me I did nothing. Eventually, my game ended. I remember sort of shoulder rolling him off me, angry, and his face, smiling. Just to be ultrasure I glanced down. No shopping bag. I bolted out of the arcade. My brothers were nowhere to be found and I was glad then that they hadn’t seen. Summary You could’ve left but you stayed. You wanted it and he knew. The ways we turn the gun to our own temple. Points: 4 Up until I was 15, I never had a boyfriend. Plain, chubby girls don’t get boyfriends. But my blond, cute, busty best friend had no problem getting boyfriends. She was two years older than me. Not the brightest girl, she’d been held back in school a couple times and that’s how we ended up being friends. Her high school boyfriend Mike drove a Camaro. I’d frequently be the third wheel when we’d drive around to various hidden spots to smoke weed or drink, sometimes drive into San Francisco, drunk walk down Broadway, sneak into the sex shops and peep show and porn booths. It all felt very reckless, and it was. But they were older and cooler and I was just an uncool freshman. Sometimes Mike would bring one of his friends. They were usually around his same age, 17. Stoners mostly. Long hair, derby jackets, Ronnie James Dio and Black Sabbath lovers. Sometimes when we’d go drive, park and party, my friend and Mike would go into the car to make out and I would be left with whichever friend had come. One time Mike brought an older friend. He was dark and fat and had a mustache. Even now I’m not sure how old he was. He could’ve been 21, 32, 40. All I know is I will never forget that mustache. This time, Mike and my friend left him and me in the car to go do whatever they were going to do. We were in the backseat and … Summary Men are strong. Also, see lesson summaries 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. Points: 8 TOTAL SCORE: 17? The ways we are taught to be a girl are many. These were my biggest lessons. The smaller ones aren’t worth writing about but they add up; the “sit on my lap uncle” who nuzzles your neck and won’t let you down, calls his mustache “a caterpillar” – “Doesn’t it tickle?” – the bouncer who frisks you slow and long and between your legs in a dark hallway when your group has already gone ahead into the club, the “Fuck you dumb bitch” when you tell him no, he can’t get what he wants, the drunk stranger guy a drunk you is chatting and laughing with who suddenly dives into your mouth with his because being friendly is an invitation, the guy after guy after guy who grinds his dick in your ass when you are dancing with your girlfriends. What. He. Wants. My score is low compared to some and high compared to others. The harder the lesson, the higher the points. Some girls would kill for my score. This is why I don’t talk about my score. I got off easy. I legitimately think: “I got off easy.” I didn’t get raped, my dad didn’t finger me, my cousin didn’t make me suck his dick, nobody ass-fucked me while I was passed out at a frat party. I got fondled, at best. Not that bad, right? Lucky, right? Right. Exactly. This is what I’m saying. I got off easy. Why even write this essay? Until I became a seasoned adult, I thought this was a normal part of growing up as a girl. Weird shit with boys/men happens to you. Look at all the times it happened to me so, obviously, it’s just how it is in life, like flat tires, running out of gas, getting a traffic ticket, spraining an ankle, etc. It’s fucked up, but it happens and you just deal with it. Move on. But as I matured and met other women, looked back on my life, I realized it’s not normal. It’s the exception. It’s not “what you get” for being a girl. It’s what you get for not having vigilant parents. It’s what you get for not knowing how to defend yourself. It’s what you get for being young, innocent and scared. It’s what you get when you are unsupervised and stupid. Most of all, it’s what you get when men decide to take it from you, regardless of what you want. If all these boys, these men, had chosen to treat me as more than “thing”, my scorecard would be empty right now. None of this was supposed to happen. Didn’t have to happen. I wasn’t supposed to have a score. None of us were.