At the supermarket, in the local pub and simply walking down the street. Everywhere he goes Jonny Brownlee is reminded of the time his big brother, Alistair, rescued him after a dramatic collapse during a 2016 race in Mexico. However, it transpires there is a physical memento, too. A shotgun Jonny bought as a present to thank his sibling for an act of selflessness that has become intertwined in their story as much as any of the four Olympic medals and 10 world titles they have between them. It is 18 months since footage of Alistair stopping to help a stricken Jonny and all but carrying him for almost 1km before throwing him over the finish line became a viral hit online, the clip viewed by millions. People who had never heard of the Brownlees before, let alone the world triathlon series finale, were captivated by a public display of brotherly devotion, with Alistair sacrificing his own race to assist Jonny. Alistair, who abandoned a medical degree at the University of Cambridge to concentrate on triathlon, recognised the seriousness of the situation as Jonny succumbed to heat exhaustion in the punishing Mexican sunshine. After Jonny was discharged from hospital, he presented Alistair with what some might regard as an unusual gift. “He’s had to be reminded of it every time that we go to buy a cup of tea or lunch,” Alistair Brownlee says. “Every time I run out of money at the cafe stop on the bike ride, it’s his turn. But he did buy me a present. A shotgun, actually.” It is little known by the wider public but the brothers, who live less than a mile apart in the rolling green hills north of Leeds, have a love of shooting encouraged by the Olympic champion shooter Peter Wilson. “We’re good friends with Peter,” Alistair says. “We’ve got a trap in the garden and we do a bit of shooting, so the shotgun, it’s just a nice thing to have.” Who is better? “Me, of course,” says Alistair, whose ruthless competitiveness clearly extends to leisure pursuits as well as elite sport. Brownlee has been chosen by his peers to be the flag bearer for Team England at the Commonwealth Games, which begin on Australia’s Gold Coast on Wednesday. The buildup to the Games has been darkened by the discovery of needles at the accommodation of the Indian team at the athletes’ village. The team’s doctor was later “strongly reprimanded” by the Commonwealth Games Federation for breaching the no-needle policy. However, Brownlee was reassured by the fact that punishment had been meted out and he believes that on the anti-doping regime’s sliding scale this sits closer to the bottom end. “In some ways it’s a pessimistic way to look at it and in some ways it’s optimistic but we’re not talking about them having to be withdrawn from a Games the day before because they found blood bags and they’re blood doping,” he says. “We’re talking about needles on the floor and if you look at it like that it’s actually really comforting.” Brownlee views the latest drugs storm surrounding Team Sky, with whom he trained very briefly in 2013, through the same prism. A report by the digital, culture, media and sport (DCMS) select committee judged that Team Sky used performance-enhancing drugs under the guise of treating a legitimate medical condition in order to win the 2012 Tour de France. The MPs concluded the team, including Bradley Wiggins, abused the therapeutic use exemption system. Meanwhile, Chris Froome is contesting an adverse analytical finding for salbutamol. “By the same moral argument it is a comfort,” Brownlee says, “We’re not talking about a Lance Armstrong-style, fully worked-out team plan to cheat. Whatever’s been going on – and I don’t really know the ins and outs of it – an inhaler is a long way off from what was happening before. But cheating’s cheating and if it’s judged as that, that’s what it is, so I’ll be watching that story with interest.”