It would have required a heart of stone not to be delighted by the mood at Tuesday’s unveiling in Parliament Square. Never before has there been a statue of a woman in the square that sits at the heart of British government. Now there is one, and of an indisputably suitable candidate, the 19th- and 20th-century women’s suffrage campaigner Millicent Fawcett. The formal unveiling was a celebratory occasion, and for good reason. Everyone present was in politically ecumenical good humour. Songs were sung and poems were read. Theresa May spoke about the path that Fawcett – who lived to see votes for women become the law of the land when she was in her 80s – had cleared with her campaigning. Jeremy Corbyn sang along to the words of Ethel Smyth’s March of the Women. Women MPs of all parties queued to have their photos taken in front of the statue. It was a privilege to be there. But Parliament Square is an odd place. It was not until the 21st century that the arrival of the supreme court on its west side – joining parliament, the Treasury and the established church on the other three – completed the constitutional quadrilateral by which it is now surrounded. It’s only recently that it has begun to acquire the status of an unofficial sacred national field, which previously belonged to Trafalgar Square. Yet there is still something low-key and agreeably unplanned about the place. Its messy lack of pretension is its saving grace. Until the end of the first world war the statues in the square were not just all of men but all of Victorian prime ministers, and all but one was a Conservative. The greatest Victorian politician of them all, the Liberal William Gladstone, was banished a mile away to the Strand. But then Abraham Lincoln arrived in 1920, followed rather inappropriately by Jan Christian Smuts after the second world war. Churchill claimed an inevitable place in the 1970s, and then Nelson Mandela and Mahatma Gandhi. The first Liberal, Lloyd George, only got a plinth in 2007. Fawcett now makes that two Liberals. There has never been a Labour statue in the square. Nor a Scot. Nor anyone from Ireland. The 12 statues previously in Parliament Square – make that 13 if you count Oliver Cromwell, over behind the parliamentary railings – are nobody’s UK historical first team squad. There’s no Robert Walpole, no William Pitt or Charles Fox, no Gladstone, no Charles Bradlaugh, no Charles Parnell, no Ramsay MacDonald or Clement Attlee and – still the most sensitive of all these days – no Margaret Thatcher. There was a lot of talk on Tuesday about the need for more statues of women. Corbyn said there should be more women statues. Harriet Harman suggested that all the current male statues should be replaced for a while by all women. The male statues would be carted off to some temporary home, she suggested, perhaps like those strange scrapyards for Lenin and Stalin statues in Russia, or the one outside Delhi for rulers of the Raj that David Cannadine described in an essay called “Where statues go to die”. It is beyond dispute that women are very poorly represented among the statuary in Parliament Square – and in statuary in general. Yet, for all my genuine devotion to Harman, hers is a bad idea. For what we need in Parliament Square and elsewhere is not more statues. What we need is fewer statues. We could start by retiring Smuts, the Earl of Derby and George Canning from the square and giving them fresh views of London. Statues are scattered around cities as expressions of power, not of popular approval or worth. The oldest statues in London are of monarchs: they are there solely because they wore the crown. The oldest one in London in English Heritage’s collection is the 1633 equestrian statue of Charles I, which looks down from the northern end of Whitehall towards the site of his execution in 1649. It is not there because Charles I was a great man. He was the very opposite. It is there because his side won in the end, more’s the pity. The Donald Trump Memorial, anyone? The Tony Blair statue? The arrival of Gillian Wearing’s statue in Parliament Square is to some extent, of course, a redressing of power. Its symbolism is immense and potent. It defies the male tradition, necessarily and splendidly so. But the last thing we need is a 21st-century statuary race. We don’t need one side in the political argument pushing its candidates on to plinths, convinced of their virtues, to be followed a few years later by another bunch of statues of alternative icons from the other side with equal self-righteousness. This is a real danger. It is exactly what has happened in the US, where the late 20th-century Republican cult of Ronald Reagan was ruthlessly used to force Washington DC and other cities to install Reagan memorials and to rename buildings and streets after the cheery old apostle of small government and low taxes. The Mall in Washington – a huge open space stretching from Capitol Hill to the Potomac river – has long been a political battleground of this kind. In the past, America was sensible enough to allow nearly half a century to pass after the death of its presidents before agreeing to commemorate them in stone or bronze. But the entrenchment of embittered politics now threatens that civic consensus tradition. The Donald Trump memorial, anyone? The Tony Blair statue? Earlier generations have left their mark in our cities with many memorials of their own values, venerations and heroes. But this does not mean that we should either destroy all their choices or replace them with our own. This is particularly apposite for modern Britain. With occasional exceptions such as Nelson and Churchill, who both saved the country from invasion, after all – and even they are not universally admired – the fact is that we don’t have a shared view of British history. We have contested and complicated views. Think Cromwell or Thatcher. Statues help to perpetuate that. It is not as though the statues themselves are very impressive works of art. The UK should have an entirely different approach to pluralistic memorialisation, designed to bring people together not emphasise their differences. First, no more statues, and instead a lot more high-quality public art in places such as Parliament Square. Second, a limited number of appropriate memorials to things that genuinely need commemorating (in other words, no more tacky Michael Ashcroft-financed memorials to other people’s bravery and sacrifice in the second world war). And third, most important of all, an open-ended, open-minded, tolerant and questioning museum of the history of the British Isles, learning from the admirable museum of German history in Berlin, multi-centred and with an educative online presence. Britain does not need more statues. Statues don’t tell us what is right and wrong. • Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnist