The cabinet today unanimously backed Theresa May’s warning that Syria’s use of chemical weapons could not go unchallenged, leaving the way open for British participation in military action against Bashar al-Assad’s regime. Downing Street said senior ministers had agreed it was “highly likely” that the Syrian government was responsible for the “shocking and barbaric” gas attack on the rebel-held town of Douma, which killed up to 75 people. At a two-hour meeting, the cabinet backed plans to take further action – along with the United States and France – to prevent Assad’s forces from ever launching such an “appalling and inhumane” onslaught again. Cabinet ministers emerged tight-lipped from the unusually long meeting as No 10 awaited the next move from the White House, where Donald Trump convened a meeting of his own national security council. High-level discussions between the UK and the US were likely to continue late into the night. May is also expected to speak directly to Trump at some point about the next steps to take against Syria. The prime minister is thought to be unlikely to consult parliament ahead of any coordinated military action. However, the cabinet’s backing could give her the political cover to take further action. A Downing Street spokesman said: “Cabinet agreed that the Assad regime has a track record of the use of chemical weapons and it is highly likely that the regime is responsible for Saturday’s attack. Cabinet agreed it was vital that the use of chemical weapons did not go unchallenged. “[They] agreed on the need to take action to alleviate humanitarian distress and to deter the further use of chemical weapons by the Assad regime. Cabinet agreed the prime minister should continue to work with allies in the United States and France to coordinate an international response.” The US defence secretary, James Mattis, has said Washington is still looking for evidence on who carried out Saturday’s chemical weapons attack in Damascus and said his main concern about a military response was how to stop it “escalating out of control”. However, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, said on Thurday that his government had “evidence” that Assad’s government was responsible. Earlier, Brexit secretary David Davis said he expected the cabinet to be provided with evidence showing that the Syrian regime was behind the attack, and also that the prime minister would set out a properly “thought-through” plan. Davis, who voted against military action against the Assad regime in 2013, added: “The situation in Syria is horrific – the use of chemical weapons is something the world has to prevent. We of all countries in the world, after the Skripal affair, have perhaps the most immediate knowledge of it apart from the Syrians themselves. We’ve got very delicate circumstances and we’ve got to make a judgment on a very careful, very well-thought-out, well-thought-through basis.” The foreign secretary, Boris Johnson, withdrew from a press conference in Oxford with his German counterpart, Heiko Maas, to attend the emergency cabinet, instead meeting him briefly at Heathrow. Speaking afterwards, Maas said Germany would like to see a political solution to the conflict that involved continuing to engage with Russia. Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn, who is expected to oppose military action, said: “More bombing, more killing, more war will not save life. It will just take more lives and spawn the war elsewhere.” On Thursday, May was also given the backing of her most influential foreign policy backbencher, Tom Tugendhat, to take part in any western strike against Syria without a Commons mandate.