Tony Richardson, the director, made it fun for everybody on set. I remember the props man was so thrilled to be working there that on the first day he went out and got drunk. My character Jo, with her innocence, toughness and cheek, was richly written by Shelagh Delaney. You can spot her in an early scene – she’s the tall lady watching the girls play basketball. My only acting experience had been as the back legs of a horse for the Liverpool Playhouse. I honestly don’t know what landed me the lead part. I think they were after an unknown, someone you wouldn’t associate with other roles. But it says much about Tony that he brought in people like me who wouldn’t usually have been considered for a movie. I was given freedom to express myself. In the classroom scene where I’m misbehaving, Tony just said: “Do what you want.” It helped that I was near Jo’s age. There’s this sort of jump-cut to my eyes when I realise the teacher has caught me. It’s one of those moments where, thanks to brilliant editing, there’s no need to say anything. I was happy with the un-made-up look. I suppose it was shocking, coming after the chocolate box 1950s, to have a female lead presented in such a raw way, but audiences identified with Jo. It was also controversial to depict a relationship between a white girl and a black guy, played by Paul Danquah, who I became great friends with. You can see it in the way we improvise that scene on the steps, where he pretends to play the bongo and I do a little dance. I’d never been in front of a camera before but didn’t feel inhibited at all. Murray Melvin had already played Geoffrey, the gentle homosexual, on the stage. He taught me so much about preparation and relaxing. His is the character your heart bleeds for, whereas Jo and her mother, unusually for the time, are presented as two females with a certain power. Whenever there is a problem, they go in with all guns blazing. I’d been working in a stuffy, studio-bound atmosphere making films by numbers for Pinewood. Tony was such a refreshing contrast: a follower of the French new wave who gave us artistic freedom. The decision to shoot the film entirely out of the studio was radical for the time, but Tony loved being different. And I was his right-hand man. Because of its realistic style, A Taste of Honey was sneeringly called a kitchen-sink drama. Yet the film has great lyricism, making beautiful use of locations in Salford found by our art director, Ralph Brinton. There’s one scene where a heavily pregnant Jo walks with Geoffrey along the canal. Tony had this idea of having a singing, wandering band of children passing them. It’s a moment of pure cinema and typically Tony. We used Arriflex handheld cameras a lot. I had form on that as I’d been in the Army film unit for three years during the second world war, shooting in near battlefield conditions. Their use is especially noticeable in the scenes on Blackpool Pier, where heavy camera tracks weren’t feasible. Shooting in black and white was a financial decision: colour was expensive. And the Eastman colour stock was slow and needed heavy lighting units, unlike black-and-white high-speed film, which was ideal for the poor lighting conditions we were often filming in. Rita was an incredible actress with very expressive eyes – just a bit of emotion would flicker over her face and convey so much. My heart turns over a little when I watch the film now: so many of the crew and cast have gone. But the film was way ahead of its time and still looks modern today. • A Taste of Honey is part of the Woodfall Films season at BFI Southbank, London, this month. The box set Woodfall: A Revolution in British Cinema is out on 28 May.