Late-night hosts discussed the strange relationship between Kanye West and Donald Trump after the rapper posted a series of tweets supporting the president. On The Late Show, Stephen Colbert picked out one of Kanye’s tweets in which he posted a signed Make America Great Again hat with 30 fire emojis. “Now that is fitting because that is how many times I would set that hat on fire,” he said. Colbert continued: “I think Kanye is lobbying for a job as Trump’s new communications director. He could just change his name to Kellyanne Kanye.” In one of his tweets, Kanye stated that his support for the president was warranted as he has the right to independent thought like anyone else. “Yes, we have the right to independent thought and I independently think Kanye has lost his mind,” Colbert said. Kanye also referred to Trump as his brother. “You know what, Kanye?” he said. “Donald Trump is your brother and I am your brother too and brother to brother, I just want to say ‘put the phone down’.” Trump also responded to one of Kanye’s tweets later in the day. “I assume because an alarm went off in the White House that someone on Twitter was being crazier than him,” he said. “Yes, it is a total bro fest. Look for their new album Yeezy & Sleazy.” Tonight at 11/10c, Kanye doubles down on his support for Donald Trump. pic.twitter.com/kbfpGm3ZlE On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah also discussed Kanye’s tweets. “I don’t even know what happened here,” he said. “Did Kanye West just realize he’s too rich not to be a Republican?” He also worried about the reaction on Fox News, where the hosts regularly criticize celebrities who get involved in politics. “You know that this is also going to confuse people on Fox News,” he said. “They’re probably going to be like ‘Why don’t these celebrity rap thugs stay out of politics, sorry I mean this guy understands the American people.’” Noah found it particularly confusing given Kanye’s previous attack on the last Republican president. “You know what’s crazy is that Kanye is the same guy who said George Bush hates black people,” he said. “But he’s the same guy who loves Trump. When Bush sees this on Twitter, he’s going to be like ‘What the fuck?’” On Full Frontal, Samantha Bee spoke about Steve Bannon’s recent series of appearances around Europe, working with various far-right parties. “I assume he stayed in the hostel from the movie Hostel,” she said. Bannon’s rhetoric remains unchanged as he pushes his message of white supremacy around the world. “It’s hard to believe someone can think their DNA is superior when they’re basically a less handsome version of Krang from the Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles,” she said. She also spoke about the role Breitbart allegedly had to play in causing Brexit. “Bannon was instrumental in dissolving England’s place in the EU,” she said. “Just like his hot tub full of acid was instrumental in dissolving Reince Preibus.” She continued: “Bannon’s presence in Europe should scare you. Not just because he looks shockingly close to Jeff Goldblum as he transforms into The Fly but also because he’s really good at transforming countries to conform to his far-right hyper-nationalist vision.”