The spokesman who lied about Republican congressman Greg Gianforte’s assault of Guardian journalist Ben Jacobs has been hired in a new campaign role. Shane Scanlon was named communications director for Matt Rosendale, a candidate for the Republican nomination in the Montana Senate race. Scanlon previously served as Gianforte’s campaign spokesman and drew widespread criticism for putting out a false statement that blamed Jacobs for the attack. Gianforte body-slammed and punched Jacobs on the eve of the Montana special election in May 2017, after the political reporter tried to question the candidate on healthcare. In response to Jacobs’ disclosure that the assault had happened, Scanlon issued a statement falsely suggesting that Jacobs initiated the altercation with Gianforte. “It’s unfortunate that this aggressive behavior from a liberal journalist created this scene,” Scanlon said at the time. In audio of the incident, however, Gianforte could be heard screaming at Jacobs, who reported the incident to police. A Fox News crew who witnessed the assault also corroborated Jacobs’ account. Gianforte also misled police about the incident. He claimed “liberal media … is trying to make a story” before leaving the scene. The Republican won the special election the following day and only then apologized to Jacobs and acknowledged he was in fact to blame. Gianforte later pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor assault charge. He was sentenced in June to 40 hours of community service and 20 hours of anger management classes and was ordered to pay a $385 fine. He also donated $50,000 to the Committee to Protect Journalists to avoid a civil suit from Jacobs for assault and defamation. Gianforte also sent a letter of apology to Jacobs, but has declined repeated requests to sit down with the reporter despite promising during the court hearing that he would commit to an interview. Scanlon has yet to retract his false statement although Gianforte stated in his letter: “Notwithstanding anyone’s statements to the contrary, you [Jacobs] did not initiate any physical contact with me, and I had no right to assault you.”  Rosendale is running in Montana’s 5 June primary against fellow Republicans Russell Fagg and Troy Downing for the seat currently held by incumbent Democrat Jon Tester.