It might have been meant as a love letter to Europe, but commuters and passersby are projecting their own feelings on to Tracey Emin’s latest artwork, the 20-metre pink neon text emblazoned across St Pancras International station that reads: “I want my time with you”. Behind it, Paul Day’s bronze statue of two lovers embracing and the large Dent clock that ticks on, a constant reminder of the frailty of time. “It made me think of one of my friends, mainly because his mum passed away and it just made me think of that for some reason, I don’t know why,” said Alice, a 21-year-old estate agent. “It’s quite emotional.” “I think [the message] is appropriate for a station and for life in general, if you think about your priorities and who you want to be with. I want my time with you. You is who?” said Jasmine Eudin, 66, an acupuncturist. Speaking about her artwork, Emin said she was “deeply concerned” about Europe and that in a year’s time “we’re going to be a tiny little island just floating around in the North Sea”. Her hope is that the thousands of travellers arriving and departing every day by Eurostar will read her words and feel a little happier. “The colours do make me feel happy,” said Jeff, 72. “Anything that uplifts you in a time of transit is a nice thing. It’s the same message as the lovers kissing, whether that’s one of leaving or arriving.” “I work on the high-speed trains so I see it every day,” said David Ford, who had brought his wife and son to see the artwork. “I come up here for a break sometimes, away from the hustle and bustle of the station. “I wouldn’t say it makes me happy, but I can see why she’s done it. It’s almost a subliminal message: it’s not in your face. It’s a modern version of the lovers kissing. It makes people think, which isn’t a bad thing.” The light work is a commission from the station owner and the Royal Academy, and will be seen by an estimated 50 million travellers over the year. Emin said the sentence had come straight into her mind, but it had taken a year to create the largest so far of what have become trademark works spelling out her texts in her handwriting. Critics’ reviews have been mixed, with the Telegraph calling it “as garish as ever” and the Independent “lame and unlovely”. But inside the grand 19th-century station the feedback was largely positive. “I think it’s just striking and beautiful and it stimulates my imagination,” said JJ Weller, a photographer in his 60s, who called it “a great piece of art”. “Like all good messages there’s an immediate response and one that takes longer to consider and think about. It works on lots of different levels. And I would love to have more time to see it from lots of different angles and perspectives. Our first glance was from downstairs and we were just captivated.” Anne Wilkinson, a former teacher, said she “totally agreed” with the statement. “I do not want to leave Europe. It’s one of those things that has got more than one meaning really,” she said. With her was Alan Wilkinson, an employee at Citizens Advice who called it “simple but profound … which is often the best way with art. You just put the layers of meaning on that you want. There’s no right answer is there?” “It makes me smile, that’s all,” said Mike Sherwood as he sat with friends metres from a sculpture of Sir John Betjeman, the man responsible for saving the station and chambers from demolition in the 1960s. Around the base of Betjeman’s statue are lines from his poems, including: “And in the shadowless unclouded glare / Deep blue above us fades to whiteness where / A misty sea-line meets the wash of air.” “It’s just showing people love,” observed Jia Liu, a writer for BBC China.