“A girl, ladies and gentlemen! A bit of a girl clutching the neck of a bandy-legged outsider streaked across the line to win the greatest race in turfdom! A girl wins the Grand National!” Thus gabbles the radio commentator in the 1944 film National Velvet, heralding the success of a character played by Elizabeth Taylor. Three parts of a century have since rolled by and horse racing reporters are still waiting for their chance to trumpet such a line for real, hopefully without the patronising diminutive. But perhaps the moment is finally at hand because Saturday’s race will feature an almost unprecedented three female jockeys. They have not been booked for outsiders, bandy-legged or otherwise; their horses feature in the top half of the betting. Nor are they unknown teenagers, like Taylor’s character, but established riders of proven talent. On his way to Aintree on Thursday, the Telegraph’s man tweeted a picture of Enid Bagnold’s novel that was the source for National Velvet and asked: “Is this the most relevant form book for this year’s race?” Bagnold’s heroine, the strong-willed Velvet Brown with her uncanny empathy for a horse, is arguably a pallid creation by comparison with the effervescent Bryony Frost, who will take her first tilt at the National aboard Milansbar. Frost, a self-described “Devon dumpling” and the daughter of a National-winning rider, had a donkey for a babysitter from the age of two and used to fall asleep on his back. She was in pony races from the age of nine. If ever a person was born and raised to be a steeplechase jockey, she was. She will be joined in Saturday’s lineup by Rachael Blackmore, only the second female professional jockey in the history of Irish jump racing, and Katie Walsh, whose third place in the 2012 National is the best result achieved by a woman. Those coincidence backers annually drawn to the National may like to know that Walsh’s mount, Baie Des Iles, will carry the same saddle-cloth number (28) as did Taylor’s in the movie. These girls are a hell of a lot better than we were in my day. They're streets better The no-nonsense Walsh will surely take no interest in such a detail. Asked if this is a significant moment, she underlines the importance of opportunity. “The reality of it is that I’m riding for my husband. And Rachael has an association with Gigginstown, owners of her horse. And Bryony is riding a horse she won on last time. “Next year, that might not be the case. I wouldn’t be riding in the National, if I wasn’t riding one for Ross.” Walsh was born into a racing family, which opened doors. She is well aware other talented jockeys, male and female, are less fortunate. “It’s just so competitive. It’s a very small, condensed sport and there’s only room for a handful of people at the top.” Only once before have three women ridden in the National, 30 years ago. Penny Ffitch-Heyes and Venetia Williams were thrilled to be in the lineup but both were on no-hopers, at odds of 100-1 and 200-1 respectively, and neither got beyond the sixth fence. Gee Armytage fared better on Gee-A, leading the field on the run down to the second Becher’s before her horse tired. Female participation in the National had become the norm, soon after Charlotte Brew was the trailblazer in 1977. Over the next 12 years, 11 different women had rides in the race. Since then, only four new names have been added to the list. While Walsh and her sister-in-law Nina Carberry have had 11 rides between them, no other woman has lined up since 2005. Where did all the female jump jockeys go? Some, including Armytage, have suggested trainers and owners were put off using women by a series of shocking injuries, including the death of Jayne Thompson at Catterick and the paralysis suffered by Sharron Murgatroyd and Jessica Charles-Jones in incidents at other tracks. Such things also happened to men, but female pain, according to the theory, was harder for some people to contemplate. That is not how Williams sees it, having had a long and successful career as a trainer. “I don’t think injuries are what put people off, really. Maybe that was the party line but we weren’t very good. End of. These girls are a hell of a lot better than we were in my day. “Gee Armytage might get a bit cross with me for saying that,” she adds, laughing, “but they’re streets better.” Thanks to the cumulative effect of Walsh, Carberry, Frost and Blackmore, it seems racing insiders are increasingly prepared to accept the right woman on the right horse can successfully fight her corner in any jumps race. Paul Nicholls, a former champion trainer, has given Frost a huge push. Gigginstown Stud, the dominant owner in Irish jumps racing, regularly employs female jockeys. There is still a widespread reluctance to accept that women can be as robust as men in coping with falls and recovering from injury. In February, Nicholls said of Frost: “I don’t think she wants to be getting loads of falls, she needs to be looked after a little bit. If she can pick and choose [her mounts], she can end up riding 50 winners a year, every year, for a good while and hopefully some good winners, that’s the thing.” Frost and Blackmore will inevitably, some day, get chances to prove how resilient they can be when injured. But when one reporter told Frost this week to “come back in one piece”, she just laughed. “I’m not worried about that,” she said. “Getting in the car is the most dangerous part of the day.”