A man wearing nothing but a coat stormed a Waffle House restaurant in Tennessee before dawn on Sunday and shot four people to death, according to police, who credited a customer with saving more lives by wrestling an assault rifle away from the gunman. The customer, James Shaw Jr, told the Tennessean newspaper he was “just trying to get myself out. I saw the opportunity and pretty much took it”. Metropolitan Nashville police department spokesman Don Aaron said three people died at the scene and one person died at Vanderbilt University Medical Center. Two other people were being treated there for gunshot wounds. Medical Center spokeswoman Jennifer Wetzel said one was in critical condition and the other was in critical but stable condition. The victims’ names were not immediately released. Police said authorities were searching for 29-year-old Travis Reinking of Morton, Illinois, who was named as a person of interest because the pickup truck the gunman used to drive to the restaurant was registered to him. Aaron said Reinking was known to law enforcement in Illinois and in the federal system, and said “person of interest” was “synonymous to suspect” in this case. Aaron said the gunman arrived at the restaurant, sat in the parking lot for four minutes and shot two people with an assault rifle. The gunman then went inside and continued firing. Shaw, 29, grabbed the rifle. “The shots had stopped so he decided to rush the gunman, actually wrestled that assault rifle away, tossed it over the counter and, at that point, the gunman fled,” Aaron said. “No doubt he saved many lives.” Aaron called Shaw a “hero”. Shaw told the Tennessean he was “just trying to get myself out. I saw the opportunity and pretty much took it”. The newspaper said Shaw was grazed by a bullet, treated and released. “When I was in the ambulance to hospital I kept thinking that I’m going to wake up and it’s not going to be real,” Shaw said. “It is something out a movie. I’m OK though, but I hate that it happened.” Some patrons suffered facial wounds from shattered glass. The suspect was wearing only a green jacket, which he shed after fleeing the restaurant. The jacket contained additional ammunition, police said. Aaron said the suspect lived at an apartment complex in the area and, based on witness reports, went there and put on a pair of pants. Aaron said witnesses then saw a man in a nearby wooded area, and police were still tracking the man hours after the 3.25am shooting. On Twitter, police said: “Murder warrants are now being drafted against Travis Reinking.” It was unclear if he had another weapon. Local media reported a second shooting nearby might be connected to the Waffle House incident. Nashville mayor David Briley said Sunday was “a tragic day” for the city, writing on Twitter: “My heart goes out to the families and friends of every person who was killed or wounded in this morning’s shooting. I know all of their lives will be forever changed by this devastating crime.” Jim Cooper, a Democratic US representative from Tennessee, issued a statement on Sunday in which he called for the restriction of “widespread civilian access to military-grade assault weapons”. A Waffle House spokesman did not immediately return a telephone message seeking comment.