Ray Wilkins, the former England midfielder, has died at the age of 61. Wilkins, whose clubs included Chelsea, Manchester United, Queens Park Rangers and Rangers in a 24-year playing career that spanned three decades, fell after suffering a cardiac arrest last month and had been in a critical condition in St George’s hospital, in Tooting, south-west London. “Everybody associated with Chelsea Football Club is devastated to learn of the passing of our former player, captain and assistant coach, Ray Wilkins. Rest in peace, Ray, you will be dreadfully missed,” the Premier League club said on Twitter. Everybody associated with Chelsea Football Club is devastated to learn of the passing of our former player, captain and assistant coach, Ray Wilkins. Rest in peace, Ray, you will be dreadfully missed. pic.twitter.com/cSDhloOPDZ The Professional Footballers’ Association added: “It is with great sadness and heavy hearts that we have learnt that former England midfielder Ray Wilkins has passed away, aged 61. The thoughts and condolences of everyone at the PFA are with his family and friends.” A winner of 84 England caps, Wilkins played at two World Cup finals. He became the fourth player sent off for England when he was dismissed during the 1986 World Cup in Mexico in a game against Morocco. We’re devastated to hear the news that Ray Wilkins has passed away at the age of 61. Wilkins made 84 appearances for the #ThreeLions, and was assistant manager of our Under-21s between 2004 and 2007. We will miss you, Ray. pic.twitter.com/kZJWipsvTq “I’m devastated to receive this sad news of my former team mate Ray Wilkins,” wrote former England goalkeeper Peter Shilton on Twitter. “A great footballer and well respected by the players rip a very sad day for me only laughing together a few weeks ago.” Rio Ferdinand added: “RIP Ray Wilkins Always so humble & softly spoken whenever I saw him. Genuine lovely guy. Watched him live at Loftus road many times for QPR. What a great passer & teacher of the game for any young kids who watched him.” Wilkins – known in the game by his childhood nickname “Butch” – played for 12 clubs and was on the coaching staff of several more, but is commonly associated with Chelsea. He started his career there and spent six years with the Blues, while also having numerous stints as assistant manager. On one occasion, he led the side on a caretaker basis. Wilkins also managed QPR, Fulham and Jordan, and had most recently been working as a pundit.