I created this image of a 1955 scene at Vancouver’s Hastings Park racing track in 2008. It was one of three shots of different crowds I planned in the run up to a bigger commission about the city’s 1971 Gastown riot. The images form a series entitled Crowds and Riots – from workers being unionised in the 1930s to police in the 1970s corralling protesters, they deal with the creation of a particular group. The Hastings Racecourse crowd were emblematic of the postwar period, when the advent of consumerism provided a way of rebuilding the economy. It showed the newly created middle class: people who were making things being able to buy those things, a sort of perpetual motion machine for capitalism. My work had mostly focused on landscapes and locations – settings where there was no particular action, though the possibility of action was always there. I hadn’t really photographed people at all. The Gastown project was going to cost about half a million dollars, so I needed to make sure I knew what I was doing. The scene was supposed to be a sunny one, the kind of soft, even light you get in Vancouver. On the day of the shoot, though, it was raining, so we had to have a big tarp over the top of everybody, then do the lighting in such a way that some were in sunshine and others in shadow. Oddly, the other shot we did that day was a street protest scene on a rainy day – and the sun came out. We had to use large flags to block out the sunlight. A lot of the 30-odd crew members were on costume and makeup because we had to dress and do hairstyling on so many people: the 1950s were a time when men wore hats and suits when out in public. Also known as Terminal City, Vancouver is at the end of the line. If you’re trying to get away from something, it’s the last place you can go. There was a tiny black population in the 50s. My father had emigrated from Tobago to Canada to go to university. So I had one person I imagined would be a Caribbean immigrant, and another an American immigrant, each with different outfits based on where they came from. Hastings Park wasn’t too far from Chinatown, so there’s an Asian person there, too. I told them all to root for their horses. But they were extras, not actors, and they didn't really do a good job We seated the performers on the kind of wooden benches they would have been sitting on and gave them exact facsimiles of the racing cards and magazines they would have bought. One performer rolled up theirs into a tube – we can’t see much of it, but that little trace tells the story of the whole. I began the shoot by telling the performers: “You’re rooting for your horses; watch the horses.” But because they were mostly extras, not actors, they didn’t do a great job. Then I noticed that what was happening between takes – the dynamics between individuals when they weren’t acting – was much more interesting. That was an important lesson for me about working with people: instead of asking them to pose, give them something to do. Exhibited, this photograph is about two metres wide. I had to shoot it in two parts – with several takes for each. It took about two and a half weeks of editing in Photoshop to make the final image. When a group like the one depicted here has a common purpose – watching the horses – they’re collectively doing one thing. But once that goal disappears – the race is over – they become individuals again. This image captured the moment when the group gave way to the individual. Some turn into themselves, others try to reach out and make contact with others. There’s the guy in the bottom left telling off-colour jokes, and the woman is clearly offended. There’s the man trying to pick up another woman in the foreground. The two guys who don’t have a prop looking over someone’s shoulder – it looks as if they’re looking at his racing form. I went on to develop ideas in this series further when I restaged images of the 2011 London riots in Hackney. Created in 2017, they depicted an altogether different group, created in a hugely different way to the passive consumerist collective of Hastings Park: the people who, after the 2008 recession, were left behind, and whose collective act of rebellion had no real aim other than to vent their rage. • Stan Douglas: DCTs and Scenes from the Blackout is at David Zwirner, New York, until 7 April. Born Vancouver, Canada, 1960. Influences “Samuel Beckett, especially for the aesthetic manifesto he wrote in the guise of an essay on Marcel Proust.” High point “Seeing my first play, Helen Lawrence, at the King’s Theatre during the 2014 Edinburgh festival.”Low point “Having to abandon the production of Alban Berg’s opera Lulu I was developing for Berlin’s MaerzMusik festival in 2005.”Top tip “Never pose a model. Give them something to do.”