By the time our dahabiya moored at Daraw, just north of the Aswan Dam, and we stepped down on to the bank, watched by a few idle cows, I was tiring of Agatha Christie. If you say you are going sailing up the Nile, everyone – absolutely everyone – cracks a gag about someone getting murdered. But gripping as it is, Death on the Nile isn’t a good book about Egypt. The river is only tangentially relevant to the story. As with all Christies, it could be anywhere. Like many a visitor to Egypt before us, we started with the pyramids of Giza. “They’re a bit of a tourist trap but they’ve got to be done,” a friend advised before I went. Standing in front of the Great Sphinx, with the pyramids looming behind, it was hard not to agree. Under the burning sun, the monuments, the sky, the sand and the yellow-brown admin buildings all seem to have been made from the same substance, as if the architecture were simply dusty air crystallised into solid form. In between bemoaning the number of her nation’s artefacts that reside in Bloomsbury, our guide astonished me with the fact that the period between the building of the Great Pyramid, the largest of the three structures, and Cleopatra’s reign was longer than that between the Egyptian queen’s reign and the present day. The pyramids were already an ancient attraction when the Romans arrived. Imagine Cleopatra and Caesar on tour in an open-topped barge, burnished like a throne, in 48BC. “They’re a bit of a tourist trap,” the queen would have said to the emperor. “But they’ve got to be done.” The irony is that Egypt’s ancient sites are rather less busy than they were. In recent years Egypt has fallen off the British tourist map, perhaps understandably. Flights to Sharm el-Sheikh from the UK have been banned since 2015, when a Russian charter flight was blown up on its way to St Petersburg. The Foreign Office advises that it’s now safe to visit sites along the Nile and tourists are slowly returning but the lower numbers, along with a depressed Egyptian pound (and presumably depressed owners of Egyptian pounds), mean it is a good time to visit, and hotels that might be out of reach are now extremely affordable. After two days in the city we took the sleeper train to Luxor. As on all sleeper trains, sleep was impossible. Strung-out at six in the morning, we left our bags at the Al-Moudira, a jewel-like hotel with cool courtyards and enormous, high-ceilinged bedrooms. You could easily spend a week here, lounging by the pool and drinking cold lager, but tombs and temples beckoned. The journey was the whole point. In the moments we weren’t eating, we lay on loungers & watched as palm trees slid past After a few hundred years of merry pyramid-building the pharaohs twigged that creating the largest monuments on Earth might not be the best way to disguise where they kept all their treasure. The tombs and the temples of Hatshepsut and Karnak are unassailable, but with so much history it’s easy to get punch-drunk without a proper guide. There is simply too much to take in. They are as overwhelming as Stonehenge, our closest equivalent, is underwhelming. At last we joined the boat that would be our home for the next four nights. Most cruises start in Esna, where the river opens out after a long and tedious series of locks, and head south to Aswan, where the Nile is dammed. Nile Sailing is run by Jane Irving, a Brit who has been in Egypt for 13 years, and her Egyptian husband. Broadly speaking, there are two types of Nile cruises: the standard variety, in which you are ferried in a kind of floating block of flats and disgorged en masse at the big sites down the river, and the quieter sort, where you rent either a cabin or, ideally, all of a traditional sailing boat, or dahabiya. Our own dahabiya slept 12, with six double cabins at the back of the boat, each with an en suite bathroom. Jane and the crew slept in the canopied wooden deck above, about the size of a tennis court. For £75 a night, it seemed impossibly luxurious. I wasn’t prepared for the food. Four times a day, including high tea, a stream of immaculate dishes were brought up from the kitchen of the chef, Mahmoud: omelettes and pancakes and fresh fruit for breakfast, then fresh bread, soups, baba ganoush, fattoush salads, grilled fish, goulash, tomatoes, piles of piquant chicken legs. On the third morning he was replaced by another chef, confusingly also called Mahmoud, whose food was still excellent but not quite the marvel of his predecessor. Perhaps too relaxed, we conjured jeopardy out of nothing. It is said there are no crocodiles left south of the Aswan dam but the cattle and donkeys grazing by the waterside looked like tempting prey. We read about bilharzia, the water-borne parasite apparently lying in wait to strike Nile swimmers, and gingerly stayed out of the river until Jane insisted that it was improper not to swim when it was 40 degrees. She was right. On the penultimate evening, a dust storm swept up the river and, for the first time, we ate indoors. The next morning we emerged to find the whole boat covered in a film of fine sand, like the surface of Mars, and the otherwise sleepy river whipped into little white peaks by the wind. There was hardly any wifi, nor much else to do bar read and talk. Four nights of nothing, like this, felt indulgent in a world of rushed weekend mini-breaks and frantic guidebook-chasing. The journey was the whole point. In the few moments we weren’t eating, we lay on loungers and watched as the 10ft reeds and palm trees and wide fields of watermelons slid past. Calls to prayer drifted from unseen minarets on both sides of the river. In time the image of the landscape, that strip of lush green between water and desert, bores into you. My friend John, who in recent years has quietly got into birding, whooped at pied kingfishers, hoopoes and purple herons. Ancient Egyptians revered birds, too: among the wall-to-wall hieroglyphs on the tombs we saw ducks, ibis, falcons, vultures and owls. They didn’t invent writing, but they were the first to realise its potential in exercising power. The hieroglyphs let the rulers of ancient Egypt control the population, protect the king’s authority, and keep records. Like Christie, they knew the power of a good story. EgyptAir flies from Heathrow to Cairo from £357 return. Sleeper trains from Cairo to Luxor cost from £55. Doubles at the Four Seasons Cairo First Residence from £155 a night, room only. Rooms at the Al-Moudira are available from £164 room only a night. A dahabiya from Nile Sailing is £75 a night based on 12 people sharing the boat