It’s Record Store Day on Saturday, a juggernaut that is still picking up pace in its 11th year, with many exclusive special-edition records released as a way to focus music fans’ attention on bricks and mortar. And now there’s a new way to take it all in: in the US, the Record Store Crawl initiative has been set up to explore the wealth of stores in each city. With RSD looming, we thought this could be a model for a survey of the health of record shops in British cities: so, four writers have gone round four cities with some of the UK’s most exciting new DJs and producers, picking out their ultimate record-shopping routes. In London, Debi Ghose – aka Debonair – seems at home in Low Company. Not only is it her local spot, in Hackney Downs, but “their selection is really close what I play, I trust their curation”. Her club and radio sets tend towards the 1980s experimentalism of post-punk, EBM and early house. The chipboard and white walls of Low Company are decorated with 80s industrial music art, its sections are called things like “Strange / Dream / Avant”, and Kenny, the crop-haired Scotsman behind the counter, is playing unwell-sounding outsider punk in between nipping outside for rollups. The shop clearly revels in being on the margins. Not only is it not participating in Record Store Day, it had considered not even opening on the day as it’s the business’s first birthday the day before and they’ll all be hungover. Debi buys a ticket for the birthday party, laughing with Kenny about how many “reprobate” mutual friends will be there. In the quarter-hour it takes us to stroll into bustling Dalston, Debi details her record shop history. At school in Leamington Spa, she “wasn’t a rebel, did well, but got bored and needed something more to focus on”. As a teenage Smashing Pumpkins and Joy Division fan, the local Fopp Records “was heaven to me”; at 15 she applied for a job there. She is endlessly thankful that the manager – a DJ known as The Lovely Helen, resident at Brum house institution Wobble – noted her enthusiasm and picked her over other (older, male, ostensibly more qualified) candidates. Behind the counter, she gained confidence talking about music, and expanded her own tastes dramatically: “I had disposable income and cheap records,” she laughs, “I bought so much!” We get to Eldica and are warmly greeted by Annie, who runs the place with her former rave producer husband Andy, and named it for her Trinidadian grandma. In contrast to Low Company’s austere hipness, it’s a piled-up Aladdin’s cave of second-hand vinyl, leaning heavily towards reggae, jazz and soul. “When I joined NTS Radio in 2011,” says Debi, referring to the taste-making online station, “it was great to have this place round the corner, as a connection to the older generation of music lovers already in Dalston. It’s a lovely spot, nothing’s overpriced, but you need three hours to properly dig here.” Sadly we don’t have that, as we need to get to Soho. After university, where she learned presenting and mixing on the uni radio station, Debi had a short stint working in an advertising agency. She was more interested in spending every lunchtime in Soho’s record shops, though, which didn’t go unnoticed: her leaving present from the agency was vouchers for Phonica. Phonica is now the West End’s main dance music hub; constant house music plays as established DJs try out 12-inches at the listening posts, and Debi reels off great “in-stores” she’s seen here as her own DJ career began. Nick, who serves us, is a DJ too and runs the well-regarded Meda Fury label; as Debi umms and ahhs over a Frankie Goes to Hollywood 12-inch, he shoves a fantastically weird new EP of Japanese electro-dub-folk songs and some Lyonnaise deep house into her listening pile, and passes me a moody electro 12-inch. He’s good: we buy all three, then walk a couple of minutes to Berwick Street, where Reckless hangs on in there, resisting gentrification, unlike most of that strip of secondhand-record shops. There’s no listening posts, only buying on spec, which Debi does often; I snap up a Planet Mu acid house record going super cheap. It’s quite a schlep to southeast London with the rush hour starting. (We’re glad at this point that we left Notting Hill’s Honest Jon’s, and Debi’s very favourite shop, Alan’s in East Finchley, off our itinerary.) Sadly, Rat Records in Camberwell is closing as we arrive. So after briefly pressing our noses against the window like kids at a sweetshop, as Debi describes it – “just a really classic record shop, which was my regular place to go when I lived in Brixton” – we get a 171 bus five minutes down the road to Peckham. There’s no fear of Rye Wax being shut, mind. In the basement of Rye Lane’s vast Bussey Building – where grubby raving spaces sit alongside African churches, community groups and yoga studios – it’s also a bar and music venue, open late every night. A DJ is playing Latin jazz as we arrive. “It’s the perfect model of how a shop can be a real hub,” Debi says. “It’s not just a venue, but somewhere I’m guaranteed to meet other DJs and people I know.” Sure enough, it’s buzzing; as Debi chats and browses, owner Tom tells me how they’re bypassing RSD releases and instead cutting their own single-copy dubplates. Once Debi has found an intriguing compilation of 80s Catalan DIY rarities, we settle down at a table for a drink, musing on what it must have been like for experimental Spanish musicians under Franco, and taking stock of our day. “It’s hard to know what will happen to record shops,” says Debi. “They’re never going to be what they were before downloading. But if they can turn into places like this, I’m happy!” Joe Muggs “This is proper Bristol weather,” grins Omar McCutcheon, the latest star in the city’s long history of experimental dance music. The drizzle is unrelenting as we pace around the Stokes Croft area on our record store crawl, but even though it’s overcast, this cultural nerve centre vividly compensates. Lurid murals loom over the urban sprawl; terraced houses are painted in fuschia and lavender. Every other shop is a quirky bar, vegan cafe or vintage clothing emporium. “You’re always getting creative stimulation in Bristol,” says McCutcheon. Under the moniker Batu, the 24-year-old is the next in a long line of Bristol musicians who create new forms from low-end frequencies: his mentors Pinch and Peverelist helped pioneer dubstep’s deep dive into techno in the mid-2000s, followed by the latter’s cutting-edge collective Livity Sound, and now Batu has taken the baton and is veering off in an even more abstract direction. With his label and night Timedance, he pairs sound-system culture with techno to create sculptural club punishers that fizz with lambent ideas and curious samples, as do the young local artists he releases such as Bruce, Ploy, Lurka and Giant Swan. Idle Hands is the shop where the city’s new wave congregates. It’s a no-frills dance music specialist run by Chris Farrell, with well-curated racks of new 12-inches spanning the UK underground. “It’s very important to me – a meeting spot, a hub of Bristol music,” says McCutcheon as he spots an old Bass Clef tune he’s been after for ages and locks straight into some headphones. Idle Hands is one of the new boutique record shops that have sprung up here in the past few years, after a wave of closures. Farrell says Record Store Day doesn’t make much of a difference to the shop in terms of sales, but because all the pressing plants are booked up with limited edition novelty items such as translucent green vinyl Doctor Who soundtracks, new stock doesn’t come through as readily in the weeks leading up to it. McCutcheon still finds a wedge of vinyl he wants, including a compilation of early experiments by Japanese musician Kuniyuki Takahashi, which recently came out on a leftfield label he admires, Music from Memory. McCutcheon is relatively new to the city, having moved here four years ago from Oxfordshire for the creative music technology course at Bath Spa University (“dubstep finishing school”, Farrell quips). His growing touring schedule means he doesn’t get as much time to shop locally as he’d like. Which may explain why we can’t seem to find next stop The Centre for Better Grooves. It was started by the founder of budget music chain Fopp but is, in contrast, “a wallet beater”, jokes McCutcheon. We pass Elevator Sound, a sleek shrine to modular synths, and bump into a postman who is by night a psychedelic DJ and points us in the right direction. Soon we are riffling through a luxurious number of jazz reissues with cosmic covers. Past a pair of congas, there’s a sizeable vintage rock section, but McCutcheon is less interested in that. “I’m more of a sound than a songs person,” he says, eyeing up a selection labelled “FX” that is ripe for sampling. Next we head to Wanted’s tiny record trailer, down a cobbled path in St Nick’s Market. McCutcheon immediately makes a beeline for the dancehall crates, and waxes lyrical over the Greensleeves Rhythm Album series, one of the longest-running of its kind, where various artists interpret the same rhythm. He has also recently been collecting reggae and dub 45s, the hub for which is Payback, around the corner. Paul Craine has been running this fir-green stall for 20 years and it’s where you can find Prince Buster 7-inches for £1, or more contemporary roots releases from Protoje or Chronixx. Payback is a window into the origins of Bristol’s obsession with making music so deep it can rattle your ribcage. The area’s African Caribbean sound-system heritage has laid the foundation for the subsequent genres of weighty, deep electronic music that have come through its streets: trip-hop, jungle, dubstep. For McCutcheon, that culture is also “integral to my identity. Living here, having family of Caribbean descent and growing up with reggae – all these ideas link back to where I see myself in the world.” No matter what record shop you’re in or producer you talk to, bass, says McCutcheon, is what unites the city: “It’s so ingrained in everything.” Kate Hutchinson “Technooooo,” comes the jovial response from Henrietta Smith-Rolla when asked what section she gravitates towards in a record shop. “Always the techno section. I never go in with any idea of what I want to buy. I like not knowing.” Over coffee in Eastern Bloc, a cafe, venue and record shop in Manchester’s Northern Quarter, the hiss of the coffee machine whistles above the thudding techno pulsing from the speakers. “I’ve been doing music for over a decade but I didn’t know this was in me,” the 37-year-old says about Afrodeutsche, a project born two years ago whilst searching for her father. She learned that her Ghanaian roots also stretched into Russia and Germany, and thus found herself with a newfound identity and family history. The name, translating as African-German, was an epiphany that linked to the already eclectic music she was creating. “I just had this huge connection to it straight away. I never expected to realise myself artistically in this world.” Afrodeutsche blends techno, house, electro and anything else Smith-Rolla feels like throwing in, based on intuition. “Everything I write is always a translation of what’s going on with me. Even my NTS shows are just based on how I’m feeling,” she says, referring to her monthly radio show. As we walk upstairs and the throb of the beat grows louder, Smith-Rolla doesn’t nosedive into the techno section but instead is greeted with a pile of 12-inches, recommended by Ben Marsden, the head house and techno buyer. This level of personal curation and assistance is crucial for smaller shops, he tells me. “I go in spurts of buying records,” Smith-Rolla says. “I’m not in shops all the time but when I am, I’m usually here.” She also buys online from places like Discogs and Boomkat. “I think record shops have got kinder,” she tells me, in-between playing Umwelt and Maelstrom on the listening turntable. “There’s been a change in how women are looked at and observed. There’s no surprise any more when a woman walks in to buy a Detroit techno record. I would get nervous going into shops when I was younger, but things have become more welcoming.” While the music of Afrodeutsche is deeply personal and emotional – she describes it as “dark optimism” – when Smith-Rolla DJs, it’s all about getting loose and dismantling the seriousness of some in the techno world. “I like to have fun. I don’t see myself as a DJ; my sets are …” she stops mid-sentence and makes a series of explosive, chaotic noises. “As far as I’m concerned, anyone can do this. There isn’t a wall between us. There’s no bravado, it’s just fun times. Manchester is the kind of place that if you’re into good stuff then you’ll be invited to do good things; it’s a small city and everyone is connected.” As we move around the corner onto Oldham Street on a bustling afternoon and into Piccadilly Records, Smith-Rolla shows her goofy side as I look over to see her doing the downward escalator routine, disappearing behind a rack of records, cackling away. Smith-Rolla lived in Devon and London before Manchester, and is positively glowing about her time here. “Manchester is a beautiful place because it is nurturing without question. It’s here where I felt I had complete freedom to make stuff.” This freedom to create has seen her work with 808 State’s Graham Massey, score a reinterpretation of the 1992 documentary Baraka, and become part of GRRRL, a group assembled by In Place of War, a project that works to mobilise and connect artists in conflict zones. The eight-piece, and their “insane, pure energy” live performance, recently played the Commonwealth Games’ closing ceremony. In Vinyl Exchange, she takes an armful of records to the counter. The man behind it sincerely asks how her music is going, telling her he’s heard good things about her live shows. On the way out, she reflects on this sense of community and support she finds in the record shops, clubs and people of Manchester: “I’m surrounded by encouragement. That’s what Manchester does, it makes you want to be involved and help people out.” Daniel Dylan Wray Cratedigging and cardio may seem like two diametrically opposed pastimes but in Glasgow it is possible to combine both. Palais de Danse – a cramped but colourful garret stacked with preloved vinyl – lies behind a doorway on Sauchiehall Street. You just have to make it up four narrowing flights of stairs first. This is where Kenny Grieve and Dan Lurinsky of Dixon Avenue Basement Jams (DABJ) – local label owners and in-demand DJs – want to begin their Glasgow record shop crawl. Even on a miserable Friday morning, the elevated view from the fire escape makes it feel like an appropriate place to survey the city’s music retail scene, once we get our breath back. “Some workout, that,” Grieve says to Dennis, Palais de Danse’s wiry proprietor. “Try doing it with a box of records,” he replies, “it’s murder.” There are deep bins of house and techno, while a lone box of dubstep sits atop an ancient safe. Grieve and Lurinsky rifle through the stock with the flowing fingers of veteran vinyl spelunkers; their eventual haul includes a hidden gem from Dave Clarke’s 90s techno imprint Magnetic North. Palais de Danse is one of a new wave of independent vinyl shops that have opened in Glasgow in the past three years. The next stop, Rubadub, is more of an institution: since 1992, it has been a hub for DJs looking to stock up on desirable new imports, upgrade equipment or just talk shop with fellow devotees. While some stores host a chaotic decor of ripped posters and countless club flyers, Rubadub has always been stripped-back, cool, clinical. A recent interior redesign has reinforced the monochrome look but retained the shop’s signature feature: a tightly-wound cast-iron spiral staircase leading up to a cluster of listening decks. Lurinsky is a longstanding Rubadub employee, and says practically all of the staff were – like him – regular customers first, drawn to the communal vibe. While the shop may not officially take part in Record Store Day (“I think most people feel it’s all got a bit commercial,” says Lurinsky) there will still be a day-long party on 21 April, to christen the refit. Next, we head south of the Clyde to visit Otherside, a narrow, seductive emporium that has offered both second-hand vinyl and eccentric vintage objects since 2015. JD Twitch, of Glasgow’s venerable Optimo club night, once offloaded so much excess vinyl here he had his own section; it is perhaps the only place in the city where it is possible to pick up a happy hardcore classic from DJ Mental Theo and a Victorian carpet beater in the same trip. Having been invited to rummage through some unsorted stock, Lurinsky is elated to find a record by Detroit legend Claude Young he has coveted for years. Grieve somehow emerges with a hookah pipe and a chipped plaster statue of the Virgin Mary, decor for the new DABJ office-cum-studio by the riverside. Their label name was inspired by a raucous mid-2000s in-the-know after-hours party staged in a crudely converted basement flat on Dixon Avenue, and the final stop on our crawl is only a few streets away from that spiritual birthplace. Some Great Reward, a cosy cafe that doubles as a physical outpost for an online record store, opened earlier this month. In the main space, new releases like Unknown Mortal Orchestra’s Sex and Food are displayed on the wall with smart, snappy recommendation notes. Over coffee and a Bakewell slice, Grieve and Lurinsky tot up how much they have spent – almost £100, not including the Virgin Mary – and reflect on how the Glasgow music scene has waxed and waned over the years. “It definitely feels like things are on an upswing,” says Grieve, “there’s a real buzz, and the record shops are part of that.” Even the shock closure of the world-famous Arches club in 2015 may have had a silver lining. “Other places have raised their game,” says Lurinsky. “You look at somewhere like [event space] SWG3 and they are putting on great nights.” Personally, they are excited about the new studio, a busy release slate and working on some upcoming remixes. But before all that there are a few more stairs to climb, having promised Dennis they’d drop off some DABJ releases at Palais de Danse. Graeme Virtue