Until recently, there were only two questions that a casual viewer had to ask in order to identify a prestigious television series. Number one: would you like to spend any time in the company of these people? Number two: is anyone onscreen having anything that might even remotely be construed as fun?. If the answer to both was ‘no’ then, bingo! You must be watching something really prestigious. But now there’s a third question: is this episode of television much, much longer than it really needs to be?. If you saw the first episode of Westworld’s new series this week, you’ll know that the correct answer here is yes. God love Westworld. In all of living memory, no other television programme has quite so fastidiously gone out of its way to be taken seriously. Its characters are all awful and mopey, its dialogue is exclusively compiled from the diary of the angstiest 14-year-old philosophy student ever to walk the Earth, and now its episodes have taken on the form of punishing endurance tests. This week’s opener hit 70 minutes and, to quote showrunners Jonathan Nolan and Lisa Joy, “the finale is just going to keep going and going”, which sounds less like a promise and more like a stern the-bell-is-for-me-and-not-for-you teacher’s warning. (In all they plan to have three ‘extra-length’ episodes spread across the season). This is bad for Westworld – a show that already knows full well how to make a minute feel like a month – but it’s also a growing concern for television in general. Gradually, as the medium becomes unshackled from its mercilessly-scheduled origins, episodes are starting to succumb to all manner of bloat. Game of Thrones is making hay of its promise to supersize the final series, cramming so much into every episode that they’re all likely to be feature-length. The new series of Legion began with an episode 25% longer than we’re used to. The Walking Dead, meanwhile, has always flirted with feature-length episodes. True, the dismantling of linear scheduling means that television shows are free to tell their stories in however much time they want, but this rarely seems like a two-way street. There won’t ever be an episode of Westworld, for example, where Nolan and Joy think “Actually, not a lot happens this week, so let’s chop it back to a tight 20 minutes of gunplay and nudity”. It can happen sometimes: Black Mirror recently put out a 40-minute episode, possibly because the thought of watching screaming women get murdered by robot dogs for a full hour was too galling but then again the previous series featured an episode that stretched out for an hour and a half. It’s a strange way to judge quality. Just because something is long, it doesn’t automatically mean that it’s any good. Especially now that we’re all drowning in TV shows. If you take television seriously, then you’ve now got more to watch than ever before. Every second counts if you want to fit everything in, so it’s agonising when something like Westworld pads out all its cryptic portent for any longer than it really needs to. And that’s Westworld. You expect a show like Westworld to use a gimmick like that. But when a show like Master of None does the same – hour-long penultimate episode, I’m looking at you – it can actively make you feel like you’re wasting your life. It doesn’t have to be like this. Tight is good. Imagine how much better Westworld would be if it was compressed into a punchy 40 minutes of action. Imagine how much more fun you’d have if it compromised some of its gloomy atmosphere for more focused storytelling. And, honestly, would it kill any of you to smile? You’re robot cowboys, for crying out loud. Lighten up a little. Black Mirror: Hated in the Nation (89 minutes) A load of bees start attacking people, but the bees are all tweets? Either way, nobody has any fun. Could have been told in 25. Game of Thrones: The Dragon and the Wolf (80 minutes) The whole gang gets together for a tense summit in an amphitheatre, and then some poor boy gets off with his auntie. Could have been told in 30. Westworld: Journey into Night (70 minutes) Not much has changed. The Man in Black is still waffling on about nothing, there are still about 15 too many timelines and all the extras are still being forced to flop around with their genitals out. Could have been told in 45. Legion: Chapter 9 (61 minutes) Honestly, God knows what happened here. I just rewatched it and I’m still none the wiser. There was a dance-off, I think, unless it was imaginary. Honestly, this show. Could have been told in the space of a micronap. Master of None: Amarsi Un Po (57 minutes) Aziz Ansari gets to luxuriate in all his wooliest Manic Pixie Dream Girl tropes at the expense of the viewers, who all age three to four decades before the episode is over. Could have been told in 20.