Andrea Constand, the woman Bill Cosby was convicted of sexually assaulting, said “truth prevails” on Friday, the morning after a verdict that could send the 80-year-old comedian to prison for the rest of his life. “A very profound and heartfelt thank you to the Commonwealth of [Pennsylvania], Montgomery County, for their service and sacrifices,” Constand wrote. “Congratulations. Truth prevails.” Other women who have accused Cosby also greeted the verdict but Cosby’s spokesman, Andrew Wyatt, told ABC the comedian was feeling great, spending time with his wife of 54 years, Camille, and maintaining his innocence. After the verdict on Thursday, Cosby waved to the crowd outside the courthouse, got into an SUV and left. His lawyer Tom Mesereau declared “the fight is not over” and said he would appeal. Later, Judge Steven O’Neill issued an order confining Cosby to his Philadelphia home until his sentencing, and instructing him to wear a GPS monitoring device. He remains free on $1m bail. Constand, a 45-year-old Temple University women’s basketball administrator, said Cosby knocked her out with three blue pills he called “your friends” and then penetrated her with his fingers as she lay immobilized, unable to resist or say no. Cosby claimed the encounter, at his mansion in suburban Philadelphia in January 2004, was consensual, saying he gave Constand the cold and allergy medicine Benadryl to relax. Cosby was found guilty of drugging and molesting Constand. The ruling was hailed as a turning point in the #MeToo movement and was seen as vindication by a multitude of women who doubted anyone would ever believe their word against that of the comedian and sitcom star once known as “America’s Dad”. Lili Bernard, who said Cosby sexually assaulted her before giving her a one-time role on The Cosby Show in 1992, became so emotional in the courtroom gallery that she banged her forehead on the bench in front of her. “I’m overcome with gratitude,” Bernard said, sobbing, outside the courthouse. “I feel like I have to pinch myself. Am I awake? It’s a miracle.” It was the only criminal case to arise from allegations from more than 60 women who said Cosby drugged and molested them but whose stories were often ignored before #MeToo put a spotlight on sexual misconduct by powerful men. A jury of seven men and five women deliberated for 14 hours. Cosby was convicted of three counts of aggravated indecent assault, each carrying a standard sentence of five to 10 years in prison. The counts are likely to be merged for sentencing. Given Cosby’s age even a modest term could mean he will die behind bars. Sentencing will probably be held within three months. Before that, Cosby must face assessment to determine if he is a sexually violent predator. He will also be required to register as a sex offender. Cosby stared straight ahead as the verdict was read but lashed out loudly at the district attorney, Kevin Steele, when the prosecutor demanded Cosby be sent immediately to jail. Steele told the judge he had learned that Cosby had a plane and could flee. Cosby angrily denied he had a plane and called Steele an “asshole”, shouting: “I’m sick of him!” O’Neill decided Cosby could remain free on $1m bail but restricted him to Montgomery county and his mansion. Janice Baker-Kinney, who alleges Cosby drugged and raped her in 1982, told ABC on Friday it was essential Cosby spend time in jail. She would not be heartbroken if he died in prison, she said. Meanwhile, Temple University, in Philadelphia, where Bill Cosby long served as a leading public face and key fundraiser – and where Constand worked – announced on Friday afternoon that it would rescind the honorary doctorate it awarded to the comedian in 1991.