David Goldblatt once described himself as “a self-appointed observer and critic of the society into which I was born”. That society was apartheid-era South Africa, which he chronicled with meticulous patience and a certain formal detachment, his acutely observational gaze illuminating the lives of ordinary people living under a system that separated and controlled them according to skin colour. From the early 1960s, when he began photographing the landscape and people of South Africa, Goldblatt shot in black and white, later saying: “During those years, colour seemed too sweet a medium to express the anger, disgust and fear that apartheid inspired.” His detached approach reflected his own sense of being an outsider – his Lithuanian Jewish family had originally settled in South Africa to escape religious persecution – but it also allowed him to present the complexities of life under apartheid in a way that contrasted with the often dramatic images made by visiting photojournalists. This photograph, titled Shop assistant, Orlando West, Soweto, 1972, is a case in point. The young girl is poised, stylish, even languorous, yet with a suggestion of defiance in her straight-to-camera gaze. Around her, the rows of canned goods suggest a society marooned in a postwar era. She is a child of the townships, of oppression, uprisings and struggle. And yet, the image insists, she is also an ordinary young woman whose life is not entirely defined by the system that exerts control over so much of her life – where she lives, works and travels, who she befriends, socialises with and marries. Goldblatt once said: “I would look at Edward Weston’s work and envy the freedom to be lyrical... to photograph a landscape apparently without concern for the implications of its possession.” His work, though, has its own moments of beauty and they are made all the more striking by the context out of which they emerged. Structures of Dominion and Democracy by David Goldblatt is published by Steidl Verlag, £45