For more than three decades, Sir Martin Sorrell has run WPP – the world’s biggest advertising group, which he built out of a small, Kent-based maker of wire baskets – with an iron grip. Sorrell embarked on global domination at the age of 40, walking out on his job as finance chief at the ad agency Saatchi & Saatchi, where he was often referred to as “the third brother”, in 1985. Since then he has built Wire & Plastic Products (which still makes “top quality domestic kitchen wireware”) into a global behemoth that he has been accused of running as a “personal fiefdom”. With WPP’s share price at its lowest point in five years, down almost 40% in the last year, voices already starting to question Sorrell’s leadership have now become louder in the wake of the revelation of an investigation into allegations of personal misconduct. But the indefatigable Sorrell has fought his way out of tight spots before. WPP’s closest call with death came following his audacious move to buy the ad group Ogilvy & Mather in 1989. Following on the heels of taking over the world’s oldest ad group, JWT, this made Sorrell a global force in advertising. The incursion of a bean counter into the world of Mad Men was not well-received – the takeover prompted David Ogilvy to call Sorrell an “odious little shit” who had “never written an advertisement in his life”. A year later WPP almost went out of business as the global recession of the early 90s saw it teeter on the brink of failure and and damaged Sorrell’s reputation as a dealmaker. He even thought of stepping down. Unlike most of his record-breaking deals, one Sorrell is not proud of is his £30m divorce relating to the break-up of his 33-year marriage in 2003. In what was then the largest settlement in British history, Sorrell pledged half his personal stake in WPP as security against personal loans, while Lady Sandra Sorrell received assets including a Georgian townhouse and two parking slots at Harrods. For years WPP has performed like clockwork, lining the pockets of investors and Sorrell – whose personal stake is worth about £250m – has benefited from hugely controversial reward schemes netting him hundreds of millions of pounds in payouts in recent years. His £70.4m payout in 2015 was one of the biggest pay deals in UK corporate history. Investors were placated by WPP’s relentless growth, and questions about the control exerted by its founder were put to one side. “Like Domino’s, WPP continues to deliver,” the company’s former chairman Philip Lader once said. His big pay days, amounting to well over £200m in the last five years, have been seen as symptomatic of what critics have called “Sorrellcentricity” at WPP – the view that Sorrell is autocratic and dominates decision-making – which in turn has finally led investors increasingly to challenge the governance of the company in recent years. Issues have included a furore in 2015 over the company bearing the cost of £274,000 in travel expenses run up by his second wife accompanying him on business trips as part of his benefit package. A series of investor rebellions against his pay (the biggest being in 2012, during the “shareholder spring”, when 60% of investors rejected his annual pay package), forced WPP’s board to cut his remuneration dramatically. Last year Roberto Quarta, then a year into his job as WPP’s chairman, said that succession planning had intensified, becoming “even more focused and detailed”. Sorrell’s response at the time was that “there is nothing to see here”. At 73, Sorrell seems fitter and his indefatigable work ethic as strong as ever, making the issue of age seemingly irrelevant. The idea of retirement couldn’t be further from his mind. “Only when they shoot me,” he has said.