Whether it’s Michel Barnier and David Davis talking themselves to a standstill in Brexit negotiations, or the impending face-off between Donald Trump and Kim Jong-un, the vexed topic of good – and bad – communication is on our minds. But is there a way to make your conversations and interactions better? As communication theorists, we examined how to make friends, influence people and reach agreements. Here are some tips: Don’t start a conversation about things that interest you. Be the one who is interested in the other person’s topics and enter every conversation with Bill Nye’s rule in mind: “Everyone you’ll ever meet knows something that you don’t.” The psychology behind this: People forget what they talked about with you, but not how they felt in your presence.  Ask for advice. People love giving advice. Start your small talk with a request for advice: “I want to buy a phone (or, depending on the circumstances, perhaps a cocktail or a book), but I can’t decide which one.” Most people will happily open up. If you ask for advice, you create intimacy – and intimacy makes rejection difficult. Therefore, if you want to influence someone, it is a good idea to ask that person for advice first. “There was once a Finn who loved his wife so much that he almost told her.” It’s a joke, and yet not a joke. Because many Finns are indeed introverted, even taciturn people. The supreme rule of so-called intercultural communication: Be aware of your own culture and don’t actually spend too much time thinking about the other. Instead, step back and simply think about the way that you communicate. One of the best-known negotiating methods is by Roger Fisher and William L Ury. Imagine a complex situation – negotiating a ransom demanded by a blackmailer or pocket money with your children – and apply the following principles: Think issue, not person – don’t be distracted by whether you like the other person or not, focus on the topic. Think interests, not position: don’t think, I am in the weaker (or stronger) negotiating position. Ask yourself: what does the other person need from me? Do we have common interests? Think good enough, not perfect: don’t aim for the maximum possible return. If you always think of your best lines when the meeting is over, console yourself with the French phrase that encapsulates the phenomenon – l ‘esprit de l’escalier – “staircase wit”. Psychologists recommend this simple trick: wait five seconds before answering – your answer might not be any cleverer, but it comes across as weightier. Also, keep in mind that although being quick-witted can be impressive in a job interview, it is seldom required in most jobs – and most HR people know this. The Communication Book: 44 Ideas for Better Conversations Every Day by Mikael Krogerus and Roman Tshäppeler is out now, price £9.99 (Penguin)