The US Senate on Wednesday unanimously agreed to allow parents to bring their infants onto the chamber floor. The rule change will allow Senator Tammy Duckworth, who this month became the first senator to give birth while in office, to nurse her newborn daughter on the Senate floor. The resolution permits parents – mothers and fathers – to bring children under the age of one into the chamber during votes.. Previously, only senators and certain members of staff were allowed on the floor while the Senate conducted legislative business. In a statement, Duckworth thanked her colleagues for helping drag the tradition-bound institution “into the 21st century” . “I would like to thank my colleagues on both sides of the aisle, particularly those in leadership and on the Rules Committee, for helping bring the Senate into the 21st Century by recognizing that sometimes new parents also have responsibilities at work,” Duckworth said. By ensuring that no Senator will be prevented from performing their constitutional responsibilities simply because they have a young child, the Senate is leading by example & sending the important message that working parents everywhere deserve family-friendly workplace policies She added: “These policies aren’t just a women’s issue, they are a common-sense economic issue.” Duckworth, 50, gave birth to Maile Pearl Bowlsbey last Monday. She was already one of just 10 women to give birth while serving in Congress, having delivered her first born, Abigail, as a member of the House of Representatives in November 2014. Her office has said she plans to take a 12-week maternity leave, but will be present for important votes. The rule change will allow her to bring Maile onto the floor – and breastfeed her – during vote series, which can take hours. It will also make it easier for the senator to be present for late-night or last-minute votes. “Being a parent is a difficult job, and the Senate rules shouldn’t make it any harder,” said the senate rules committee chairman, Roy Blunt, a Republican of Missouri. “I’m glad we were able to get this done to address the needs of parents in the Senate. I congratulate Sen Duckworth and her family, and look forward to meeting her daughter.” After announcing her pregnancy, Duckworth vowed to work with senators on both sides of the aisle to make the chamber more accommodating to mothers and parents. The House has long allowed lawmakers to bring their children on the Senate floor. “I feel like the Senate is actually in the 19th century as opposed to the 21st somehow and that’s really unfortunate,” the Illinois Democrat told the Guardian in an interview before the birth of her daughter. “It’s a reflection of a real need for more women in leadership across our country, whether it’s legislatively or in boardrooms or the military.”