It is not an opportune time to play Irish sides. A contest between league champions and the team they defeated in last season’s Pro12 semi-final across the road from here was one-sided throughout because of the unyielding force and drive of Leinster who had effectively reached their Champions Cup fourth final in 10 years by the interval. The Scarlets looked like escaping into the dressing rooms at half-time 17-9 down having been outplayed by finely tuned opponents who from the opening moments played with pace, precision and purpose. The visitors fielded the 10 players who had started Wales’s Six Nations campaign against Scotland but they struggled to contain a team rippling with confidence. Leigh Halfpenny gave the Scarlets an early lead with a long-range penalty and their threat was contained in his boot. Leinster’s response was a try after 10 minutes, Scott Fardy’s lineout take was quickly transferred behind where the speed of passing and Isa Nacewa’s foray into midfield from his wing created space on the right wing. The initial attack was thwarted but James Ryan drove through Tadhg Beirne’s tackle and, not held after going to ground, scored at the second attempt. Johnny Sexton and Halfpenny exchanged penalties but it was Leinster who had the impetus, Robbie Henshaw making metres in midfield and with runners attacking shoulders rather than chests, ball was quickly recycled. Leinster were playing at a breathless pace and the Scarlets found themselves running to stand still. The second try came from a scrum, Cian Healy crossing after Dan Leavy had been held up over the line. The Scarlets were operating with 30% possession and when their first meaningful attack ended when Aaron Shingler knocked on, Leinster won a penalty, moved downfield and ended with half with Fergus McFadden catching Garry Ringrose’s long pass to score in the right-hand corner. McFadden suffered a knee injury in scoring and did not appear for the second half. The same could not be said for Leinster who extended their lead within 10 minutes after the wing’s replacement, Jordan Larmour, dispossessed Rhys Patchell and Scott Fardy, a muscular, industrious threat all afternoon, forced his way over. It resembled a contest between teams in different divisions. Leinster were relentless, feeding off mistakes avariciously. The Scarlets had to run what little ball they had and after coughing up possession again, they watched Sexton dummy his way over. It was the cue for the Ireland fly-half to take his leave having scored 18 points. Leinster were on course to break Saracens’ record victory in a semi-final, 46-6 against Clermont Auvergne in 2014, but the Scarlets did not give up. Scott Williams denied Rob Kearney with a cover tackle and Fardy was denied a second try on review, but the game had long been decided and the former Leinster second-row Beirne’s try one minute from time was no consolation. Wales held on against Ireland in the Six Nations here two months ago despite operating with as little possession as the Scarlets, but Leinster are a deluxe version of their national side, as adept at using the ball as retaining it. Europe has rarely seen better.