‘The idea for the show came from three things,” says Abi Morgan. “I was coming up to 50 and, having spent two decades with the same man, was starting to think about 21st-century marriage and relationships. Then I met a mother who was a divorce lawyer and got talking to her about family law.” The third angle derives from the fact that Morgan, the acclaimed writer behind The Hour and River, is herself a child of divorce, her parents having split when she was 11. “I was really interested in that legacy, how it can affect people in different ways.” From Brothers and Sisters to This Is Us, the emotional, issue-driven family drama has long been a mainstay of American TV. Now Morgan is hoping to convince audiences to tune into her shiny British take on the genre, which comes with a legal twist. The Split, which starts on BBC One next week, is a slick, funny and – Morgan hopes – ultimately moving story about the relationships between mothers, daughters and sisters, and the way we never quite leave our family behind, no matter how hard we try. It’s filled with scenes that should have viewers cringing in recognition, from a trio of tipsy sisters rummaging through their mother’s clothes to a pair of siblings squabbling over whose childhood memories are more valid. “I really wanted to tell a story that had all the energy, warmth, vitality and complexity you find in families,” says Morgan, adding that she was keen to take the taboo out of divorce. “I think inherently people are scared of talking about it. You go out to dinner and speak to a couple who are divorcing, and you sympathise and gossip and then you go home and cling to each other and think, ‘Thank God that’s not us.’ Yet everybody in a long-term relationship has at some point looked at their own marriage and relationship and wondered … What I hope The Split does is look at that grey area and say, what if?” The focus is on the all-female Defoe family. Hannah is a high-powered divorce lawyer who made her name working for her mother Ruth’s firm. Hannah recently quit to join their sleek corporate rivals, leaving chaotic middle sister Nina, who still works at Defoe, struggling to live up to her mother’s expectations. Meanwhile, the soon-to-be-married youngest sister, Rose, is sure that she doesn’t want to be a lawyer, but unsure about just about everything else, and Hannah’s teenage daughter Liv is negotiating first love in the digital age. As all this proceeds, the Defoe women tackle various divorce cases at work each week. “The legal stuff is important but it’s really a drama about the personal choices and how our attitudes towards love and marriage and relationships change as we get older,” explains Morgan. Most interestingly it is also the story of a female midlife crisis, something that is rarely portrayed on TV. On the surface, the fortysomething Hannah – played by Nicola Walker – has everything. Yet increasingly she is doubting whether the choices she has made are the right ones. “I really enjoyed playing a woman whose story isn’t about how is she juggling family and work,” says Walker. “Hannah’s problem isn’t the thing that we’re normally told as female viewers should be the problem. She’s got a brilliant job, she’s got a lovely husband, she’s got three kids – it should all feel great. And yet, as it goes on, it doesn’t.” Her uncertainty is exacerbated by the unexpected return of her father, Oscar (Anthony Head), who walked out 30 years previously. His arrival jolts Hannah, throwing her organised world off kilter and causing the careful structures on which she has built her life to crumble. “She’s not always a totally appealing person but she is a believable one,” says Walker. “She’s really struggling to find an identity outside her family. So she’s running away from them and also asking who she is without her mother and her sisters. Hannah basically created a narrative for how she coped after her father left and it worked; but now her father is back and something that seemed set in stone gets blown apart.” If Hannah’s crisis lies at the heart of The Split, the show’s wider appeal lies in its glossy look and glamorous settings. This is the legal drama by way of The Good Wife or LA Law, the sort of series in which attractive and sharply dressed people walk down corridors at speed talking passionately. It’s about as far from Rumpole of the Bailey or even Silk as it’s possible to get. “The world of the court is very dark, very austere,” says Morgan. “Trying to make that feel fresh without resorting to all the standard tropes is really hard. One of the most exciting things in making this a story about solicitors and not barristers is that you get to spend time in the office. I’ve loved offices ever since I wrote The Hour. I like the way they’re the family away from home, the fact that you often spend more time with the people you work with than with your family.” It’s also openly aspirational. Ruth’s large and warmly lit home is likely to set social media aflutter while Hannah wears her nipped-in suits and high heels like armour. The cases she and her family tackle are the kind that dominate the front pages: stories of oligarchs and footballers, of celebrity divorces and city high-flyers desperate to cut loose their loyal first wives. “We wanted it to be kind of shiny and beautiful and fun and entertaining,” says the series director, Jess Hobbs, acknowledging that the level of affluence on show may prove a turn-off for some. “There will be some people who just see it as a TV show about incredibly privileged people and go, ‘Urgh,’” agrees executive producer Jane Featherstone. “But I think what’s important is that the stories at the centre are not flippant. It’s escapism but it’s also emotionally truthful.” Their clients may have multimillion pound lifestyles – but when it comes to issues of the heart, we're all the same Morgan deliberately set out to write about a very comfortable world. “We can be self-conscious about writing about the middle class,” she says, “but it’s a large part of our audience and I hope it’s a show that pulls people in despite the fact that the characters live in beautiful houses and have nice lives. There’s also an element of schadenfreude about it, in that they’re not as happy as they look. With some of the cases we feature, they may have multimillion-pound lifestyles and properties all over the world. But when it comes to issues of the heart, we’re universally connected. We’re the same.” Despite taking on such weighty issues, the show never loses sight of its desire to tell a story from the perspective of its women. Morgan describes it as being “about the different generations of feminism and how they affect each other in the workplace”. Yet the leading male characters – Hannah’s husband Nathan, played by Stephen Mangan, and her colleague Christie – are well drawn. “I didn’t want to do what happens in male-centric dramas,” says Morgan, “where the man would be in the background draped across a bed or chopping a carrot or looking busy in his study, and gets one line.” The show’s approach may not find favour with everyone. At the press screening I attended, a male critic described the show as a “female fantasy”. Walker mentions that a number of reporters asked her “if the men get more complicated, which I found interesting because of course they do. Abi would never write a part where an actor didn’t feel like they were playing a fully rounded character, but this is a story told through a female gaze.” Morgan remains more entertained than worried by the criticism. “There’s never been a more exciting time to be a female writer or a more important time to have a discourse around female narrative,” she says with a smile. “I wanted to write something that reflected that. At its heart, this is a show that was born out of a group of women sitting together, sharing our stories and our lives and then talking to female divorce layers about their stories and marriages and relationships. From those conversations came this show. And despite everything, it’s a story about hope.”