Rome conjures many glorious European memories for Liverpool but for Ian Rush it means the most nerve-racking walk of his life, singing along to Chris Rea in the Stadio Olimpico tunnel and the unshakable belief that underpinned victory over Roma in the 1984 European Cup Final. He recognises that same quality when watching Jürgen Klopp’s team today. With the Giallorossi on the European horizon, Mohamed Salah closing in on one of his records and Accrington Stanley showing there is much more to them than a milk advertisement, Liverpool’s all-time leading goalscorer has been transported back to the 1980s of late. The development of Klopp’s team in recent months has had a similar effect, fuelling Rush’s confidence for the Champions League semi-final. “It’s strange Liverpool drew Roma as there are similarities with the team in 84,” says the club ambassador. “In Europe Liverpool are playing extremely well. In the Premier League there are times when they do not but there remains that belief and confidence they are going to win. A year ago they didn’t play that well at home to Bournemouth and drew 2-2. Last Saturday they didn’t play that well and won 3-0. It’s a very good sign when you are not playing to your full potential but still winning comfortably. That was the same with us. The spirit in that 1984 team was massive and it is something I see in Liverpool now.” The side’s confidence had deeper foundations in 1984 and they found an unusual way to show it. Joe Fagan’s team had won the league for a third year running before arriving in Rome, the first two of the hat-trick coming under Bob Paisley. It was their fourth European Cup final appearance in seven years and, after a 1-1 draw, extra time and Alan Kennedy’s winning penalty in the shootout, Liverpool returned home as European champions for a fourth time. Rush believes the seeds of victory were sown before kick-off. “It was like going into the Colosseum, playing a European Cup final against Roma in Rome,” he recalls. “In the tunnel before the game we lined up alongside the Roma players and, while waiting to go out, we all started singing I Don’t Know What It Is But I Love It by Chris Rea. That threw Roma. They didn’t know what was happening but it was our way of showing them we wouldn’t be fazed by anything. “We respected Roma but it was a nice way of letting our opponent know they were up against Liverpool and our supporters. We didn’t care that the game was in Rome. Every stage was the same to us. I think that played a big part on the night. They tried all sorts of intimidation tactics over there but we overcame them as a team, not as individuals. They did the usual thing of trying to keep us awake all night by blasting horns outside our hotel but we deflated them by singing in the tunnel. It must have had a big impact because when I went to Juventus the first thing Antonio Cabrini said to me was: ‘What was that singing all about with Liverpool?’ I told him we did it all the time!” Rush converted Liverpool’s fourth penalty that night, moments before Bruce Grobbelaar wobbled his legs, Francesco Graziani struck the crossbar and Kennedy reprised his European Cup-winning routine from 1981. “That walk from the halfway line to the penalty spot, with 60,000 people booing me, was the most nervous walk of my life. It was such a relief to score,” says the former striker, who dropped to his knees on the walk back. The penalty is not included in the record tally of 47 goals that the Wales international struck for Liverpool that season. Rush’s record has remained intact for 34 years but is under serious threat this season, with Salah scoring his 41st at West Brom on Saturday. “I’m very proud of the record,” he admits. “It is an amazing feat and so is what Mo Salah has done. He’s a joy to watch. He seems so humble too. What I like about him is if someone else is better placed he will pass. He’s not greedy and he always runs over to the person who made his goal and says thank you. That is something we were brought up to do. It seems funny to say now but in the first five or six games of the season he missed quite a few chances. Now he’s in the same frame of mind as I was in ’84 – knowing you are going to score in every game. Keep him fit and Liverpool have every chance. Honestly, if he needs one more goal to break my record and scores his 48th in the Champions League final, I’ll be a happy man.” The Liverpool legend was working in Thailand last week but could not escape from another chapter from his past when Accrington Stanley sealed the first league promotion in their history. Reruns promptly followed of that 1989 ad for the Milk Marketing board, when a young scouse hopeful drinks milk on Rush’s supposed advice, and the 56-year-old was keen to congratulate Accrington’s manager, the Liverpool fan John Coleman, on a remarkable achievement. “John deserves the utmost respect and credit,” says Rush. “He has been there for quite a while now and must have one of the lowest budgets in the entire league. My club, Chester City, have just been relegated and, when you look at clubs like Accrington and Chester, they tread such a fine line. All credit to them. I don’t think people will be asking who Accrington Stanley are any more. Maybe they’ll ask who Ian Rush is instead!” The answer, should anyone need to ask, would be the winner of one European Cup, five league championships, three FA Cups, five League Cups and the most prolific goalscorer in Liverpool’s rich history. Exactly.