If the golf even approaches the heights of the buildup, stand by for quite a show. Who said the Masters begins only on the Sunday back nine? Eighteen months have passed since Patrick Reed and Rory McIlroy went toe-to-toe and blow-for-blow in an epic Ryder Cup tie. We ain’t seen nothing yet. This battle for a Green Jacket promises to be one for the ages, with Reed holding the ace card of starting Sunday three ahead. Fourteen under plays 11 under. Reed emerged victorious from that electric Hazeltine encounter, with McIlroy later admitting fatigue got the better of him. On Sunday in this, the 82nd Masters, the Northern Irishman need only keep control of his fluctuating emotions as the tantalising prospect of a clean sweep of major championships homes into view. There is no question of tiredness halting McIlroy now but Reed’s stubbornness in opposition cannot and will not be taken lightly. Reed could become the first ever Masters winner to shoot four sub-70 rounds. McIlroy has waited seven years to be in the last Masters pairing. How he reacts will draw glances from beyond golf. It is hardly a leap of faith to point out the majority within the sport will root for the Ulsterman. McIlroy himself was brilliantly bullish on Saturday evening as he firmly laid down the gauntlet to Reed. McIlroy’s day-three 65 outscored Reed by two. “Patrick has a three-shot lead; I feel like all the pressure is on him,” said McIlroy. “He has got to protect that and he has some pretty big-time players behind him. He has to sleep on that tonight. I feel like I have nothing to lose. “My game is right there. I don’t feel like there is any shot on the golf course that I can’t execute and I think I’ve shown that in the last three days. This isn’t my first time in this position. I have a lot of experience and experience that I have learnt from, good and bad.” In a further, obvious jab McIlroy added: “I know what it’s like to be in that position. It isn’t easy, especially if it’s your first time. I’m going to free‑wheel it and play like I have nothing to lose, everything to gain. Which is true.” Reed had dropped a shot at the 12th hole when seeing his lead over McIlroy reduced to two. The battle was on; the Northern Irishman saved par from the middle of an azalea bed ahead at the 13th. Proof that Reed lacks nothing in competitive spirit was to follow. Reed’s 215-yard approach to within 14ft of the 13th hole might be the shot of this tournament. The Texan duly converted for an eagle. That Reed may have the golfing gods, as well as obvious talent, in his corner could be readily inferred two holes later. Reed, in a tricky lie 30 yards out from the flag on 15, chipped in for another two-stroke boost. For McIlroy hope, unlikely hope, appeared one hole later as Reed three-putted for a bogey. Better was to come for McIlroy before he strode so purposefully from the 18th green following a birdie. Reed missed an opportunity for the same. It would be folly to believe only two players can win this major. At any other venue this would be a two horse race but fortunes can switch so rapidly at Augusta National that the leaderboard as a whole must be considered. “There’s a lot more players in this tournament than Patrick Reed and I,” McIlroy warned. “Guys can get off to hot starts on a Sunday here.” A host of illustrious names lurk with intent. Rickie Fowler is the most prominent among them, his 65 meaning a 54-hole total of nine under. This was Fowler’s lowest ever major championship round and his first bogey-free round at the Masters. Jon Rahm would love nothing more than to receive a Green Jacket from his fellow Spaniard, Sergio Garcia. Rahm’s third round of 65 – matching Fowler and McIlroy as the best score of the day – moved him to minus eight. Recent history says Rahm will not buckle under pressure should he find himself in a position where winning is possible. His credentials should be taken seriously. Henrik Stenson is seven under. Bubba Watson has improved his scoring in each round of this event. A 68 moved him to six under. He has Tommy Fleetwood for company there. Not even a bogey at the last could remove the smile from Fleetwood’s face. In only his second Augusta appearance the Southport man produced a Saturday 66. Can he win? “I’ve no idea,” replied Fleetwood. Which does not mean by any stretch that he will not try. He added: “I’ve watched the Masters in the past and I know anything can happen. I suppose it depends on how many players there are that are up there in the mix but it doesn’t matter that much to me. I’m just happy that I shot that score today and put myself into some kind of spot on the leaderboard. It was just nice to do that, really. Two years ago, I was not close to being part of this. “As much as it suits my eye, and hopefully I’ll have many more times where I’ll play the tournament, there’s so much to learn on the golf course. And I’m kind of really enjoying doing it. You know, we turn up at so many tournaments and we have two days to prepare and you can generally get a really good feel for it. “At Augusta, you never feel like you’ve done enough. You never feel like you can actually do enough. I’ve enjoyed that side of it.” A 72 from Tiger Woods retained his plus four total. Woods again bemoaned poor iron play, with the returning 14-times major champion setting a Sunday target of returning to even par by the end of round four. Such an ambition, of course, is a far cry from the aspirations of the masses as Woods entered this tournament. He will, at least, move back inside the top 100 of the world rankings from next week.