Asparagus has overtaken my kitchen. While I will never tire of it eaten simply, with good butter, salt and a squeeze of lemon, it lends itself to spring recipes, like this salad of thinly sliced raw spears sliced into coins and dressed with lemon, yoghurt and finished with golden breadcrumbs. Or my new creation, an asparagus saute: over-ordering meant I could be a little bit braver and experiment with bolder flavours; now this recipe is part of my asparagus repertoire. The spears have a pleasing crunch tempered by a quick bath in some lemon juice. Prep 15 minCook 10 minServes 4 50g breadcrumbs Olive oil2 x 400g bunches asparagus1 unwaxed lemon, zested and juicedSalt and black pepper25g parmesan (I use a vegetarian one)50g toasted walnuts1 small green chilli, finely sliced2 tbsp yoghurt Toast the breadcrumbs in a hot pan with a little olive oil until golden – or in the oven tossed in a little oil at 180C/350F/gas 4 for five to eight minutes. Snap off the tips of the asparagus and put in a bowl. Then, using a paring knife or peeler, peel away any woody exterior from the bottom to reveal the tender inside. Next, cut the asparagus in half lengthways then cut each into three. Add to the bowl with the lemon zest, half the juice and a good pinch of salt, and leave it to sit for a couple of minutes. Next, grate the parmesan on top, crumble in the walnuts, add the green chilli and a good pinch of salt and pepper. Toss to combine. Add the yoghurt to the remaining lemon juice with a tablespoon of olive oil and season, then mix or shake to combine. When you are ready to eat, tip the asparagus into a serving bowl, add some of the dressing, toss well and taste, adding more salt, pepper or lemon as needed. To finish, top with more dressing and the golden breadcrumbs. This recipe was a happy accident that came into being when I ordered 10 bunches of asparagus from the greengrocer instead of the two I needed. Sesame, maple and soy might not be the most obvious asparagus pairings, but – trust me – it all just works. Prep 10 minCook 20 minServes 4 2 tbsp sesame seeds2 tbsp pumpkin seeds1 tbsp maple syrupSalt1 good pinch dried red chilli flakes1 unwaxed lemon, zested and juiced2 tsp sesame oil2 x 400g bunches asparagus 2 heads of greens or 400g sugar snaps1 tbsp soy sauceCooked brown rice or egg noodles, to serve First, toast the seeds in a frying pan until they start to give off their aroma. Once toasted, add the maple syrup, a good pinch of salt and the chilli, and cook for another minute, until the syrup begins to bubble up around the seeds and thicken (but not darken). Take off the heat and transfer to a parchment-lined plate, sprinkle over the lemon zest and leave to set. Remove the asparagus tips and set aside, then cut the stems into 5cm pieces on the diagonal until 5cm from the base, which you can discard. Put the pan back on the heat with one teaspoon of sesame oil and add the asparagus and greens or sugar snaps. Fry for a couple of minutes, then add the juice of the lemon, the remaining teaspoon of sesame oil and the soy. Serve with warm brown rice or noodles with the maple seeds on top.