The limited, short-lived US, British and French missile strikes in Syria yesterday are unlikely to have a lasting impact on the course or the conduct of the civil war. Indeed, Syrian opposition figures fear the small scale on which they were conducted may even encourage Bashar al-Assad, Syria’s president, to prosecute the conflict with an enhanced sense of impunity. These  attacks were not intended to overthrow the regime or to degrade Syria’s conventional military capabilities or those of its principal allies, Russia and Iran. Their purpose, according to Donald Trump and Theresa May, was to deter future chemical weapons-related atrocities similar to that in Douma last weekend, which killed dozens of civilians and sparked the current crisis. The Observer is the world's oldest Sunday newspaper, founded in 1791. It is published by Guardian News & Media and is editorially independent. The likelihood of what looks like very mild punishment achieving this objective is open to question. The Syrian regime declared the damage done to the three targets was minimal and that most of the 100-plus allied missiles were shot down. The claim by Gavin Williamson, the defence secretary, that the strikes would have “enormous effect [in] significantly reducing” future chemical weapons use is only that: a claim. Williamson cannot possibly know whether his conclusion is justified. Assad’s forces launched a similar attack using sarin gas in Khan Sheikhun last year. Trump responded with air strikes. The regime was not deterred then and it may not be now. The scope and impact of the allied action will disappoint those who had hoped for a telling or even definitive blow against Assad. This constituency includes not just Syrian opposition forces, political hawks in Europe and the US and Arab leaders in Saudi Arabia and the Gulf, but also aid agency workers and NGOs sickened by the west’s continuing failure to halt a slaughter that has cost upwards of 400,000 lives. Israelis, who had seen an opportunity to deliver a decisive blow against hostile Iranians forces based in Syria, may also feel it is not enough. But disappointment will be matched by relief in many quarters that alarming predictions of an escalating conflict pitting US forces against Russia, and possible descent into a third world war, have proved wrong. Despite its angry statements, Moscow doubtless shares in this relief. Syria is akin to a gunpowder store where a single spark could potentially set off an explosion felt around the world. That remains true this morning. The fact the US trod relatively lightly seems to be primarily due to Jim Mattis, the US defense secretary, who reportedly resisted White House pressure for more swingeing, sustained military action. Mattis quickly declared the attacks were a “one-off”. Britain and France appear content, with caveats, to accept his verdict. Whether that applies to Donald Trump is less certain. His antics since this crisis unfolded last weekend have been inflammatory, confrontational and deeply irresponsible. His reckless words and actions, not least his tweeted threats to fire off “smart” missiles at Russia, again demonstrated his unfitness for America’s highest office. We now have the answer to the question of how Trump would handle an international crisis: very badly. Trump is a liability for America and the world. The verdict on Theresa May’s performance at this moment of acute international stress will be more nuanced. The prime minister had to balance the demands of a bullying, incompetent US president with the British national interest, in the particular context of the Skripal chemical weapons attack. The government rightly sees Russia’s hand in both Douma and Salisbury. May was also rightly concerned to uphold the global prohibition on chemical weapons. Participation in the strikes was thus both an affirmation of Britain’s essential, ongoing alliance with the US (as distinct from Trump) and another episode in the broader British and western argument with Moscow, which still has a long way to run. May should nevertheless be criticised for her willingness to sanction potentially risky military action without the approval of parliament. Timing is not an excuse. The Commons could have been recalled last week, in time for a debate and a vote. May, who has insisted on an evidential approach to Salisbury, also seems to have set aside the need for incontrovertible proof of regime responsibility for Douma. International inspectors were due there on Saturday. May’s conduct recalls similar, wrong-headed attempts to bypass parliament in the Brexit process. Yet overall, the prime minister emerges from this difficult episode with more credit than those who argued, with apparent disregard for the dire situation in Syria, that military intervention in any circumstance is wrong. The western powers do not have a right to tell other countries how to order their affairs. But democratic governments do have a moral and legal duty, as do all peace-loving citizens, to uphold universal human rights and international law. Despite the American president’s vainglorious “Mission Accomplished!” tweet yesterday, the essential problem remains unchanged by the weekend raids: Assad and his allies, contemptuous of this very limited attempt to punish them, will continue unchecked to murder Syria’s people – Idlib province is next – until they have “won” the war. And there is no credible, coherent or agreed western strategy for stopping them.