A loss of trust in Facebook in the light of the Cambridge Analytica scandal could prompt the EU to scrap its voluntary code of conduct on the removal of online hate speech in favour of legislation and heavy sanctions, the European commission has said. The EU’s executive arm is examining how to have hateful content removed swiftly by social media platforms, with tough legislation being one option that could replace the current system. Věra Jourová, the EU commissioner for consumers and justice, said the system as it stood, under which Facebook and others remove material and report back on their performance, relied on trust, which she suggested was ebbing away in the light of the misuse of personal data. Jourová said she would be grilling Sheryl Sandberg, Facebook’s chief operating officer, later this week over “unanswered questions” about the company’s past errors and future plans. “I want to discuss with her the measures to be taken to ensure the scandal will not be repeated,” the commissioner told the Guardian. “Maybe also we will touch upon the hate speech code of conduct. For me, of course, two things are important: that they apply to the EU laws, and the second field of my interest is where we cooperate on a voluntary basis. “A code of conduct on hate speech was an important piece of common work and I want to continue with it but it is based on trust. It must be there. They have to work on renewing this trust.” Of the refusal by Facebook’s founder and chief executive, Mark Zuckerberg, to give evidence to a UK parliamentary committee investigating fake news, Jourová said: “I hope he will come ... I’m happy I don’t have to plan his diary.” In an appearance in front of two US senate committees on Tuesday, Zuckerberg said removing hateful content from the site was difficult and beyond the capacity of artificial intelligence. He said that by the end of 2018 the company would have 20,000 employees devoted to security and reviewing content. Facebook has been accused by human rights advocates in Myanmar of not doing enough to weed out hate messages. United Nations officials investigating a possible genocide against Myanmar’s Rohingya Muslim minority said last month that Facebook had been a source of anti-Rohingya propaganda. “What’s happening in Myanmar is a terrible tragedy and we need to do more,” Zuckerberg said. Facebook planned to hire dozens more Burmese-language speakers to remove threatening content, he said. The free-speech arguments made by social media platforms that argue against legislation have already fallen on deaf ears in some EU countries. In Germany, companies face fines of up to €50m (£43m) if they persistently fail to remove illegal content. Jourová said she was wary of following the German path, because of the thin line between removing offensive material and censorship, but said all options were on the table. “We are still working on the possible legal proposals,” she said. “I still stand on the position that for terrorism, extremism and images of child abuse we should have a more reliable framework that could introduce sanctions for lack of compliance … but the line between prohibiting hate speech and censorship is very thin.” Jourová previously said she felt forced to close down her own personal Facebook account as it had become “full of hatred” and abuse. “I don’t plan to open an account now,” she said.