Every time I roast a guinea fowl, or cook one in a lidded pot with cider, apples and rosemary, I ask myself why this doesn’t happen more often. The skin crisps pleasingly, the flesh is gently gamey and the roast bones make a flavoursome broth. There is enough meat to feed four on the average bird – they are rarely very large – but hardly anything left for sandwiches as there is with a big chicken. Maybe that’s it: my fondness for a roast chicken sandwich with a slice of thyme and onion stuffing, sprigs of watercress and a thick drift of mayonnaise on a Sunday evening. A guinea fowl roasts sweetly and is good value. I always stuff them with cooked whole wheat, herbed breadcrumbs or crushed floury potatoes. The roasting juices trickle down through the stuffing, enriching it with the flavour of the bird. We seem to have got out of the practice of making stuffing, but I like everything about it: the way it makes the meat go further, adding another savoury element to the plate and introducing a fresh note of lemon or soft spice, or whatever else we season it with. I have moved on from the traditional sausage-based stuffing, using lighter mediums, such as mograbia and fregola – the Sardinian semolina pasta, like large pearls of couscous. Oh, and freekeh. The green wheat works in this case, too. It took me a long time to work out why I hold such a fondness for Easter eggs. I have finally clicked that it is the thinness of the chocolate that appeals – so crisp and fine and melting is it. I have never been much of a fan of chocolate desserts, finding them too rich after dinner and preferring them as, say, a mid-afternoon treat. That said, I wouldn’t say no to a classic chocolate mousse, but I like it with a crisp, thin, curling almond biscuit or one of those Belgian waffle wafers. This week, I took to crumbling soft ginger cookies and folding them through the mousse before it sets – crunchy nuggets among the soft, fudgy chocolate. I like to serve chocolate mousse with a jug of simple double cream. Something to flatter the mousse rather than smother it. Happy Easter. This stuffing works well with chicken, too. The fregola with herbs and lemon started life as a side dish for grilled lamb. Here, it benefits from the juices of the bird, trickling through as it roasts. Serves 4fregola 200glemon thyme leaves 2 tbspparsley a small bunchbutter 30gbay leaves 3guinea fowl 1 x 1.5kgolive oil 3 tbsp For the peas:parsley 10golive oil 3 tbsplemon juice of 1peas 300g, frozenmint leaves a small handful Bring a medium saucepan of water to the boil, salt it lightly, then add the fregola and bring back to the boil. Lower the heat to a simmer, and leave to cook for 10-15 minutes, until al dente. Drain and set aside. Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Chop the lemon thyme leaves and stir into the fregola. Remove the leaves from the parsley and roughly chop, then add to the fregola with the butter cut into small pieces. Season with salt and black pepper. Add the bay leaves then spoon the fregola inside the guinea fowl. Rub the olive oil over the bird and season, then roast in the preheated oven for about 40-45 minutes. Remove the guinea fowl from the oven and leave to rest for 10 minutes. For the peas: chop the parsley, warm the olive oil in a large, shallow pan then squeeze in the lemon juice. Tip in the peas, cover with a lid so the peas steam, and cook for 3-4 minutes, then stir in a little salt and the parsley and mint leaves. Carve the guinea fowl then serve with the peas, stuffing and juices from the tin. Chocolate mousse benefits from the addition of something crunchy. Here, ginger biscuits, smashed and tossed with chocolate. The slightly chewy version works better than hard-as-nails gingernuts. Serves 6For the ginger crumb:dark chocolate 75gbutter 40glight ginger biscuits 200g For the mousse:dark chocolate 300gbutter 40gespresso, hot 2 tbspeggs 5 For the ginger crumb: break the chocolate into pieces and melt in a heatproof bowl over a pan of simmering water. Put the biscuits into a freezer bag and crush into small, gravel-sized pieces with a rolling pin. Alternatively, use a food processor, but take care not to reduce them to fine crumbs. Stir the butter gently into the melted chocolate. (Too much stirring will make the chocolate “seize”.) Fold the biscuit crumbs into the chocolate. Make the mousse: break the chocolate into small pieces and put it in a heatproof mixing bowl. Place the bowl over a saucepan of simmering water and leave the chocolate to melt without stirring. Separate the eggs. Cut the butter into small pieces and add to the chocolate, then pour in the coffee, stirring lightly. Remove the bowl from the heat. Beat the egg whites until almost stiff then fold them into the chocolate. Pour a third of the mousse into a dish, add a layer of the crumbled chocolate-covered crumbs, then a second layer, then more crumbs, the remaining mousse then lastly more chocolate crumbs. Refrigerate for 4 hours or until the mousse has set. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater