I found a list in an old notebook the other day, the pages yellowing, the faded pencil marks almost illegible. It was my wish list for a new house. Near the top, just underneath the obvious deal-breakers of “garden” and “kitchen large enough to eat in” was “in walking distance of a good fishmonger”. I have always lived close to a fish shop. The only time I didn’t was as a teenager, when the fish came round twice a week, like the bread, cakes and vegetables, in a white Bedford van. (We had a mobile library, too, that arrived with its little shelf of cookbooks on the first Wednesday of each month.) To this day, no food shopping quite excites me like the prospect of a sparkling ice-strewn slab of a fish shop. I am drawn to net bags of mussels, clams and cockles like a kid to a rock pool. Untidy piles of langoustines, all fine whiskers and fragile legs, dressed crabs and razor clams and ghostly white squid all unfailingly grab my attention. Langoustines are usually eaten with a bowl of basil mayonnaise, or split from head to tail and grilled with some sort of butter – lemon, tarragon, garlic. This week we made a bacon butter to melt over them with nuggets of crisp, smoked streaky. A recipe that got us all teasing out the snow-white flesh and salty juices with our tongues, snapping and sucking the toasted shells and licking our buttery fingers. A recipe that reminded me what a smart idea that little wish list had been. Serves 4 new potatoes 400ggarlic 1 whole, small headolive oil 50ml egg yolks 2lemon juice of half a small onemussels 400gsugar snap peas 150gwatercress (or land cress) a large handfulsalt and black pepper Wash the potatoes, then place them in a steamer basket over boiling water. Tuck in the garlic, cover tightly with a lid, then leave over the heat for 15-20 minutes until the potatoes are tender. Remove from the heat, then slice them, a little thicker than a £1 coin, dropping them into a bowl as you go. Toss the potatoes in a trickle of olive oil, cover and set aside. Pop the garlic cloves from their skins, mash them to a paste using a pestle and mortar, then scrape into a mixing bowl. Stir in the egg yolks and then the lemon juice, a little at a time, mixing thoroughly. Beat in the olive oil and season with black pepper and a little salt. Check the mussels over, washing them in cold running water and discarding any broken shells or those that don’t close when tapped on the side of the sink. Tip the wet mussels into a medium saucepan, add a splash of water and place over a high heat. Cover tightly then let the mussels cook in their own steam for 3 or 4 minutes until the shells have opened. Remove from the heat then remove the mussels from their shells. Keep the shelled mussels in a bowl, moistened with a little of their cooking juices, covered with a plate. Slice the sugar snap peas in half and add to the mussels. Wash the watercress or land cress and shake it dry, then add to the mussels. Toss together the sliced potatoes, mussels and peas, cress and dressing and place on a serving dish. Serves 2 butter 125gsmoked streaky bacon 6 rashersdill 10glangoustines 8Lemons 2 Make the butter first. Get the oven grill hot. Lay the bacon on a baking sheet and cook until very crisp, then drain on kitchen paper. Break the bacon into pieces and put them into a food processor. Add the dill and its stalks, then the butter and a little black pepper. You won’t need any salt. Process to a rough paste (over processing will make it oily). Cut the langoustines in half lengthways. Lay them on the baking sheet, cut side up and close together, then dot with lumps of the bacon butter. Cook the langoustines under the heat for about 6 minutes until the butter has melted and the surface is golden brown. Serve with halved lemons, and something to wipe your fingers on. A useful recipe for when you come across fresh herring. The pickled ginger slices through the oily notes of the fish, offering a warmth and gentle spice. (Ground ginger was added to early recipes for fish patés but I think the pickled version is better.) Serves 4 carrot 1, large lemon juice of halfwhite wine vinegar 1 tbsppickled sushi ginger 10gdill 1 small bunchherrings 500g, raw, pin bonedbutter 75gbay leaves 2rye bread toasted, to serve Coarsely grate the carrot to give 3 heaped tbsp and put in a mixing bowl with the lemon juice and the vinegar. Tear or cut the pickled ginger into small pieces and add to the carrot, together with 1 tbsp of juice from the packet or jar. Finely chop the dill and stir in with a little salt and black pepper. Lay the herring fillets in a baking dish or roasting tin, add the butter, a bay leaf or two, and bake for half an hour or so, until soft and tender. Let the fish cool a little then, using a couple of forks, pull the fish from its skin in small flakes. Fold the fish and the butter from the baking tin into the grated carrot, taking great care not to over mix. Check the seasoning – it should be buttery but fresh and crisp. Serve with hot toast. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater