Liverpool clearly need some help running riot against highly favoured opponents so, before they try to do it all again at the Etihad, the grapevine is abuzz with suggestions they would like someone to do the honours next season. That man is Paulo Dybala, the Juventus whizz, for whom Jürgen Klopp could cough up £90m before sitting back and watching his team attack, attack, attack. Should that not come off there is always Fiorentina’s winger Federico Chiesa – the son of 1990s favourite Enrico – whom Liverpool and Chelsea are both keen on and his manager, Stefano Pioli, admits the 20-year-old could depart the club in pre-season. The picture is slightly more modest across Stanley Park but Sam Allardyce – assuming in bold Big Sam fashion that he will be in charge of Everton next season – has his eyes on a big-money addition of his own. He would like to shell out £25m on the West Ham left-back Aaron Cresswell, who is apparently keen on a move back to his home city. Westfield or Las Ramblas? That could be the dilemma facing Barcelona’s Yerry Mina at the end of the season, with West Ham keen on snapping up the Colombian defender on loan. He only arrived at the Camp Nou in January and a dash of Premier League experience is thought useful for his long-term prospects. Another South American could join David Moyes’s project this summer, but rather more cheaply than expected. Salomón Rondón will be available for £16.5m if – when – West Brom are relegated, meaning they will receive around half the sum Tianjin Quanjian offered them a year or so back. West Ham are up for the bargain but Chelsea and Tottenham could also see the Venezuelan as a decent back-up bet for their current first-choice forwards. Perhaps Rondón would fill the boots of Javier Hernández, whose vital equaliser at Stamford Bridge came from the bench and who is cheesed off at his lack of starting action, making him consider a move once this season is done. Meanwhile, some of the league’s bigger guns are chasing wonderkids for – and you can decide – stockpiling or careful, step-by-step introduction to the first team. Manchester United are interested in the Sheffield Wednesday forward George Hirst – another son of a famous father, David – while Arsenal are favourites for Real Madrid’s attacking midfielder Robert Navarro after Manchester City cooled their interest. Navarro turns 16 on 12 April and, after that, can choose his own career adventure.