It is not a pastime for which rabbits usually require much encouragement. But a mystery depletion in numbers on the Dutch island of Schiermonnikoog has led to an emergency effort to coax the local population into breeding … well, like rabbits. Ferrets are being deployed to chase the reluctant remaining animals out of their warrens and into the hands of conservationists, who are bringing them together in the hope that romance will blossom. Rabbit numbers on the island have been on the decline for the last three years. Until recently there were about a 1,000 – a little more than the human population – but it is believed that the figure is now down to barely 100. The concern is that the unexplained decrease could have a negative effect on the biodiversity of Schiermonnikoog, a 9.9 mile-long nature reserve off the northern coastline, which attracts 300,000 visitors a year. The rabbits play a vital role in nibbling away at the invasive American black cherry, a variety of the woody plant Prunus serotina that gets in the way of other species. Birds on the island are also known to use the rabbit warrens to lay eggs. Jan Willem Zwart, a forester on Schiemonnikoog, said the fall in the rabbit population was already noticeable. “Rabbits eat grasses and saplings that have just come up. That prevents the landscape from becoming closed. We do not know exactly how many rabbits are still here, but we clearly see that the vegetation on the island is increasing,” he said. The rabbit population has traditionally gone up and down, often due to outbreaks of infectious diseases, such as myxomatosis, a virus introduced into Europe in the 1950s as an agent to control numbers. But the consistently low number of baby rabbits in recent years remains a mystery. Those surviving on the island have largely congregated around the village. Zwart told local media: “We are going to catch a number of rabbits on the island. In the village there are still enough and there they cause inconvenience. In the long run, we want to expand them elsewhere on the island, where they are needed. “We want to do that in an animal-friendly way. That is why we are going to use … ferreting. The ferret goes into the rabbit hole and chases them out. We will catch them there.” The rabbits will then be held together in a confined space in the hope that nature follows its course, albeit with a little human help. The project, run by the Dutch national heritage organisation, the Natuurmonumenten, considered importing rabbits but the paperwork was deemed overwhelming because a permit is required for every rabbit.