Eurovision winner Conchita has told fans that she is HIV-positive, and has been in regular treatment for “several years”. The 29-year-old Austrian drag performer made a public statement on Instagram in response to an ex-boyfriend allegedly threatening to reveal the information. “I have been HIV-positive for several years,” Conchita wrote (translated from German). “That is actually irrelevant to the public, but an ex-boyfriend threatened to reveal this private information. In the future, I don’t want to give anyone the right to cause me pain and influence my life in that way.” heute ist der tag gekommen, mich für den rest meines lebens von einem damoklesschwert zu befreien: ich bin seit vielen jahren hiv-positiv. das ist für die öffentlichkeit eigentlich irrelevant, aber ein ex-freund droht mir, mit dieser privaten information an die öffentlichkeit zu gehen, und ich gebe auch in zukunft niemandem das recht, mir angst zu machen und mein leben derart zu beeinflussen. seit ich die diagnose erhalten habe, bin ich in medizinischer behandlung, und seit vielen jahren unterbrechungsfrei unter der nachweisgrenze, damit also nicht in der lage, den virus weiter zu geben. ich wollte aus mehreren gründen bisher nicht damit an die öffentlichkeit gehen, nur zwei davon will ich hier nennen: der wichtigste war mir meine familie, die seit dem ersten tag bescheid weiss und mich bedingungslos unterstützt hat. ihnen hätte ich die aufmerksamkeit für den hiv-status ihres sohnes, enkels und bruders gerne erspart. genauso wissen meine freunde seit geraumer zeit bescheid und gehen in einer unbefangenheit damit um, die ich jeder und jedem betroffenen wünschen würde. zweitens ist es eine information, die meiner meinung nach hauptsächlich für diejenigen menschen von relevanz ist, mit denen sexueller kontakt infrage kommt. coming out ist besser als von dritten geoutet zu werden. ich hoffe, mut zu machen und einen weiteren schritt zu setzen gegen die stigmatisierung von menschen, die sich durch ihr eigenes verhalten oder aber unverschuldet mit hiv infiziert haben. an meine fans: die information über meinen hiv-status mag neu für euch sein – mein status ist es nicht! es geht mir gesundheitlich gut, und ich bin stärker, motivierter und befreiter denn je. danke für eure unterstützung! A post shared by  conchita (@conchitawurst) on Apr 15, 2018 at 12:01pm PDT She continued: “I have been in treatment since my diagnosis, and under the threshold of detection for several years, preventing the spread of the virus. Until now, I haven’t wanted to go public with this information for several reasons, two of which I will discuss: the most important was my family, who since day one have been discreet and unconditionally supportive. I would gladly have spared them the attention over their son, uncle and brother being HIV-positive. Likewise, my friends have been aware of this for quite some time, and behaved in an unbiased way that I would wish for anyone in this situation. Secondly, I believe that this information is primarily relevant to those with whom I have had sexual contact. “Coming out is better than being outed. I hope to show courage, and to take another step towards the destigmatisation of people who have become infected with HIV due to their actions or through no fault of their own. To my fans: this information about my HIV may be news to you, but it’s not the totality of my identity. I am well, and stronger, more motivated, and freer than ever. Thank you for your understanding!” Conchita, formerly known as Conchita Wurst, won the Eurovision song contest in 2014 for her song Rise Like a Phoenix. Wurst is a recording artist and drag queen portrayed by Thomas Neuwirth. The BBC reports that the singer recently recorded a special edition of BBC Radio 2’s Friday Night Is Music Night, performing her favourite diva songs, accompanied by the 60-piece BBC Concert Orchestra. The concert will be broadcast later this month.