Too often we respond to a perceived crime wave with calls for tougher punishment, increased stop and searches, more police funding, and crackdowns on drug trafficking. Yet young people continue to be drawn into conflicts that end in bloodshed. There is the well-known adage that “insanity is trying the same thing over and over again and expecting different results”, however the visceral nature of violent crime seems to bring about a collective insanity that leads our society to repeat the same mistakes over and over again. I don’t think it’s contested that many of the 50 people killed in attacks in London this year are likely to be linked to gang-related feuds and activity. It is also evident that both victims and perpetrators are often under the age of 18 – still children and understood to be relatively early in terms of human development. The fact that these are young people caught up in gang activity should be key to developing a response that will have a lasting effect. They have been drawn into a twisted perception of reality by their gang elders. I've seen how lost they become to reason We need to understand them not as violent criminals, or – as so often in the past – feral and intrinsically antisocial beings, but as victims of child criminal exploitation who are subject to levels of coercion and control. Having worked with good and decent young people who have been drawn into a twisted perception of reality by their gang elders – a world of enemies, honour and artificial territorialism that seems utterly alien to those outside the sphere of control – I’ve seen how lost they can become to reason. However hard their parents try to talk sense into them (and I’ve seen them try incredibly hard), gang elders exert far stronger control. Children tell me what they get out of gang life: friendship, support and a way to achieve independence. All reasonable desires that most of us hold. When I ask how people might achieve those things without selling drugs or feuding, it’s really hard for them to find meaningful answers. How do you achieve independence when you’re permanently excluded from school, or stopped by police waiting for you as you return home to your mum’s house in the early hours of the morning (so you’ve taken to sleeping more and more often in the “trap houses” you work in)? What can you do when the gang elders you look up to expect more time and commitment of you than any boss or educator? How can you escape when the things you may have seen or done at such a young age are more than likely to have left you attempting to manage the symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder while still being at constant risk of experiencing further trauma? Increasing police presence on our streets doesn’t work. The police have an interest in public protection at almost any cost, and more often than not that comes at the expense of the children doing the bidding of gang elders. I have been in many multi-agency meetings with police, youth‑offending officers and educators in my capacity as a social worker, and have been utterly dismayed at the lack of empathy and understanding of child exploitation exhibited by police officers. This results in officers being eager to punish children rather than protect them from coercion and control. Many of the families of children drawn into gangs have been so scarred by their experience with the police that they no longer trust them. And I don’t think the police have the capacity or the will to engage with this type of crime as a child protection issue. So what could help? A return to community social work is needed. Small pockets of multi-disciplinary social work teams should be located across cities, linked closely to the communities in which they work. Social workers with an understanding of human development, power, coercion and control, who are given the time and space to work closely with communities to provide the support and advocacy they need. The government’s £40m serious violence strategy must increase funding for community projects that are led by the people affected by the issues those projects are seeking to address. Until we understand that knife violence is a child protection issue and not an issue of criminal justice, our children will continue to hurt one another and we will continue to demand the implementation of more punitive measures that don’t work. • Anonymous is a student social worker in a child safeguarding and protection team for a London borough • Comments on this article have been pre-moderated to ensure the discussion is on the topics that have been written about in the article.