It is rare to hear birds chirping along Yonge Street, a bustling six-lane thoroughfare that divides Canada’s largest city into east and west. But on Monday, as Saman Tabasinejad carried bouquets of flowers to the site where pedestrians were hit by a van in Toronto, she heard them. As evening fell, the road was empty, save for a two-kilometre stretch barricaded by police cars and officers. Most of the bars and patios – usually bustling as the work day wound down – were shuttered. The white rental van, with a crumpled front, was surrounded by at least nine police vehicles. The neighbourhood was now a crime scene, following the death of at least 10 people. Tabasinejad, 25, had spent much of the morning canvassing the area for the upcoming provincial election in Ontario – as a candidate for the New Democratic party – and was having more luck than expected: following a balmy weekend, a number of residents had taken the day off. “It was such a beautiful day. People just wanted to be out on the street,” she said. But as she left a sushi restaurant at about lunchtime, she saw swarms of firetrucks. She first worried there might have been an incident at the seniors centre across the street, until she noticed the debris: shoes, a mailbox and a fire hydrant scattered along the street. As she walked further north, she came upon three bodies covered in bright orange tarps. It wasn’t until just before 8pm – almost seven hours after the incident – that firefighters began to remove the bodies from the road. They formed a ring holding thick yellow tarpaulin around the deceased victims to shield them from gathering onlookers. Residents and passersby huddled at an impromptu memorial set up across the street from where the first victim – a young woman – was struck. They lit candles and signed messages of remembrance to memorialize the 10 lives lost. “It could’ve been anybody,” said Konstantin Goulich, who has lived across the street for 15 years and had purchased paper and markers from a craft store for the memorial. “We live in a unified society. And people support each other. The outpouring of grief here is evidence of this.” Tabasinejad planted a number of roses alongside the signed posters. “Each life had so much love. I just want to honour them.” Mehrsa Marjani broke down at the sight of the memorial and was comforted by her husband, Farzad. She had been at a cafe when the van struck its first victim at the intersection of Finch and Yonge streets. “This lady died in front of me,” she said. “People tried so hard to rescue her. They kept trying. But they couldn’t.” Messages of support were written in at least four languages, reflective of the diverse neighbourhood. The northern suburb of Toronto is home to large Chinese, Korean and Iranian populations – as well as a hub for new arrivals to Canada. More than eight hours after the attack, bewilderment hung heavily over the neighbourhood as residents who commute to other areas of the city returned home. “People were calling me at work, asking me if I was OK. I didn’t understand what they were talking about,” said Cristina Cibotaru as she surveyed the long lines of yellow tape. “This is such a safe place. I walk this road everyday.” A number of residents commented they’d never seen the street like this before. “The sun was setting, it should have been a beautiful moment,” said Tabasinejad “But the silence is deafening. It’s a little too quiet.”