Last week my mum was driving me from the coast up to my house, to stay for a couple of days, when I decided to ask her something that had been perplexing me. “Mum, why did you wrap the tree in my backyard in plastic?” A few months ago I’d come home from an overseas trip to find the large tree in the backyard had the entirety of its lower limbs wrapped in a thick black plastic. It was not the American Beauty plastic bag in the tree that so transfixed Wes Bentley’s character (“Sometimes there’s so much beauty in the world, I feel like I can’t take it, and my heart is just going to cave in”). Instead, it was a menacing presence, like a Dark Mofo installation or a visual arts representation of a black hole. The plastic was thick and tough – the sort aid organisations use to shield dead bodies after a natural disaster. I presumed my parents had wrapped the tree last time they stayed because the fairy lights on its branches were shining into their bedroom and they couldn’t get to sleep (why not just take the lights out then, Mum, why did you have to wrap the tree in plastic?). “I don’t know what you’re talking about,” my mother said. “We did not wrap your tree in plastic.” We pulled into the house. Half the plastic was still on the tree – I had removed some of it, then got tired and hadn’t finished the job. The portion I had removed had taken up most of the room in my large yellow recycling bin. The plastic that was left was pockmarked by the weather and covered in bird shit. It was ratty and flapped in the wind like an evil flag. In a weird irony I got a text message from my editor not long after we arrived, asking me to write about going a week without plastics. I looked at my diary. Easy, I was spending much of my week at home, where the only plastic I would be likely to see was the plastic hanging off my tree. “I shall try valiantly to live without plastics!” I wrote back, knowing that the difficulty I faced was not living without plastic but the opposite. It was a challenge to live with plastics! Very few places in my town carry plastic bags and you have to make a special case to get one. I live in a village that was established around the mid-19th century. The buildings are beautifully preserved. There’s an old-fashioned courthouse and a town hall, with a clocktower, like the one in Back to the Future. In recent years the town has been gentrifying at a great clip and although it may be unconscious I have observed that many people in the town don’t just want to preserve the 1860s – they want to be in the 1860s. They want to be pre-plastic people. There is no Uber Eats (there’s no Uber). Children play with wooden toys. Sometimes I see people on unicycles down the wide main streets. I see men wearing capes unironically. The men have Ned Kelly beards (no disposable plastic razors necessary) and wear lumberjack shirts or formal black waistcoats. The women dress like Quaker school teachers in chunky cardigans and long smock dresses made of rough natural fibres. I am yet to see anyone with signs of visible plastic surgery. When I arrived, some 18 months ago, my phone and internet stopped working. We were in a Vodafone blackspot – just like the 1860s! Then there’s getting around. As I don’t drive, I have to take prehistoric modes of transport: walking and cycling. My house was built in the 1860s and, when one of my brothers first saw it, he got very excited because it reminded him of the fake 1860s houses at the model maritime village in Warrnambool, Flagstaff Hill. “It’s like the candlemaker’s cottage!” In this ye olde environment, plastic is hard to come by. I feel shame when asking shops for a plastic bag and do the verbal equivalent of a carbon offset to justify it: “I am asking for this plastic bag because I have to walk two miles home in the rain and I don’t want these loose salmon steaks and laundry detergent to get wet.” So when my mother and I set off into town on our buggies (just joking, my mum drove) to buy some provisions, we did so with our largest handbags. The first stop was to get some ham. The man in the small goods shop neatly wrapped the ham (smoked on the premises) in wax paper. In the organic vegetable shop next door, we were not offered plastic bags. When we stopped into a cafe for a drink, our iced tea came with metal straws. We went to the cellar door of a winemaker, who told us that there were no sulphates in the wine and that we might find sediment in the bottom. We bought a bottle of wine and were not offered bags. Likewise at the next shop, where we bought two glass bottles of mineral water. We were running out of arms! At the weekend I went to the farmers’ market where I carried the food home in my pockets (no plastic bags) and bought a bunch of flowers secured with twine. (Twine! So 1860s!) At the flea market, I bought recycled clothes, including a chunky Quaker cardigan. Once again, no plastic bags were offered to shoppers. My friend bought a heavy jacket and wore it home. (Bodies: the best way to transport clothes!) At the end of her stay, Mum and I drank our wine in the backyard of the candlemaker’s cottage, waiting for the tide of sediment to hit our back palates. The fairy lights tried to sparkle under the thick black plastic. “You know what?” said Mum. “I think someone has poisoned your tree and put plastic on the branches so that the birds don’t die.” The tree did look a bit sick. Maybe it had been poisoned. In a way, it was like American Beauty, or maybe a David Lynch film where under the wholesome plastic-free exterior there lurked menace: the worm in the heart of a rose. • Brigid Delaney is a Guardian Australia columnist