Prep 15 minCook 20 minServes 4-6 95ml vegetable oil110g honey110g dark brown soft sugar1 tsp table salt1 tsp ground cinnamon½ tsp ground mahlab seeds½ tsp ground cardamom 160g puffed wheat85g pecans, halved40g sunflower seeds50g pumpkin seeds30g sesame seeds85g almonds, very roughly chopped To serveYoghurtFresh fruit Heat the oven to 190C/375F/gas 5 and line a couple of large flat baking trays with parchment. Combine the oil, honey and sugar in a medium pan and set on a high heat. Mix well and bring to the boil, stirring occasionally to stop it burning. Put the rest of the ingredients in a large bowl and mix well. Once the honey syrup is bubbling, carefully pour it over the dry ingredients. Use a large spoon to stir, turning the contents of the bowl over a few times until everything is well coated with the syrup. Transfer the mixture to the baking trays and flatten it out a little to an even layer of cereal. Put in the centre of the oven and bake for 10 minutes, then carefully remove one tray at a time, and mix the cereal around to make sure everything is getting roasted and crisp. Return the trays to the oven for another five to six minutes, then take them out and leave them to cool entirely before breaking the ashura into large clusters. Serve with yoghurt and fresh fruit – or plain, with milk, if you prefer. Transfer the rest to an airtight container – it will keep for well over two weeks.Honey and Co: The Baking Book by Sarit Packer and Itamar Srulovich (Headline Home)  Prep 5 minSoak 8 hr+ Serves 1 60g rolled oatsA few drops vanilla extract1 tbsp chia seeds175ml unsweetened almond milk2 tbsp fresh or frozen blueberries Combine the oats, vanilla extract and chia seeds in a small glass jar, cover with the milk, stir to mix and top with blueberries. You could use any other berries or even dried fruits, which will plump up as the mixture soaks. Close with a lid and put in the fridge for a few hours – preferably more than eight, or better still, overnight.Green Kitchen Travels by David Frenkiel and Luise Vindahl (Hardie Grant) Prep 10 minCook 20 minServes 2 150g short-grain brown rice400ml coconut milk1 cinnamon stick3 cardamom pods, ground½ tsp vanilla paste or 1 pinch vanilla powderSalt1 lime, juice of 1 and zest of ½Sugar, honey or sweetener (optional)1 small mango, peeled, stoned and sliced2 tsp black sesame or poppy seeds1 tsp flaked or desiccated coconut Begin by cooking the rice according to the packet instructions. You can also use leftover rice, as long as it has been cooled and stored properly in the fridge. Combine it with the coconut milk, cinnamon stick, cardamom and vanilla in a large saucepan with a pinch of salt. Slowly bring to a simmer, stirring occasionally, for about 10-15 minutes, until the coconut milk has reduced and the porridge is creamy. Add a splash of water or milk if you take it too far. Remove the cinnamon stick, stir through the lime zest and juice and sweeten with your favourite sweetener, if you like. Divide between two bowls, top with the mango slices and sprinkle over the sesame seeds and coconut.Lagom by Steffi Knowles-Dellner (Quadrille) Prep 5 minCook 5 minServes 2 190g rolled oats35g almonds, roughly chopped2 tbsp butter or coconut oil3 tbsp honey, agave or maple syrup Dry-toast the oats and almonds together in a large deep frying pan over a high heat for five minutes, stirring often. Make a hole in the middle of the mixture and add the butter or coconut oil along with the honey (or other sweetener). Continue to heat and stir the mixture for a further five minutes, making sure everything is well coated. Remove from the heat and allow to cool before transferring to a lidded jar for storage – it will keep for up to two weeks.Top With Cinnamon by Izy Hossack (Hardie Grant) Prep 15 minCook 40 minCool 20 minServes 4 150g rolled oats60g almonds, halved1 tsp baking powder1 tsp cinnamon½ tsp fine salt240ml almond milk60ml maple syrup1 egg1½ tsp vanilla extract1 apple, peeled, cored and cubed2 bananas, sliced1 pear, peeled, cored and cubedYoghurt, to serve (optional) Heat the oven to 190C/375F/gas 5, and grease a cake tin or casserole dish. In a bowl, combine the oats, almonds, baking powder, cinnamon and salt. In another bowl, combine the milk, maple syrup, egg, vanilla and chopped apple. Add the dry mix to the wet and thoroughly combine. Put a layer of half the banana, then a layer of half the pear on the base of the tin or casserole dish, cover with half the oat mixture, then the remaining fruit and the rest of the oat mix. Bake for 35-40 minutes, until set and golden. Leave to cool for 10 minutes, then spoon out into bowls and serve immediately, with yoghurt if you like.Healthy Baking by Jourdan Bourke (Orion) Prep 5 min Soak 8 hrCook 1½ hrServes 4 200g pearl barley, rinsed1 tsp ground cinnamon80g chopped walnuts, toasted2 tbsp caster sugar40g pomegranate seeds Soak the barley in cold water overnight. Drain and rinse the barley, put it into a large saucepan with the cinnamon and 600ml water, then bring to a boil. Lower the heat and simmer the barley for an hour to an hour and a half, or until tender, but still with a little bite. If necessary, top with more boiling watery (it evaporates quickly), stirring occasionally to prevent it from sticking to the bottom of the pan. Be careful not to add too much water, because it can become stodgy. To finish, stir in the walnuts, sugar, and pomegranate and serve warm.Middle Eastern Vegetarian Cookbook by Salma Hage (Phaidon)