US officials published a list on Tuesday of $50bn in Chinese imports set to be targeted by US tariffs, the latest move in Donald Trump’s simmering trade confrontation with Beijing. The list – which includes electronics, aircraft parts, medicine, machinery and other goods – has yet to be finalized and is intended as a response to China’s alleged theft of American companies’ intellectual property and technology. The move comes a day after Beijing imposed duties on about $3bn in US exports, a countermeasure widely seen as a warning that Chinese officials will not hesitate to retaliate quickly. “The proposed list of products is based on extensive interagency economic analysis and would target products that benefit from China’s industrial plans while minimizing the impact on the US economy,” the office of the US trade representative, Robert Lighthizer, said in a statement. The proposed list identifies roughly 1,300 goods but remains subject to a 30-day public review process before it can take effect. China’s ministry of commerce on Wednesday condemned the US decision. “Disregarding strong representations by China, the United States announced the tariff proposals that are completely unfounded, a typical unilateralist and protectionist practice that China strongly condemns and firmly opposes,” the ministry said in a statement, according to Xinhua. “We have the confidence and ability to respond to any US trade protectionist measures,” a spokesperson said. “As the Chinese saying goes, it is only polite to reciprocate.” Over the last month, Trump has rattled markets and disregarded warnings from industry groups and members of his own Republican party in announcing punishing new tariffs on exports from major trading partners. Tensions had calmed in recent days, with investors taking a degree of solace in news that Washington had begun talks to resolve differences with the European Union and China. But in a series of irate tweets this week, Trump has repeatedly renewed threats to scrap the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta). Canadian, Mexican and US officials are currently in fraught negotiations to overhaul the 24-year-old agreement and analysts say the odds are slim that a deal can be reached before elections in Mexico and the United States.