The athletics world is madly searching for a new star to fill the void left by Usain Bolt but if such an individual was at the Carrara stadium on Australia’s Gold Coast on Monday evening they wore a heavy disguise. In the first major championships 100m final since Bolt retired the man once tipped as his successor, fellow Jamaican Yohan Blake, the equal second fastest man in history, suffered a shock defeat. The sprinter nicknamed The Beast, a world champion in 2011, has struggled to find his best form since major hamstring injuries in 2013 and 2014. But in a field devoid of many of the Commonwealth’s fastest men, with Canada’s Olympic bronze medallist Andre De Grasse and several talented Caribbean sprinters opting not to compete, he had been expected to claim a straightforward victory. But he stumbled out of the blocks and, despite recovering in the dying metres, could not catch South Africa’s Akani Simbine who took gold in 10.03sec with compatriot Henricho Bruintjies claiming silver in 10.17. “I was stumbling all the way and I didn’t recover from it,” Blake said, “I’m disappointed because I’ve been feeling good. I didn’t get the start and I was all over the place. I was supposed to take this race very easily because I was ready and feeling good. Maybe I was too confident and over thought it.” Adam Gemili had earlier withdrawn from the final with an a thigh strain sustained in the semi-final. “It’s devastating not to have the chance to compete,” he said. Asha Philip had qualified fastest for the women’s 100m final but could only manage fourth in 11.28 as Trinidad and Tobago’s Michelle-Lee Ahye took gold in 11.14 ahead of Jamaican duo Christania Williams and Gayon Evans. “I came fourth in Glasgow, fourth in Australia, it seems to be my favourite number,” said Philip, “It’s sport. I’m better than this. I ran faster in my semi. That’s just shocking to be honest, I should have done better than that.” Andrew Pozzi qualified fastest for Tuesday’s 110m hurdles final, narrowly ahead of Jamaica’s Hansle Parchment who will almost certainly provide his toughest opposition. Pozzi, who became the world indoor 60m champion in Birmingham in March, said now was his time to shine after years of injury blighted his progress. He was unable to compete at the Commonwealth Games in Glasgow in 2014 because of a foot injury. “I am at peace with what has happened in the past, and the fact that opportunities where I would have liked to win medals have gone,” he said. “I feel I am making up for lost time but I am conscious that there are very few opportunities in track and field and elite sport for you to really go out and make the most of championships. It is not a case of missing out in Glasgow and feeling I have to win here. I have not shied away from doing the Commonwealth and Indoor season whereas a lot of athletes have done one over the other. It is not driven by a need to catch up.”