Over the past two weeks Guardian critics have been setting out the case for their favourite decades in film-making, discussing the iconic movies that made them and outlining the cultural – and personal – impact they had. We asked you to respond with your favourite decades, and have been watching discussion unfold in the comments. From the 1920s to today, here are a few of the most interesting recommendations for past decades, and the films you remember them by. “The 60s for me, particularly because of Andrei Rublev, 2001: A Space Odyssey and The Graduate. I believe Andrei Tarkovsky’s Andrei Rublev to be the most visually poetic film ever made. Stanley Kubrick’s 2001 stretched the cinematic envelope and Mike Nichols’s The Graduate is important because choosing a character actor as the ‘guy who gets the girl’ opened the door to Al Pacino, Robert De Niro, Robert Duvall, Gene Hackman, Richard Dreyfuss (and every other actor who didn’t look like Robert Redford) to become major players, changing the face of Hollywood forever. conedison “There’s something about the cinematography and image quality of the 60s and early 70s that particularly appeals to me. For much of the first hour of the excellent Sam Spiegel film The Chase, for example, when the audience is pretty much in the dark about the plot, the gorgeous photography kept me hooked. Since Star Wars, this sort of thing’s been on a steep decline, and since Gollum [in the Lord of the Rings] I reckon many directors don’t worry about cinematography much any more. They figure, we’ll fix everything in edit.” freespeechoneach “The 90s keep a special place in my heart. Until then, cinemas were a place of dumb, predictable blockbusters. I barely noticed who was directing the films and I didn’t even bother to watch films on TV. Everything changed when, out of complete luck, I happened to see in a short period Reservoir Dogs, Barton Fink, Miller’s Crossing and Bad Lieutenant at a local cinema that held a US indie week at the occasion of the release of Abel Ferrara’s masterpiece. I had no idea that films could be so exciting and different from all the bland soup I was used to, it was a revelation that beyond the box office there was a place for me.” bf_silvertown “I’m a child of the 90s, so that’s the decade that gets my vote as an era when cinema made something of a leap, with new, important voices coming to the fore, new technology pushing the boundaries, and a trend away from the boorish blockbusters of the 80s towards comparatively more exciting, [sometimes] dangerous movies including Steven Spielberg’s Jurassic Park, Schindler’s List and Saving Private Ryan.” Skoolyad “Now you’re talking. Two of the most magical times I’ve had in a cinema were watching Murnau’s Sunrise and Browning/Chaney’s The Unknown. Perhaps the ultimate decade for horror, which has the peculiarly narcotic feel of dreams, like The Man Who Laughed. Nosferatu stands alone among the versions of the Dracula story. It’s like a stone tape and the memory of it is evocative of something that might perhaps have happened. It was the great decade of physical comedy, with Lloyd and Keaton remaining its peak. But the sadness of 20s film is that so much of it has been lost. How frustrating it is that 4 Devils no longer exists.” MildredPlotka “Silent film of the 20s is when cinema came of age. DW Griffith formulated the alphabet of film in the 1910s, but the Soviets created the syntax of cinema language still used today. There would be no Apocalypse Now (the Kurtz assassination intercut with the water buffalo sacrifice) without Eisenstein’s Strike (“The Carnage” chapter), there would be no Godfather baptism sequence, and hundreds of Potemkin “Odessa steps” references … Soviet montage proved that by image association you can convey complex emotions and engage the viewer intellectually. All that without a single word spoken. Cinema at its purest (albeit propaganda).” Karlos_Nagasaki “I was born in 1995 so this is the decade I remember best. It was all about epic sagas, and the trilogy was the big thing: The Lord of the Rings, Harry Potter, [Christopher] Nolan’s Batman, Tobey Maguire-era Spider-Man, Pirates of the Caribbean, and more. Even memorable standalone films such as Gangs of New York, Gladiator, District 9, Avatar and Slumdog Millionaire had a kind of epic scope to them. I think Hollywood has descended into a quagmire of sequels, spin-offs and reboots, fuelled by little more than nostalgia to keep it going.” ChristianRound “Nothing gives me that blast of nostalgia and feeling of escapism like a great 80s movie (I’m 42 now). It’s not just the films themselves but the times that surround them. And the music is like a soundtrack to your childhood. The Beverly Hills Cop theme tune and Eye of the Tiger from Rocky. Not to mention the great John Williams soundtracks. The likes of Raiders of the Lost Ark and Back to the Future are classics in any era, they just take you on a thrill ride and are just perfect examples of a great script, casting and pacing. They definitely don’t make films like that anymore.” McnultyDJW “While the 80s will always be regarded as ridiculous after the sublime heights of the 70s, it actually holds up – probably because of its proximity to the 70s. Lots of films from the 80s that were little-regarded then and are little-remembered now hold up surprisingly well. I’m thinking of films like 48 Hours, Beverley Hills Cop, First Blood, Lethal Weapon, Robocop, They Live, Terminator – considered lowbrow then, but in 2018 seeming gritty, gripping and really well-crafted. Ironically, even the bad films were elevated by the high standards that they represented a decline from.” GRANFALLOON “The more I see films from the 30s, 40s and 50s the more I’m aware that those decades are when pretty much everything we see on screen today was first attempted and, in many cases, perfected. Not just in Hollywood, but all over the world.” alexito “Hadley Freeman wrote that no other decade has made fun movies as brilliantly as the 80s? Try the 1930s, which is basically where every film style covered in her article is sourced from. Lucas, Zemeckis, Hughes, Spielberg etc were obsessed with recreating the decade’s approach to Hollywood entertainment. And they were by no means alone. Check out films from WC Fields, the Marx Brothers, Wheeler and Woolsey, Zazu Pitts and Thelma Todd, the more upmarket screwball comedies (social commentary being central to most of them), Capra’s films, all those action adventure comedies – and then have a look at their 80s stylistic copies.” Splatgadget “How can you discuss the 50s and not mention Ealing Studios? Two of my favourites are The Lady Killers and Kind Hearts and Coronets. If you want to dismiss Ealing films as fluffy, middle-class nostalgia pieces, watch these films. They are wonderfully cynical and dark. Kind Hearts is great social satire. The lead is an awful person but you still feel a pang a sympathy towards him because the way society – and his racist, snobbish family – has screwed him over. Alec Guinness is wonderful in both, playing a demented criminal in the first and seven parts in the second” “One of the things I like about the 40s, pressed between the Hays Office, the need for war propaganda, and the impending McCarthy years, is that film-makers had to work with a limited palette and vocabulary. Rather than coming out and saying something, they had to hint, or concoct allegories. When I was younger, I saw these films in literal terms. Now, it is all innuendo and double entendre.” TomC49 “The 40s for me too! Spent a most enjoyable couple of hours last night watching Mildred Pierce for the umpteenth time. It’s been great to be able to collect films I watched for the first time on the BBC years ago. I’ve finally got hold of Beyond the Forest, the film which drove Bette Davis to finally break with Warner Bros: ‘What a dump!’” eileanmor