English cyclist Melissa Lowther has been training all season for the time trial at the Commonwealth Games and travelled more than 24 hours to be on the Gold Coast. But she was denied her place on the start line after a Team England official failed to tick a box on her entry form. The extraordinary administrative error was not spotted until it was too late, despite “seven or eight” layers of checks where the mistake could have been identified. Despite the Commonwealth Games reputation as the “friendly games” the organisers refused to bend the rules to allow her to race. The 21-year-old was informed of the mistake the day before she was due to compete and it is understood she was devastated and her family, who were hoping to watch her on the TV from their home in Wakefield, are furious. Team England chef de mission Sarah Winckless, a former world champion rower, offered a personal apology to Lowther. “No athlete should suffer because of an administrative error by my group,” she said, “As soon as we knew of the error we did everything to rectify it and it went to the Commonwealth Games Federation reallocation committee and unfortunately they were not minded to add her into the draw. “What went wrong is we failed to tick a box a few days ago on an allocation to add to an event,” Winckless added, “We found that out at the technical meeting. I told her team leader Keith Reynolds and it was their choice to tell Melissa last night. I’ve spoken to Melissa and she was very reasonable, she was very disappointed not to be able to compete as we are on her behalf. I think more than embarrassing, it’s hugely disappointing and she has my sympathies and sincere apologies.” Lowther had been expected to perform well after missing out on several important races this season with the Commonwealth Games her primary target. British Cycling performance director Stephen Park, who is in the Gold Coast working with Team England, said Lowther may have even challenged for the minor medals on the course which ends on Currumbin Beachfront. While no individuals were named as having made errors, Winckless conceded that it should have been spotted sooner. “We need to review our processes, our checks and measures,” she said, “There were probably seven or eight steps where this error could have been seen. Unfortunately it hasn’t. The last one was at the technical meeting.” Despite the apology, Lowther was “gutted” by the error. She will still compete in the women’s road race on 14 April and posted on Instagram. “I can’t put into words how disappointed I am that to have been missed off the start list due to an administrative error,” she said. “It was one of my targets this season to make selection for the time trial event and I was so proud that my hard work in training had paid off. While Team England have apologised, I’m still gutted not to have the opportunity to represent my country after all the hard miles I have put in.” Commonwealth Games chief executive David Grevemberg defended the decision not to grant Lowther entry. “We have a very strict late-entry policy, and if we allow one athlete leniency, we’re required to provide it to all,” he said. “We did receive a late-entry request, but not within policy guidelines. It’s about setting that precedent. We’ve been consistent.”