William Forsythe’s new work for English National Ballet was to be the headline event of the ballet year. After decades of pushing the art form to its furthest extremes – the diabolically deconstructed and minimally reduced – the great experimentalist was finally announcing his return to his classical roots. What none of us expected from this new creation, though, was that Forsythe, now 68, would be getting down with the kids; and that, with a mix of infinite sweetness and outrageously sophisticated skill, he would be mashing together club music and classicism to create a banger of a hit. Playlist (Track 1,2) is a ballet album in two halves. The first, set to the smooth poppy beat of Peven Everett’s Surely Shorty, has the 12 dancers – all male – cruising through a compendium of classroom steps. With arms perfectly placed, feet perfectly stretched, the men ride the music to ever more virtuosic heights, crisscrossing the stage with feathery jumps and spins. The style of the movement is pure joy, as Forsythe inflects his academic language with disco bounce and shrug. Even better is the shining assurance with which he structures the choreography, massing and splintering his dancers through restless patterns, sustaining the dance impulse on a delirious, slow-burning crescendo. The second half continues, astoundingly, to rise as a Jax Jones remix of Lion Babe’s Impossible sends individual dancers flying into stratospheric jetes and pirouettes. The work is now in classic machismo terrain, yet Forsythe makes it look like everybody’s party. The audience start to yell, and when the ballet comes to a sudden stop – the dancers signing off with a courtly bow – the yelling becomes an ovation. To wield that degree of control is the sign of a master, and in Approximate Sonata 2016, a work in which Forsythe revisits past material, there’s the same authority. Constructed as a series of duets, the ballet is vintage Forsythe with its randomly rising backcloth, disparate scratchy music and ballet moves drastically realigned. What’s most striking is the bantering camaraderie with which the four couples turn the conventions of the pas de deux inside out, especially the classic gendering of roles. As Tiffany Hedman pats her partner’s buttocks when he edges too close, or Alina Cojocaru encourages Joseph Caley to make a second attempt at a tricky slide, we see men and women as casually equal partners. This kind of staged “rehearsal vibe” nearly always looks fake, but Forsythe makes it beguilingly natural and it’s a world away from the Grand Guignol drama that follows. In Jerome Robbins’s The Cage, a colony of predatory female insects devour their men with greedy hands and steely thighs, and while this gruesome battle of the sexes looked shocking at its 1951 premiere, today it feels like a period piece. The stark facial expressions and angular shapes are unassimilated borrowings from modern dance, and apart from the Novice, performed by Jurgita Dronina with a touching feral innocence, the storytelling is forced. If this Robbins revival is an oddly disappointing vehicle for the company, they are superb in everything else, including Aszure Barton’s unwieldy but technically demanding Fantastic Beings. ENB are looking more finessed and adventurous in this all-American programme than I have seen them in years. Better yet, I have never seen them having so much fun.