The people who run Severnshed, a restaurant in Bristol, have had a tricky week and their mood won’t be improved by this column popping up on their Google alert. Sorry, guys! Don’t worry, it really will blow over. This is all part of it blowing over – honestly, this is the same section as book reviews so it’s basically a secret. You may be wondering what the Severnshedders have done – unless literally everyone reading this works there, which I must glumly acknowledge is possible. Nevertheless, just in case, I’ll tell you. According to a post on TripAdvisor, they served their baked camembert starter (£12.95 for two to share) in an Asda camembert box. Or, to be accurate, the camembert part of it was in an Asda camembert box, which was itself on a board (which I’m actually fine with, so pipe down plate fascists), alongside bread and chutney. The bread and chutney were not in a Mother’s Pride bag and a Branston jar. And, in customer Emma Daniels, they chose the wrong woman to plonk it down in front of. Because she didn’t order it. No, she did order it. So they chose the right woman to plonk it down in front of. No one, not even Emma Daniels, is criticising that side of their operation. But when Emma Daniels had finished eating it, she flipped the box over, discovered the Asda camembert packaging and quite reasonably inferred she’d been eating an Asda camembert. We can’t know for sure. Maybe it was a Lidl camembert decanted into the fancy Asda camembert box they bought when the Queen visited. Or maybe it’s a fashion-forward design touch from someone who’s decided that Asda branding is this era’s Coca-Cola bottle – Warhol-like, they’re ironising the supermarket chains’ bland corporate ubiquity. In which case, the camembert within might be higher quality than Asda’s. Tesco Finest camembert, Waitrose camembert or even a camembert that doesn’t have the name of a supermarket on its packaging at all, if you can imagine anything so posh. I'm happy when a service charge is added – it mechanises the mortifying emotional maths of calculating how mean you are Nevertheless, the smart money is on it being an Asda camembert. And the smart amount of money to pay for an Asda camembert, as Emma Daniels revealed in her scathing Tripadvisor review, is £1.15. Not £12.95 plus service “added sneakily on your bill so you don’t really notice”. (Personally, I’m delighted when service charges are automatically added – it mechanises the mortifying emotional maths of calculating how mean you are. I can’t face that kind of self-examination after  a heavy meal.) The reason I’m cultivating a miasma of doubt around what happened at Severnshed is that I’m determined to respect the 21st century way of doing things. There has to be a full and thorough investigation. The most clear-cut mishaps and incompetences must have the absolute crap fully and thoroughly investigated out of them, as gradually as possible, so that by the time any culpability is confirmed, all public outrage, indeed any interest in the subject at all, has leached away. Praise be that humanity has a history of sometimes leaping to the wrong conclusions, because that justifies any large organisation in indefinitely delaying the moment we’re permitted to leap to even the most glaringly obvious right ones. Severnshed’s recently appointed general manager, Ashley Kirwan, belongs to this school of crisis management: “I really have to investigate it,” he reportedly said of Ms Daniels’s complaint. “I’m going to look into it and speak to the person. We’ve got to work out what actually happened. Until then I can’t really say much.” So it’s certainly not as simple as: “At our restaurant we serve camemberts we’ve bought from Asda without even taking them out of their boxes”. It’s far too soon to make that sort of sweeping statement.But, sod it, the Observer’s gone tabloid now – this is the dirty and discredited print media, scourge of Paul Hollywood’s girlfriend’s front garden – so let’s have some fun and take it as a working hypothesis that Severnshed habitually serves Asda camemberts in their packets. If they’re doing that, is that OK? For me, it’s all about the packet, not the £1.15. Emma Daniels herself acknowledged in her review that restaurants have to mark things up: “You pay for more than just the ingredients, you pay for atmosphere, staff, cooking etc etc”, but added: “Even when I cook it at home I cook it in a terracotta dish!!” That’s the key and that’s why I don’t mind boards. A board, a slate, or indeed a terracotta dish, displays effort – it starts to earn the mark-up. Leaving on the Asda packaging just reminds customers that food is cheaper in supermarkets and that’s the worst thing a restaurant can do – it’s like the dealer at a casino telling a big gambler that it’s getting late. I wouldn’t be shocked if Severnshed only pay £1.15 for every camembert they then serve for 13 quid. I’d be surprised they were buying their stuff at Asda rather than a cash and carry, but not that they’re getting bargain cheese and tarting it up. Except they didn’t really bother tarting it up – a dangerous omission when so many restaurant customers are paranoid about being conned. There’s a pervasive fear that if you don’t watch your step in a restaurant, they’ll have the shirt off your back. They’ll make you buy mineral water and astronomical wine, and order dishes that need loads of sides to bulk up into a proper meal, and then it turns out there’s a cover charge and the bread wasn’t free. Give them an inch, we suspect, and they’ll fleece you. And yet, looking at the relative success of supermarkets and restaurants, does it really feel like it’s the restaurants who are the evil geniuses of capitalism? Even with all the mineral water and marked-up booze they shift, half the country’s restaurant chains are on the verge of going under. As for independent restaurants, their most likely fate is to close before the end of the first year. Eating out and launching a restaurant both require you to embrace the idea of wasting money. If you really want a bargain, your best bet is to buy a closed brasserie and bribe the council into letting you turn it into flats.