The Queen has sent her “heartfelt congratulations” to the Royal Air Force on its centenary as she celebrated Easter at the church where Prince Harry and Meghan Markle will marry in May. The engaged couple were conspicuous by their absence at St George’s Chapel, Windsor Castle, on Sunday, as was Prince Philip, who has retired from public duties at 96. The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge arrived late for the service, which was attended by most of the rest of the major royals. Kate is expecting her third child next month. Jack Brooksbank, who is engaged to the Queen’s granddaughter Princess Eugenie, made his first Easter appearance with the royal family. Brooksbank and Eugenie, the daughter of Princess Andrew and Sarah Ferguson, plan to marry in October. Before the service the Queen sent a message to the breakfast celebrations of the RAF at the former Hotel Cecil building in the Strand in London, which was the first headquarters of the RAF. It was 100 years ago, on 1 April 1918, that the Royal Flying Corps and the Royal Naval Air Service merged to create the RAF, the world’s first independent air force. The Queen’s message, read out by Aircraftsman Adam Wood, 16, one of the youngest members of the RAF, said: “The anniversary of the world’s first independent air force is of great significance, and it is fitting to pay tribute to the tenacity, skill and sacrifice of the men and women who have served within its ranks over the last century and who have defended our freedom gallantly. “Through its enduring focus on professionalism, excellence and innovation, the Royal Air Force stands as a shining example of inspiration around the world today and for the next generation. May the glory and honour that all ranks have bestowed on the Royal Air Force light its pathway to the future guarding our skies and reaching for the stars.” The Easter plans of Harry and Meghan were “private”, their spokesperson said. But the couple did reveal which flowers they had chosen for their nuptials on 19 May. They will be surrounded by white garden roses, peonies and foxgloves assembled by the floral designer Philippa Craddock. She will use locally sourced foliage, much of which will be taken from the gardens and parkland of the crown estate and Windsor Great Park. “Working with them has been an absolute pleasure. The process has been highly collaborative, free-flowing, creative and fun,” said Craddock.