Late-night hosts on Tuesday discussed president Trump’s attacks on Amazon and its owner Jeff Bezos, as well as his comments regarding the administration’s relationship with the Kremlin. “The president has been lashing out at Amazon this week, repeatedly,” Jimmy Kimmel began. “He says Amazon has been taking advantage of the US Postal Service after he claimed the post office loses $1.50 for every Amazon delivery which, by all accounts, isn’t true.” “He tweeted this one-star review of Amazon defending that,” the host continued, reading Trump’s tweet aloud: “I am right about Amazon costing the United States Post Office massive amounts of money for being their Delivery Boy. Amazon should pay these costs (plus) and not have them bourne by the American Taxpayer. Many billions of dollars. P.O. leaders don’t have a clue (or do they?)!” “Why insult the people at the post office by calling them Amazon’s delivery boy?” Kimmel replied. “They deliver things, that’s what they do!” The host went on to explain that Trump’s vendetta against Amazon, which has lost $60bn in valuation since Trump began attacking them, spawns from the company being owned by Jeff Bezos, who also owns the Washington Post. “And also Trump is jealous because Jeff Bezos is actually a billionaire,” Kimmel joked. Meanwhile, NBC’s Seth Meyers touched on a number of stories having to do with Trump, including his latest comments on US-Russia relations, the Stormy Daniels scandal and his criticisms leveled against Amazon. “President Trump said today that nobody’s been tougher to Russia than Donald Trump,” Meyers began. “And Vladimir Putin said: ‘It’s true, he’s been a terrible employee.’” “Never come to work, always golfing,” the host joked in a Russian accent. “I’m starting to think he doesn’t speak in the third person,” Meyers said. “He just has no idea who Donald Trump is.” Meyers then noted that on Tuesday Trump nicknamed former president Barack Obama for the first time, referring to him as “Cheatin’ Obama” in a tweet about approval ratings. “That’s a pretty lame nickname,” the host said. “You know what’s a cool nickname? Stormy.” Referring to Stormy Daniels, who sued Trump to be released from a non-disclosure agreement he never signed, Meyers went on: “President Trump’s legal team has asked a federal judge to force arbitration over this alleged hush agreement with adult film star Stormy Daniels, which would cause the case to be conducted entirely behind closed doors and out of the public eye.” “Which means we may just have to rely on Trump’s own personal courtroom sketches,” Meyers joked, showing a drawing of two stick figures. Finally, the host brought up Trump’s tweets about Amazon, which began on Monday when Trump said of the postal service: “They lose a fortune.” “This is when I appreciate Twitter,” Meyers said. “It used to be if you wanted to hear a 71-year-old man whining about the post office, you had to go to the post office.”