There are battles you think you’ve won, only to discover you need to fight them all over again. Look around and you can see them everywhere: dragons we thought we’d slain – or at least badly injured – decades ago, stirring themselves anew to haunt us once more. Tuesday brought a vividcase in point. On that day, Parliament Square was packed for an event that suggested a rare consensus. Theresa May and Jeremy Corbyn were temporarily united to witness the unveiling of a statue of Millicent Fawcett, campaigner for a woman’s right to vote. Of course, the event did not seek to say that the feminist struggle was over or that it could now be consigned to the apparently safer, cosier realm of history. But it hinted that, at the very least, the suffragists’ most basic argument – that men and women are equal – is now accepted as the common sense of the age. And yet that same day a terrorist in Toronto drove a van along a packed pavement, killing 10 people and injuring at least 13. It soon emerged that the 25-year-old suspect, Alek Minassian, had minutes earlier posted on Facebook – where else? – a message hailing the coming “incel rebellion”. As the world has rapidly had to learn, “incel” is an abbreviation for “involuntary celibate”, and behind it stands a movement of women-hating, rape-advocating men turned to fury by their own inability to form sexual relationships. The authorities and the press initially hesitated to describe this as a terrorist act, partly because there is a reflex in both institutions to see that word as a synonym for “jihadist”. A mindset has developed that assumes that, if there are no Muslims involved, it’s not quite terrorism but something else: merely the work of a deranged individual that can be tidily labelled as a one-off. In fact, terrorism is precisely the right word for what happened in Toronto, right down to the online radicalisation that preceded it. It’s just the radical creed in question was not jihadism, but misogyny. There will now, rightly, be a renewed debate about the root causes of such violence, and especially the toxic masculinity that feeds it. But one thing is surely already clear. The assumption, or perhaps the hope, that at least the elementary principles of gender equality – that women should be accorded the same basic human dignity and respect as men – are now universally accepted in mature democratic societies: well, that hope was far too optimistic. Of course, we knew – and women knew all too well – that rampant sexism lived on. But not so long ago it was assumed that this was among a dinosaur generation who had failed to keep up with the times. So safe was that assumption, they built an entire TV show on it: Life on Mars suggested you’d have to go back to the 70s to see real sexism in the raw. Now it was as safely retro as flares. But on the 4Chan message board, drenched in loathing of women, the incels and their less extreme brothers – the young dudes who thought it amusing to interrupt Hillary Clinton speeches with chants of “Iron my shirt”, or whose favourite memed reply to any outspoken woman is “Make me a sandwich” – are all proof that there is nothing old about old-school misogyny. It is revived and rejuvenated for the 21st century. Put another way, she may now be cast in bronze, but Fawcett’s fundamental argument is far from firmly planted in the ground. Dispiritingly, we may have to draw a similar conclusion about race in Britain. By a quirk of the calendar, April 2018 brought a double anniversary in the history of race relations in this country: 50 years since Enoch Powell delivered his “rivers of blood” speech, and 25 years since the murder of Stephen Lawrence. Implied in much of the commemoration of these two events has been a note of self-congratulation: look how far we’ve come. And yet April 2018 has been dominated by revelations that tell a different story. The Windrush scandal is about a group of black Britons who have been deprived of their rights, their livelihoods and in some cases their liberty simply because they could not comply with Kafkaesque demands for documentation. In the Commons this week, the prime minister repeatedly insisted that the Windrush generation were here legally – “They’re part of us,” she said – and that the hostile environment measures pursued by her former department were never aimed at them, but rather at illegal migrants. But that’s no defence at all, for it raises a much harsher question. Given that the Windrush citizens were not here illegally, why were they treated as if they were? Even after officials and ministers were warned this was happening, why did a group who had obeyed the law keep getting dragged into a net designed for those who broke it? Once again, Windrush was meant to be part of our country’s settled narrative – celebrated in the story about ourselves that we told the world, via Danny Boyle’s opening ceremony for the London Olympics in 2012. Now we realise it was not settled at all. This month brought news of a survey finding that two-thirds of US millennials could not say what Auschwitz is In the next few years, Fawcett will be joined by a new memorial in Westminster. This one will be for victims of the Holocaust. When the idea was first floated, I was ambivalent. I wasn’t convinced it was necessary. Surely everyone knew that the Nazis and their collaborators across Europe had murdered 6 million Jews in a bid to eliminate the entire Jewish people. Did we really need to tell that story all over again? But this month brought news of a survey finding that two-thirds of US millennials could not say what Auschwitz is, while 22% of that same age group had not heard of the Holocaust. Maybe education on this subject is better in Britain, but it was still possible for two Holocaust deniers to be adopted as Labour candidates for next week’s council elections, while the Conservatives nominated a man who once tweeted that he was “sweating like a Jew in an attic”. And it was possible for a supposedly humorous video, in which a would-be comedian repeats the phrase “gas the Jews” 24 times, to go viral. In other words, the memory of the Holocaust is not secure, just as what seemed to be long-ago battles over racism and sexism have not been won. There is an amnesia abroad that is troubling, as if lessons we thought we had learned need to be relearned all over again. Perhaps each generation has to do it itself, itself from scratch. Maybe we should take no knowledge, no insight, for granted. Older generations, for example, might think it obvious, given the 20th century, that European nations need to cooperate rather than compete if we are to avoid mass slaughter and bloodshed. However, it seems even that is not obvious, but rather needs to be taught anew. It is an especially dispiriting thought for progressives, who, as the name implies, want to believe in progress. But perhaps this is our fate. Like Sisyphus, we must roll the boulder to the top of the hill, only to watch as it rolls all the way down – then gird ourselves to push it all the way up again. • Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnist