Last Christmas Eve, just before midnight, Barry Jenkins, the Oscar-winning director of Moonlight, settled down in a hotel room to watch the new French film 120 Beats Per Minute. After an hour, he stopped the action and fired off a tweet: “Fuuuuuuuuuuug I just had to pause BPM because this scene just destroyed me. DE.....STROYED. I shouldn’t drink because it’s late but I need to room service a glass of something before I head back in. Damn.” Written and directed by Robin Campillo, 120 Beats Per Minute is a dramatisation of the early years of the militant Aids activist group Act Up-Paris. (The title is a nod to house music, which for many was the soundtrack to this period.) Specifically, the film focuses on the relationship between Nathan (Arnaud Valois), a newcomer to the group, and Sean (Nahuel Pérez Biscayart), a charismatic campaigner behind some of Act Up’s most outrageous publicity stunts. It was a scene in which they discuss moving in together that particularly blew Jenkins away. He went on: “The patience and sensitivity of the dialogue, so many layers in what’s said, such care.” An hour later, Jenkins delivered his considered verdict. “Obviously I loved it,” he wrote. “I can only thank Robin Campillo and everyone for making this wonderful film. As someone whose mother was diagnosed HIV+ in the early 90s and IS STILL WITH US, I’m biased and thankful for Act Up and this moving testament to them.” 120 Beats Per Minute has not been short of love since it premiered at the Cannes film festival last year; it won the jury’s grand prize (essentially runner-up to the Palme d’Or), while jury president, Pedro Almodóvar, broke ranks and said it was his personal favourite for the main prize, the Palme d’Or, but the majority went with The Square. It was also awarded six Césars, including best film, at the “French Oscars” and was nominated as France’s entry for the actual Oscars, though surprisingly didn’t make the shortlist. The film was a massive hit at the French box office, selling 800,000 tickets, but Campillo insists that the greatest satisfaction of making 120 Beats Per Minute is that people are talking about Act Up again. “I hoped the visibility that the group wanted 25 years ago would be achieved today,” he says. Act Up was founded in New York in 1987 and launched in France two years later. For its first “action”, Act Up-Paris had about 15 activists stage a “die-in”: lying totally silent on the street at the Gay Pride parade. Each wore a T-shirt with a large pink triangle on the front – upending and repurposing the badge forced on homosexual men by the Nazis in the second world war – and on them was the slogan “Silence = Death”. And the protests became more and more eye-catching. Fake blood was thrown at politicians, the ashes of dead members were scattered at fancy receptions for pharmaceutical companies – anything to draw mainstream attention to the masses who were losing their lives to the so-called “gay plague”. Probably Act Up’s greatest coup was when they – with the help of Benetton – covered the obelisk in the Place de la Concorde in Paris with a giant pink condom on 1 December 1993, World Aids Day. “Yeah, I was there, that was so funny,” says Campillo, who has tightly cropped silver hair, an aquiline nose and a small, wry smile. “For many, many years, there were two things we wanted to do. We wanted to put a pink condom on the obelisk. The other thing was the red river” – turning the Seine the colour of blood – “which is practically impossible. So we did that with technicians from Benetton and we just got out of the métro to make a demonstration and then we were arrested for many hours.” The 55-year-old Campillo joined Act Up-Paris in 1992, when he was just about to turn 30. He was working as an editor in television news for the state-run France 3 channel, and knew the group well from having to cut together stories for the nightly bulletin. After he started attending meetings, he began to live a strange double life. “Sometimes I would be doing an action in the morning and I was editing it in the afternoon,” he laughs. “And one day, which is barely legal, I went back to my job with the journalist in his car.” Despite being openly gay for a decade, before Act Up Campillo had few gay friends. Now he started spending every spare minute with the group. “I don’t have words to say how much it changed my life,” he says. “It’s like I was breathing again and a lot of people were breathing again. The way you can imagine power described by Michel Foucault: an electricity that goes from people to people. And when I did this film, I found this energy again.” Born in Morocco in 1962 to French parents, Marcel and Simone, the young Campillo had a peripatetic existence. His father was in the military and the family moved around grand residences in the former French colonies. When he was about 10, in Madagascar, he saw Jean-Luc Godard’s dystopian sci-fi Alphaville; the film was roundly booed by the soldiers, but for Campillo it was the early stages of a lifelong obsession with the New Wave, especially Godard and Éric Rohmer. “I wanted to be a film-maker from the age of six,” says Campillo on the afternoon we meet, in the “living room” of a plush London hotel. He apologises for being hungover – he was out the previous night in Soho with an actor friend – but in reality he is bright eyed and an effusive talker. He goes on: “I was obsessed and I really thought it would be easy for me, such a logical thing that of course people will give me a lot of money and all the stars will want to act in my films. So I was very naive and pretentious.” After school, Campillo won a place at the prestigious film academy IDHEC, the Institute for Advanced Cinematographic Studies, whose alumni include Louis Malle. One of his contemporaries was the French director Laurent Cantet. Campillo would later be co-writer and editor of Cantet’s 2001 drama Time Out, which was placed ninth on the Guardian’s list of the best films of the 00s. Another collaboration, The Class, about a teacher struggling to keep order in a school in Paris, won the Palme d’Or in 2008, the first French film to do so for more than 20 years. Their latest project, The Workshop, about a group of teenagers at a creative writing retreat, is released in the UK this summer. “I have been very lucky,” says Campillo, smiling. “I never search for work because I am so lazy.” This makes Campillo’s path sound straightforward, yet it has been anything but. After graduating from IDHEC in the mid-1980s, he didn’t really work for many years, mainly because he convinced himself he was HIV-positive. Here, art and life start to blur. In 120 Beats Per Minute, Sean and Nathan tell each other about their sexual history. Nathan’s version, Campillo admits, is basically his own experience. He started having gay relationships in his late teens and he was especially taken with one guy (in the movie, he’s called Arnaud) who used to pick him up in Aix-en-Provence, where Campillo lived, and they’d drive back 25 miles to his apartment in Marseille. His parents had no idea. Campillo was besotted, but one day he read about Aids in a magazine. The pictures showed an American couple: in the first, they were fit and vigorous, lying on a boat; in the second, one of them was weak and puffy faced, ravaged by the disease. His name was Ken Ramsauer and he died shortly afterwards. “I’d never seen a gay couple in a magazine before,” says Nathan in 120 Beats Per Minute. “Except it was to say that homosexuals were going to die. That we were all going to die.” In Act Up, we used to say our address books were cemeteries – a joke but it was also true. We were in a very weird place For around five years in his 20s, Campillo stopped having sex: not because he feared contracting Aids, but because he was certain that he was already a carrier and didn’t want to infect anyone. “Two or three years before I joined Act Up, I did my first test and [then] I knew I was negative,” he says. “That was something of a relief, of course, because I lived the 1980s thinking that I was going to die, because I was so stupid. I was in a kind of denial.” Eventually, Campillo did reconnect with “Arnaud”. They spent a day together, but Campillo could see he had lost weight, that he struggled for breath when they walked. “He was a very sexual guy who had lots of lovers and was not faithful at all,” he recalls. “I loved him so much and the last time I saw him I realised he was HIV-positive, but we didn’t say anything about that, because I wouldn’t ask him and he wouldn’t tell me. “In Act Up, we used to say our address books were cemeteries – that was a joke but it was also true. We were in a zone where people were not dead or alive; when I looked at my friends, I was thinking they were already a little bit dead. We were in a very weird place.” In this state of mind, it didn’t feel appropriate for Campillo to think about making films. “Because of the epidemic, I shrank,” says Campillo. “Being a director seemed pointless to me. The French New Wave is cinema for healthy people. You don’t have people with disease in a film by Godard, not at all I think. People die but only because they have an accident: a hard, quick death, not because they have a disease. “There’s only one film of the New Wave, Cléo From 5 to 7, by Agnès Varda, where a woman is waiting for her result for cancer,” he continues. “And that’s exactly what I was living in the 1980s.” Campillo remained involved in Act Up-Paris until around 2000. By this point, the treatment of Aids had advanced significantly and the organisation could point to numerous small victories in France: everything from condoms becoming available in schools to free medicine for HIV patients and needle exchanges for drug users. But for Campillo the biggest impact of Act Up was in changing the perception of Aids in the country. “We say to the people and to the government that an epidemic is not only a social issue, it’s a political issue.” By this point, too, his career was starting to take off. He directed his first film in 2004, They Came Back, about thousands of undead who return to a small French town where they used to live. The film was a smart twist on the zombie flick – Campillo notes that the central idea of living in a “no-man’s-land” partly came from his personal discombobulation during the Aids epidemic – but it didn’t make a huge impact outside France, at least until it was remade as the stylish TV thriller Les Revenants, and then remade again for America as The Returned. Campillo was not involved in either of those projects. “No, no, no,” he says. “I just receive money, which is great!” To be fair, Campillo does not make great claims for They Came Back. He describes it as “conservative” and says that he was guilty of being too rigid over how shots were framed and lit. He shakes his head. “It’s like a control thing and when you do the first take everyone stops breathing: ‘We are doing cinema!’ I hate that so much.” After They Came Back, he made his first attempt at writing a script about the Aids epidemic. It was called Drug Holidays: a reference to the treatment breaks that were sometimes recommended for HIV-positive patients. Only when he finished the draft did he realise that it lacked any narrative tension. “So I lost one and a half years of my life,” he says, giving that most French of gestures, the shrug. “Not very clever.” For Campillo, the reason why 120 Beats Per Minute has been successful, while Drug Holidays wasn’t, is that he and co-writer Philippe Mangeot finally captured the gallows humour of Act Up-Paris. The story he chooses to illustrate this point is especially close to the knuckle. On Campillo’s second film, 2013’s Eastern Boys, he was having an argument with one of his producers, Hugues Charbonneau, who is an old friend from the group. Campillo wanted more time and money to shoot extra scenes and Charbonneau was telling him he couldn’t have it. Eventually, Campillo lost his temper and, in front of cast and crew, he blurted: “You owe me because I dressed up your boyfriend when he died.” “It’s like a running gag between us that is not funny for the others,” explains Campillo. “They were paralysed, but at the same time I realised that this specific way of talking, this specific behaviour in front of death, was connected really to the spirit of Act Up-Paris. At this point my other producer, Marie-Ange Luciani, said, ‘You shouldn’t do anything else. You have to do this film.’ And I think she was right – enough time had passed for me to do it.” Again, life and art become hard to separate: in 120 Beats Per Minute, one member of Act Up dresses the corpse of another’s boyfriend. As this scene shows, the film probably shouldn’t have worked. The raw material is too bleak. It absolutely shouldn’t have been watched by almost a million people in France and won countless awards. Campillo cheerfully admits that it is too long (two hours, 23 minutes), has too much dialogue and makes no attempt to censor its sex scenes. For Barry Jenkins, this last detail was the only explanation he could find for why the film didn’t feature at the Golden Globes or the Academy Awards. Meeting Campillo, you have the sense that the attention 120 Beats Per Minute has received has caught him a little on the hop. As explicit as he has been about his experiences in the film, he prefers not to talk about his private life. “I do everything I’m asked, I’m a good soldier, but it’s a little bit hard,” he says, of the publicity wagon. “It’s not that I’m shy, I just don’t like to be too exposed.” Certainly LGBT films are attracting more mainstream interest than ever before: recent critical hits include not only 120 Beats Per Minute and Moonlight, but also Call Me By Your Name and A Fantastic Woman. For Campillo, though, he simply made the film he wanted to make with no compromises. “When I did this film, I didn’t try to make a universal film,” he says. “It’s a very gay film with a political topic and a long sex scene between guys. And the film has been a success.” France does not appear to be having the same degree of soul-searching that Hollywood is currently going through. This is in part because the statistics, while far from healthy, are less damning: around one in five directors in France is female, roughly double that of American studio features. But there is increasing discussion of diversity and equality. Before the recent César awards, there was the launch of 5050 Pour 2020, which promotes gender balance in the film business, and also #NowWeAct (Maintenant On Agit), the French equivalent to Time’s Up. For Campillo, as he learned with Act Up-Paris, there needs to be open debate and a willingness to disrupt the status quo. Or, as he puts it, very simply: “When you change the point of view, you change cinema.”