Napoli’s dream of winning the Serie A title lies in tatters after they were humbled 3-0 by Fiorentina, for whom Giovanni Simeone scored a hat-trick. A famous victory at the leaders, Juventus, the weekend before had closed the gap to a single point but the Bianconeri won 3-2 at Internazionale in dramatic fashion on Saturday and Napoli could not keep step. After Kalidou Koulibaly was sent off for fouling Simeone the Argentinian struck thrice to lift La Viola to a first win in four games. The son of the Atlético Madrid manager, Diego, drove Cristiano Biraghi’s through-ball beyond Pepe Reina in the 34th minute and doubled the lead when Milan Badelj’s headed attempt rebounded to his feet. Simeone’s third came deep into second-half stoppage time Napoli’s from a Federico Chiesa pass. SPAL pushed their relegation rivals Hellas Verona closer to the drop by winning 3-1 at the Stadio Marc’Antonio Bentegodi. Verona’s Mattia Valoti turned in Bruno Petkovic’s splendid assist in the 13th minute but Mohamed Fares’ own goal deep into first-half stoppage time burst the Hellas bubble. SPAL grew in confidence after the break, with Felipe firing them ahead after 71 minutes and Jasmin Kurtic rubbing salt in the wound at the end. With three games remaining Verona are seven points from safety and next face a trip to Milan. The Rossoneri were 2-1 winners on Sunday after they resisted a late Bologna rally while a video assistant referee call also went their way. Hakan Calhanoglu stuck Patrick Cutrone’s pass away early on at the Renato Dall’Ara but before half-time Riccardo Orsolini scored what he thought was a Bologna equaliser until the VAR ruled that Rodrigo Palacio had handled the ball. Giacomo Bonaventura then doubled Milan’s lead heading into the interval before Sebastien De Maio halved the deficit with 16 minutes remaining. In the early game Marcello Trotta scored twice against his parent club as Crotone edged towards safety with a thumping 4-1 victory over Sassuolo. Bacary Sagna left it late to rescue a point for relegated Benevento from a 3-3 draw with Udinese. Elsewhere Atalanta strengthened their claim on a Europa League spot by dispatching Genoa 3-1. Fabio Quagliarella scored but later missed a penalty to forgo his 20th goal of the season as Sampdoria downed struggling Cagliari 4-1 at the Marassi. In Spain, Atlético Madrid earned their first away win in La Liga for over two months by snatching a 1-0 win at Alaves thanks to a late penalty converted by the French forward Kevin Gameiro after Fernando Torres had spurned an earlier spot-kick. Atlético’s coach, Diego Simeone, left Antoine Griezmann, Saul Niguez, Jose Gimenez and his first-choice goalkeeper, Jan Oblak, at home for the trip to the Basque country to keep them sharp for Thursday’s Europa League semi-final second leg against Arsenal, with the tie poised at 1-1. Diego Costa made his first start after more than two weeks out with a muscle problem, although Atlético’s most dangerous player was the winger Vitolo, who hit the post in the second half and later earned the first penalty which Torres squandered when he was pushed over by the Ghanaian Mubarak Wakaso. Torres’s shot was beaten away by the former Real Madrid goalkeeper Fernando Pacheco in the 71st minute but Atlético were soon awarded another penalty when Wakaso was again penalised, this time for blocking a shot by Torres with his arm. Gameiro had been on the pitch for only 15 minutes and took penalty-taking responsibilities from Torres to break the deadlock in the 78th minute. Atlético’s Argentinian winger Angel Correa was sent off deep in stoppage-time for picking up two successive bookings, one for a foul and the other for protesting at the decision. Atlético are second in the standings on 75 points, four ahead of third-placed Real Madrid although they have played one game more. In Germany, Borussia Dortmund will have to wait another week to secure their Champions League spot after stumbling to a 1-1 draw at Werder Bremen to stay third in the Bundesliga, two points behind Schalke 04 with two games left. The visitors, who hit the woodwork three times, went ahead through Marco Reus in the 19th minute and the Germany international, who is hitting top form ahead of the World Cup after a long injury absence, should have scored again after Mario Goetze sent him through. But the impressive Werder keeper Jiri Pavlenka got his fingers to the shot to deny the winger, who also hit the post. Instead it was Werder who scored with Thomas Delaney’s looping header on the stroke of half-time. Dortmund hit the woodwork three times in an exciting second half and Pavlenka was on hand with a string of outstanding saves to rescue a point for Werder. Dortmund stayed third on 55 points, two behind Schalke, who also dropped points in their 1-1 draw with Borussia Moenchengladbach on Saturday. Werder are 12th on 38. Hoffenheim are fourth on 52 and Bayer Leverkusen a point behind in fifth. The top four teams qualify for next season’s Champions League stage. The former European Cup winners Red Star Belgrade clinched a record 28th Serbian league title with three games to spare after a 2-0 win at Napredak Krusevac gave them a 12-point lead over their city rivals and last season’s champions, Partizan. In France, two late goals from Edinson Cavani spared Paris Saint-Germain defeat but the Ligue 1 champions lost their perfect home record with a 2-2 draw against Guingamp. Ludovic Blas deservedly put Guingamp in front late in the first half with a superb 20-yard strike and Jimmy Briand struck a second goal after 68 minutes. PSG, who had won all 17 home games this season in Ligue 1, got back into the match through Cavani’s penalty in the 75th minute before the Uruguay striker headed the equaliser with eight minutes left. Emery’s side pushed for a winning goal but could not make a breakthrough. Giungamp’s Nicolas Benezet came closest to scoring a winner with a curling effort in injury time. Elsewhere Rens overcame an early own goal from Joris Gnagnon to beat Toulouse thanks to strikes from James Lea Siliki and Benjamin Bourigeaud, and Marseille drew 1-1 at Angers. Ismaël Traoré cancelled out Florian Thauvin’s third-minute penalty, his 20th league goal of the season taking him above Neymar to second in the Ligue 1 scoring charts.