Dating is different in the post-#MeToo era, and Jean Hannah Edelstein is here to help you navigate it in her pop-up advice column. Send your romantic quandaries to datingaftermetoo@gmail.com. Dear Jean, I am strongly attracted to a friend with whom I work. We meet up once a year and work together for several weeks across the summer. The rest of the year, I’m in another country. Last summer I told him I was attracted to him, and his reaction was initially one of joy and surprise. Moments later his attitude changed and he started to talk about his “issues”. Over the next few weeks, he distanced himself from me. We did have one good talk, during which he said he was worried about detrimental effects on his mental health if things didn’t work out. I get strong signals that he would be very interested, except for this fear holding him back. Since separating our work has required us to remain in email contact. Besides work emails, I have sent several personal emails in which I have told him in detail about how I feel about him and how much I value and admire him, in the hope that it will give him some reassurance. I’ve not had much response, other than a brief thank you in acknowledgement, to these. I am in a quandary about what to do when we meet up again this summer. I flip between thinking I will keep my distance and let it go, and thinking I will push things a little further. But I am very worried that pushing things further may constitute harassment. Many thanks, A Hi A, You say you get “strong signals that he would be very interested except for this fear holding him back”, but the signals that you’ve described here are, alas, not that. You told your friend that you were attracted to him in person and he told you that he didn’t want to be in a relationship with you. You told him again, over email, how you felt about him, and you’ve “not had much response”. I’m sorry to say that I don’t think that your friend wants to date you. Who knows why not? It may be the “issues” he professes. It may be something else altogether, but the bottom line is that it’s not your job to persuade him otherwise. That’s not to say I don’t understand your desire to encourage him to feel otherwise! You mentioned that his initial reaction to you confessing your feelings was joyful, and it’s natural to wish that you could help him get back to that feeling. But what I learned from my own experience with ambivalent men (and oh my, I have known quite a few ambivalent men) is that the key to a successful relationship is two people wanting to be in a relationship. You can be kind and you can be encouraging, but you can’t make someone want to be with you by persistence and force of will. Will trying again to persuade your friend constitute harassment? I think it could be viewed as unwanted behaviour. Imagine if the gender roles were reversed: in this post-#MeToo world, a man who asks a female colleague out repeatedly after she says no would be seen as a creep. Even if he did not make a formal complaint if you “push things a little further”, your continued pursuit after your friend gave you a pretty clear no may make him uncomfortable, and have a negative effect on your experience working together. That would be a shame, since you clearly care about your friend and your work. Please don’t lose heart, or at least not too much. That you’ve written to ask me this question and that you don’t want to step over the line shows that you are a thoughtful and caring person. I’m certain that you will meet someone who you adore who will adore you back without caveat or condition or hesitation: someone who, like you, is ready, not afraid. JHE Dear Jean, I teach English as a foreign language and I’ve always been a bit wary about relationships related to work – both with colleagues and students (adult students, obviously). Although I’m relaxed about being friends with adult students outside of the classroom, I’ve always personally carried the idea that dating students is something that shouldn’t happen. However, I’ve met other teachers who’ve ended up in great romantic relationships with students (often after they’ve stopped being their teacher) and who now have happy marriages. I’m curious to know what you and others think, especially as it could potentially be an issue for me in the future. Kind regards, B Hi B, You gut feeling is correct: you should not date your students, even if they are adult students. The student-teacher relationship is inherently imbalanced in favour of the teacher’s authority, even if the student pursues the teacher, rather than vice versa. (Jo Livingstone wrote very well about this in the New Republic.) Your no dating students rule is right because it respects the reason that your students are spending time with you: to learn. A classroom is not a singles bar. I would also say that if a teacher is standing in front of a classroom of adult ESL students and thinking about which one of them is most attractive, rather than how to help them learn English, the teacher is … not really doing their job? Drawing the line at dating students also eliminates risks: that your relationship with one student might have a negative impact on your other students, your ability to do your job or your employer’s perception of your motivation and performance. These are all things that you’ll put on the line if you date a student, even if the relationship itself is True Love. Once someone is no longer studying under you, I think you can feel free to ask them out – when they’re not your student, but your peer. But maybe wait until they’ve been out of your classroom for a few days before you make your move, lest this give your employers the impression that you’ve been counting the days until the end of term. JHE