Janina Ramirez, the art historian, is walking purposefully towards me, along a corridor. It has become a television bugbear for me, the “approach” approach to presenting, walk and talk. Like the – worse still – camera whirling around the head thing, AKA helicoptering. I mind less if the walk is connected to what they are saying, if they are pointing things out as they go. But Ramirez is talking about the Mona Lisa and she is not in the Louvre, she is in Blenheim Palace. It is walking for the sake of walking and I find it a little unsettling. Ramirez is great and has lots of interesting things to say. She makes me want to sit and listen, not feel as if I am walking backwards and worrying about tripping over. While I am moaning, here is another little one that is specific to art on TV and also on show here: the slow pan over a work. You don’t look at a picture in a gallery like that, do you, unless you are drunk? You look at the whole thing, then you might focus on areas or details. And that is fine, if the camera zooms in for the expert to point something out or explain something. But the slow pan is meaningless. Both of the above, I think, are about television’s fear of stillness. Everything has to keep moving or, they seem to think, people will get bored. There is a similar fear about a different kind of stillness – a lack of noise – which is why silence must be filled with music. But stillness – both kinds – can be powerful and make you sit up and listen. Moan over. Ramirez is talking about Leonardo, his insatiable curiosity, his quest for knowledge and his use of light and shade. There is time spent on his technical innovation and his revolutionary anatomical research. In short: his genius. “Genius, genius, genius …” echo a chorus of critics and art historians and presenters from the ghost of television past. Ramirez’s journey takes her not just along the corridors of Blenheim, but also deep into the BBC archive, to see how television has influenced our understanding of the man and his work. A kind of TV history of L da V. So here is Kenneth Clark in the seminal series Civilisation talking about that curiosity, and timelessness (see, Clark’s not walking, but sitting, and I am listening). And Robert Hughes bringing some antipodean early-70s cool, and excellent hair, to the table. And, most tantalisingly, Henry Moore from a 1978 Arena programme – caressing what seems to be the leg bone of a large animal, but may be one of his own creations – talking about Leonardo’s unending childlike quest for knowledge and his desire to share what he felt about life through his work. I would like to have seen more of that one, artist on artist; that is the problem with this hooked-on-snippets approach. Here is reconstructed Leonardo (did Mark Rylance really need to do flickery candlelit recon?) in 2003. And Fiona Bruce on the search for lost works. And Andrew Graham-Dixon being taken under the skin of the Mona Lisa by a man named Pascal and his magic wavelength machine, to find another woman ... The best things in this show have all been on other programmes, but that is the nature of it. And Ramirez turns it into something coherent and interesting that says something about the man himself, his timelessness, and about his TV career. To be honest I am surprised he didn’t pre-invent the television. I bet there is a sketch of something that looks very like one in a lost notebook somewhere; Bruce should get on the hunt. Another good thing about Ramirez: she is a she. Whereas everyone else, in all the past BBC art programmes, has either been a he or Fiona Bruce. That is progress. Speaking of progress, she doesn’t do the walking thing too much. Why Blenheim, though? Is there a little-known Leonardo hanging in Oxfordshire? No, but there is a James Thornhill ceiling, painted as the Renaissance in Europe was drawing to a close. That is a bit tenuous, isn’t it? I am wondering if, as my own painstaking research has discovered, it might have something to do with the fact that Woodstock, the town outside Blenheim’s gates, is also Ramirez’s hometown? No travel, flights to Florence or Eurostar to Paris, even bus tickets required. Just a short – purposeful – walk. Coupled with the use of the corporation’s own archive, this must have been pretty cheap TV.