No military intervention without representation. Put like that, Jeremy Corbyn’s proposal to ensure no government could deploy troops again without first seeking parliament’s consent sounds virtually a no-brainer. After all, there is already a broad political consensus that the days of prime ministers declaring war and everyone meekly falling into line are over. To many, it won’t seem a huge leap to turn that into a legal duty to consult parliament – with exemptions, obviously, for emergencies such as Britain coming under imminent attack – and to require such consent for even strictly limited, one-off airstrikes like those Theresa May ordered last week. Every conflict starts somewhere, even if this particular Syrian operation turns out to have taken longer to debate than it did to carry out. But what’s true in sex and medicine is true in politics too: consent is worth nothing unless it’s informed, and that’s where the doubts creep in. Not everything can realistically be shared with parliament in advance. Ground wars are months in the planning, and can be debated more easily in their generality without giving too much away to the enemy since the biggest questions are all strategic: what we’re trying to achieve, at what cost, for what gain. But airstrikes are all about specifics: the nature of the targets (which dictates the likelihood of civilian casualties and the risk of blowback) and the strength of the intelligence case, neither of which can easily be shared in advance or in their entirety. Judging by the tone of Monday’s debate, May might have won a vote on bombing Syria had she sought one, but it might well have happened largely in the dark, with MPs given frustratingly little to go on. The most worrying aspect of last week, in some ways, wasn’t so much her refusal to offer a vote but her inability to offer a good explanation. If she didn’t want to recall MPs she could have spoken directly over their heads to voters in advance, making a serious pitch for whatever it is she believes in – the legal and moral case for intervening on humanitarian grounds maybe, or for circumventing an obviously paralysed UN, or simply the broad principles governing her view of military intervention. But where the May foreign policy doctrine should be there is an oddly blank space, barring the odd Sun column. We now know in unusually exhausting detail when the leader of the opposition would or wouldn’t go to war (not without the consent of parliament, not without UN backing – even if in practice that means not without Russian consent, given Moscow’s willingness to use its veto in service of its allies and itself – and probably not solely on the grounds of humanitarian intervention, given he seems to regard that as a legally dodgy fiction of the Blair era). You can think what you like of that position, and many Labour MPs evidently do, but it is crystal clear to voters. It is odd, then, that we know far less about the gut instincts of the one person who currently has the power to go to war. And that matters, because if MPs broadly understand a prime minster’s worldview they can make educated guesses at what they’re being asked to approve, even if some details must be withheld on security grounds (either our own or those of our allies, whose intelligence we may be using). If not, however, they’re left to fall back on gut feelings about war in general, past interventions in particular, and party loyalties. May was visibly furious when Labour’s Laura Smith accused her of mindlessly following American orders, which suggests she prides herself on having principles of her own. But what’s the point if she can’t articulate them? There may well be no going back to the days when Britain was essentially an explanatory democracy – one where prime minsters were expected to take the decisions and explain themselves afterwards to parliament, before falling on their swords if something went wrong. The Brexit referendum as much as Iraq marked the death knell for all that, a decisive shift towards a more representative model where everyone expects to have a say in advance. The catch, however, is that there’s no guarantee of it automatically leading to any better decisions, unless those voting are also better informed. The lesson we should have learned from Iraq, where parliament was consulted only to find out later that the evidence it considered in good faith was flawed, is that voting is no panacea in itself. What matters is having the information to do it well. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist