Over the past decade, rainbow-coloured barnets have outgrown their confinement to the cybergoths of London’s Camden Town and become a commonplace sighting across the country. In 2018, a spate of salons specialising in colouring services – such as Bleach London and Electric in Brighton and Rainbow Room in Stirling – have established themselves and even box-dye brands – once scorned for their lack of sophistication – offer hues ranging from apricot to teal. Now, with the likes of Lady Gaga and Paris Jackson experimenting with peach rinses, the colour is tipped to be the trend of the summer. Think pink! Following trends such as blorange, fruit juice and rosé locks, peach is a combination of orange and pink tones on top of a blond base. Sophia Hilton, director at Not Another Salon in east London, says the popularity of pinkish dye lies in it being the most socially accepted non-natural colour. “It also helps that it’s the easiest colour to remove, so it’s accessible to everyone who might not want to sign their life away.” Plus, it looks good with a tan. Unconventional is the new normal In an age where only a few trends, such as Stan Smith trainers and Kanken bags, have outlived the two-year mark, it’s Instagram that has kept bold dyes alive. Hilton says: “Vivid colours used to be for small groups of society and these seemed exclusive to punks and teenage girls in their bedrooms. Instagram has merged these cultures into each other, and eventually into the mainstream.” She has a point. When even the Kardashians are donning cartoon-hued hair, an unnaturally coloured mane is unlikely to garner puzzled looks on the daily commute. Technical advances help, too It used to be that bold hairdos could only be achieved with a Tulisa-inspired red or purple tint at the hairdresser’s or a dubious £4 pot of Crazy Color. Now, you could ask a colourist to give you a “mouldy leaf” tinge and leave the salon not only with your desired shade – thanks to new dyes and toners – but with any potential pre-lightening damage curbed, courtesy of a £30 Innoluxe oil treatment.