Rapper, musician and cultural commentator Akala is becoming one of the UK’s foremost critical thinkers, having recently spoken on everything from Grenfell and Corbyn to the entire span of human history in his televised epic poem The Ruins of Empires. This all-encompassing scrutiny is clear from the get-go of his sold-out show, with an introductory video in which he criticises western television for its propagation of negative images of black people over the course of history. Backed by his DJ and a live drummer, Akala carries the air of a civil rights orator. His energetic presentation and lyrically dense raps float with poise, are ingested by his cult following and reflected back in the form of constant mobbing. Particular fervour is whipped up as he moves through call-to-arms thriller Sun Tzu, with the help of featured guest Asheber, and the crowd’s growing appreciation for his tongue-twisting prowess crafts a raucous atmosphere. Each of the night’s peaks, from singalong anthems Roll Wid Us and XXL to curtain call Find No Enemy, are constantly topped, and these leaps do not falter as the show continues. It’s as if he finds infinite strength in rejecting gang violence, examining historical injustice towards black people, and exploring the doctrines of black leaders such as Malcolm X and Marcus Garvey. His calm demeanour is a tonic to the lyrical onslaughts, and comforting, given the tough nature of his subject matter. Akala’s mission to educate becomes increasingly obvious, and comic-book style visuals and impromptu on-stage soliloquies inject vividness into his songs about finding one’s path after being led astray. There is a genuine feeling that he is trying to make sense of the world’s injustices as he speaks, which numbs the crowd into a thought-provoking silence. He saves the night’s most powerful sequence for Visions, a detailed account of black history, from pre-civilisation to the present day, that bounces off the exceptional pounding drums that soundtrack the entire evening. He draws a line in the sand between himself and his braggadocio rap contemporaries, with anecdotes relating to discovering his own limitations, and urges the crowd to do the same. His fervent hand-waving is proof that his belief in his own work continues to burn like an Olympic flame.