When Dr Sam Mejias of the London School of Economics set out to study young people’s attitudes to Europe, as part of a project which involved gathering data from nearly 10,000 people aged under 30 across the continent, he did not expect the British to emerge as among some of the most pro-European of the lot. But the data from Catch-EyoU project, part of the Horizon 2020 research funding programme headed by the EU, found that more than 50% of respondents showed some kind of positive identification with the EU – one of the highest figures of any member state. And they weren’t just interviewing middle-class university graduates. This was across all socio-economic groups. This demographic voted to remain, of course, but in light of the referendum result, you might expect to see high levels of Euroscepticism among focus groups. The climate and level of political discourse certainly feels very Brexity. We are constantly being told that Brexit is what the people voted for, that the 48% have been forgotten. But then, when does the political climate ever reflect what young people are thinking? This isn’t something young people will just get over. It is a profound betrayal The surprise referendum result seems to have acted as a catalyst for this group to start thinking differently about the EU. Our departure will strip them of rights and benefits to which they had been entitled since birth. These rights were valued, especially freedom of movement. The sense of despair that younger adults feel at the prospect of having their EU citizenship taken away from them cannot be overestimated. This isn’t something they will just get over. It is a profound betrayal. They were born EU citizens. Despite initial reports, there was a fairly high turnout (64% of 18-24 year olds). “It is not a cloak, it is my skin,” one young woman wrote of her political identity, in the aftermath of the referendum. If that sounds dramatic, consider how you would feel having your British passport taken away from you. It is the same thing for those of us born with EU passports. Yet, with barely a year to go, there remains no mass youth anti-Brexit movement. In the US, we see young people mobilising on issues such as gun control: taking to the streets, writing op-eds, giving powerful, articulate interviews. Here there is muted, resigned acceptance. Attempts have been made: Our Future Our Choice, a youth campaign against Brexit, is touring universities and writing open letters to Jeremy Corbyn, arguing that soon the UK population will consist of remain voters (as Brexit voters age and die). But this remains a relatively small campaign and, even with time running out, it feels as though younger adults have become resigned to their fate. The complexity of Brexit doesn’t help. The March for Our Lives protesters in the US have an obvious and immediate moral argument; their very lives are under threat. Young people here might have moral objections to the consequences of Brexit, such as increased inequality and suffering among the most vulnerable in society, but the referendum result was, for all its faults, democratic. Perhaps the apparent acceptance of what is to come reflects the role young people play here: that of not quite citizens. “Young people in the UK are living through a period where their views and aspirations are only validated if they turn out at the ballot box,” Mejias tells me. In further research he conducted for LSE, on youth representation, Mejias found that UK government policies treat young people as incapable, victims, or potential troublemakers, when many are in fact politically engaged, if not always in the traditional way. He explains that the last UK-wide youth policy, now seven years old, was called Positive for Youth. In it, the government was seeking to “rebrand” the image of young people from negative to positive. That such an effort was required speaks volumes. Maybe it is inevitable that an ageing society will have a discursive climate that does not reflect the views of younger demographics. Older people dominate all spheres; there is simply less room for young people to make their voices heard. Perhaps the forums for debate are wrong: people in their teens and early 20s aren’t as engaged in old media such as newspapers and the Today programme. Maybe they have given up trying to engage. But we can’t disengage – that’s a luxury, with the clock ticking towards a disaster that will define our lives and that of the nation for decades to come. If young remainers care about these rights, they must fight to keep them. • Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett is a Guardian columnist