Of all the extraordinary images and effusive displays of manly affection – hugs and kisses, grins and thumbs-ups, back-clapping, hand-clasping, yes, even tree-planting (of an oak, as it happens, from a wood in northern France where more than 1,800 US Marines lost their lives in the first world war) – it was the oddest. Staring intently at his young guest’s immaculate suit, Donald Trump abruptly stretched out a finger, brushing something invisible off Emmanuel Macron’s collar. “We do have a very special relationship,” he said. “In fact, I’ll get that little piece of dandruff off – we have to make him perfect. He is perfect!” The French president, understandably taken aback at a gesture breaching all known protocol for state visits, could do little but grin, rather manically. For French newspaper Libération, this was “embarrassing”. For Le Point, albeit tongue-in-cheek, it was “humiliation, a brilliantly executed blow, a stab disguised as an endearment”. That may be overegging things slightly (the French news weekly also reckoned it was deliberately calculated to distract media attention from the US president’s own capillary issues, and underline the 31-year difference in the two men’s ages and what Trump would like to see as a corresponding gulf in status). But the paternalistic dusting-down neatly symbolised the risk inherent in Macron’s Trump gamble. Almost alone among Europe’s leaders in having established a rapport with an unpredictable and unpopular US counterpart, he aims to stay close, win concessions, and if possible polish his own image – all without getting burned. It will not be an easy tightrope to walk. While their personal relationship at least appears genuine enough, the political divide between the two could not be wider, and the concrete political differences – on the environment, Trump’s planned trade tariffs and the Iran nuclear deal – are substantial. The risk that it may all blow up in his face, however, seems to be one that Macron is willing to take, a year after he stunned the world by sweeping to victory in what had once appeared an unwinnable presidential election, subsequently leading his new political movement to a big parliamentary majority. How it will all end is anyone’s guess. But while it lasts, the Trump-Macron bromance – an unlikely pair-up between an often incoherent champion of nation-first, drain-the-swamp, close-the-borders populism and a brilliant young multilaterally minded centrist from France’s elite finishing school – is at least proving entertaining. Like Trump, Macron’s victory came against the odds, and as a result of having laid waste to his country’s traditional political landscape. (Macron, whose rise entirely circumvented and severely weakened both of France’s mainstream parties, likes to call them both “mavericks”.) The first contact between the two came in a call from the White House on 8 May 2017. Praising Macron’s “great win” and the “magnificent pictures” from the new president’s victory speech outside the Louvre, Trump reportedly drew attention to the qualities the two men had in common: “You’re like me, a winner, a dealmaker ... a trailblazer. We’re going to work very well together.” Once past their initial surprise, Macron and his team swiftly concluded that “whatever you think of Trump’s personality, he is the president of the United States, the world’s No1 superpower and our ally for 150 years, said one diplomatic source, according to Le Monde. “We’re going to talk to him.” There were other incentives, analysts note. Trump, unpopular pretty much everywhere except Saudi Arabia and Israel, enjoyed “notably poor” relations with Europe’s other main leader, Germany’s chancellor Angela Merkel, and with Theresa May, “apparently because he is very ill at ease with ... female leaders,” Laurence Nardon of France’s Institute for International Relations told the paper. With May in any case sidelined by Brexit, and Merkel, after 13 years in power, now weakened by an unexpectedly poor re-election result and saddled with an awkward coalition, the path was clear for a confident and supremely ambitious Macron to step into the vacuum and become the face of European diplomacy. The new French and US presidents met in person a fortnight later, at the US embassy in Brussels on the margins of a Nato summit. The encounter was marked by a handshake of unusual intensity: a nine-second mano a mano of white knuckles, crunched bones, tightened jaws and fixed smiles. Described by one who saw it at close quarters as a “screw-you in handshake form”, it was also intentional. “My handshake with him wasn’t innocent,” Macron told the Journal du Dimanche newspaper. “It wasn’t the be-all and the end-all of a policy, but it was a moment of truth.” Leaders such as Trump, Turkey’s Recep Tayyip Erdoğan and Russia’s Vladimir Putin “see relationships in terms of a balance of power,” Macron said. “That doesn’t bother me. I don’t believe in diplomacy by public abuse – but in my bilateral dialogues, I won’t let anything pass.” Having apparently earned the US president’s respect, Macron sealed the deal by inviting Trump and Melania to Paris last July for a Bastille Day parade complete with guard of honour, fanfare and massed bands playing a Daft Punk medley, accompanied by a visit to Napoleon’s tomb and dinner at a Michelin-starred restaurant on the second floor of the Eiffel Tower. Trump enjoyed it so much he went straight home and ordered a military parade of his own. That, analysts say, marked the real turning point in the relationship. Despite unconcealed disagreements, such as when Trump announced he was pulling the US out of the Paris climate accords, the two leaders have developed a relationship close enough, for example, for Trump to have called Macron twice after the recent chemical weapons attack in Douma, Syria, before he picked up the phone to May. French officials are insistent that their obvious rapport should not be mistaken for an actual friendship: Benjamin Griveaux, a close Macron ally, has said he does not think the two are “buddies. The goal is not to have affectionate relations but to establish some sort of personal connection.” His aides hint at a psychological ploy, a calculation that demonstrating personal affection, refraining from any direct criticism and above all avoiding stoking Trump’s notorious temper will prove the best way of keeping the White House more or less on side. Macron himself has also said, in an interview with the BBC, that “sometimes I can manage to convince him, and sometimes I fail.” It helps, presumably, that there is clear strategic interest for both sides in a good relationship: to achieve his international goals, Macron needs the US on board. For Trump, on the other hand, Macron is “a partner who recognises him, who welcomes him, who does not lecture him, and who is not afraid of him – which is important, too,” says the Franco-American political scientist Nicole Bacharan. “So Macron is like an open door to Europe for Donald Trump.” Perhaps crucially, Macron is also cautiously realistic about what he can hope to achieve through the new “special relationship”. It is already progress, for some analysts, that in Washington’s eyes the French are no longer the “cheese-eating surrender monkeys” that Republican hawks called them during the Bush administration for their refusal to take part in the invasion of Iraq. “Macron’s ambition is not to influence Trump – he knows he won’t be able to change his positions, and that the only thing that counts for Trump is his voters,” political scientist Thomas Snégaroff told Le Monde. “But he does hope to be able to moderate his views on certain points.” Nor, perhaps, is the domestic risk of failing to win over Trump quite as big for Macron as it may appear. His ambitious plans for an “in-depth transformation” of Europe are encountering resistance, his vision of a new partnership between Paris and Berlin to breathe new life into the EU bogged down in the slow-moving realities of European politics. A year into his presidency, the centrist – elected on a sweeping programme of pro-business reforms aimed at liberalising France’s economy – is also facing widespread (though not so far overly threatening) protests at home from striking rail workers and angry students and public service workers. But most voters would presumably not be surprised, given Trump’s personality, if Macron either failed in his bid to win concessions or saw the US president subsequently change his mind. And despite his controversial reforms, the president’s popularity in France, although fluctuating, remains far from catastrophic. A poll last week for Paris Match suggested that if presidential elections were held now, Macron would romp to victory with a first-round score of 33%, nine points more than his score of May 2017. At 42%, his overall approval rating was double Francois Hollande’s and 50% higher than Nicolas Sarkozy’s at the same point in their presidencies. His domestic reforms may be less popular – but 57% said he was keeping his electoral promises, 56% said he had boosted economic growth and France’s attractiveness to overseas investors, 67% approved of his defence of the EU, and 63% said he had “improved France’s image abroad”. For the time being, the French – who have traditionally appreciated leaders who strut the global stage, such as De Gaulle and Mitterrand – seem willing to give Macron’s apparently risky Trump charm offensive the benefit of the doubt.