Had Duwayne Brooks been aware of the date that was looming? “Do you know what my name is?” he asks. “Whenever the press refer to me, what is it they call me? ‘Best friend of Stephen Lawrence.’ ‘Was with Stephen when he died.’” He looks down at the ground, then back up and makes sure we have eye contact. “I knew it was going to be the anniversary.” On 22 April it will be 25 years since the night in 1993 when Brooks and Lawrence were attacked by a racist gang at a suburban bus stop in Eltham, London. Lawrence was stabbed to death. Brooks is now 43, as Lawrence would have been. We sit among diners in the Westfield Stratford shopping centre. He’s neatly dressed, a little tired at the end of the day. Around us, people chat happily in Five Guys and Wagamama. The Met failed to investigate murder. The person at the top didn't lose their job. That's because we are black Anniversaries mean taking stock. A quarter of a century after the murder, you can feel a collective pull for the date to mark some kind of closure. Over the last two week, Doreen Lawrence has suggested that the police have run out of leads in the murder of her son. As such, she said, they should now end their inquiries. For its part, Scotland Yard has admitted exactly that – and that the future of the investigation is under review. “It’s time to move on,” ran the headline in the Daily Mail, the paper that has championed the campaign for justice ever since editor Paul Dacre learned Stephen’s father, Neville, once worked as a plasterer on his house. Yet at the same time Imran Khan, the Lawrence family lawyer, has spoken of an ongoing crisis. Institutional racism in the police, he has said, is not just alive but “thriving”. So is moving on even possible? Brooks says discussion of the future of the case should be led by the Lawrence parents. Now, in Stratford, he is talking about another crisis, the wave of knife crime gripping London. Brooks opposes stop and search, newly back in favour among police and politicians. It’s pointless, he says. Instead, there should be visible leadership, engagement with communities. “I’m angry. I want to sit down with Sadiq Khan and [Metropolitan police commissioner] Cressida Dick. I’ve asked Cressida to do a live TV debate with me and she won’t. They’re scared.” Why? “Because embarrassment is hard to deal with on live TV. They don’t want to sit down with someone who actually knows how the Met works.” He shrugs, holds up a hand. “We should talk about the programme.” The programme is a three-part BBC One documentary with a bold statement for a title – Stephen: The Murder That Changed a Nation. It was produced by Asif Kapadia, director of the Oscar-winning Amy, the sorrowful portrait of the late Amy Winehouse. Kapadia is just a couple of years older than Brooks, growing up as an Asian kid in Hackney, going through the same experience many young Londoners had with racism and the police in the 80s and 90s. “There were certain estates you just didn’t go to. And in Hackney we all grew up thinking the police were bent!” But for a whole generation, he says, the effect of the case was seismic. “For a lot of people, Stephen Lawrence was the first time they saw the system as a whole. How it all connected, the police, judiciary, politicians. And it was also exactly the moment they lost trust in it.” Already, the series has assumed a pivotal role. The police have said they will wait until after it broadcasts and new witnesses potentially come forward before making a decision on continuing investigations. Yet getting it made was a delicate process, navigating between the BBC and the Met, scrutinised by lawyers on all sides. Directed by James Rogan, the result combines new interviews – Brooks among them – with the kind of vivid archive collage Kapadia perfected in Amy. The effect can be startling – Rogan found a glimpse of Stephen on a 1991 episode of late-night TV show The Word, watching Public Enemy next to the stage, like a photograph come to life. The series begins with the stunned grief of the Lawrence parents, and the nest of bigots in Eltham who murdered him, then zooms out ever wider into the surrounding web of career criminals and police malpractice, the media, Home Office, a whole country suddenly appalled by what it saw in the mirror: Britain, the place where racists get away with murder. Rarely can have three hours of television have felt so tightly packed. Just the landmarks of the case could fill the time – the botched investigation, the shock of the Macpherson report damning the police as institutionally racist, the belated conviction in 2012 of two of the gang responsible. But to really understand what happened, the series says, you have to consider history such as the Deptford fire of 1981, which engulfed a south-east London house party and killed 13 young black people, without adequate investigation; the economic downturn at the start of the 90s that saw racism in nearby areas eventually congeal into support for the BNP. Then, at the other end of the process, we have the 2014 Ellison review commissioned by Theresa May. She appears on camera, too, having ordered a public inquiry after the Met planted “a spy in the Lawrence family camp”. For Brooks, at least May confronted the police as home secretary. “That’s why they hate her,” he says. Although in the past he has been a Lib Dem councillor, he represents no one but himself. “My questions about the case now are around corruption, not racism,” he says, the kind of line that unnerves lawyers. Here not from any formal involvement with the series, but simply because he likes and trusts Rogan, Brooks is complicated company – funny, brusque and insightful in the course of the same answer. And wary too, as any of us would be. Discussing knife crime in London, Brooks talks about trauma – the damage done to friends and families of the victim. In the wake of the murder, as people in the community said that he had run and left Stephen behind, the police embarked on a campaign of harassment that would go on for years. At first they tried to discredit his evidence; then there was a long game of attempting to ruin him personally. There were regular arrests, the charges either quietly dropped or defeated. It emerged that the police had recorded a meeting between Brooks, his solicitor and a senior officer. In 2006, the Met offered a written apology for his treatment (“Because they were told to say sorry”). No officer involved ever lost their job. Paul Condon, the Metropolitan police commissioner throughout the early years of the Lawrence investigation, remained in the post after the Macpherson report, retiring as he had planned to in 2000. A year later, he was given a life peerage. Lord Condon retired in turn from Parliament last December. “It’s not about satisfying me,” Brooks says. “You fail, you lose your job. That’s standard. The Met failed to investigate a simple case of murder, and most of the suspects were allowed to get away with it. The person at the top should have lost their job.” Why does he think there wasn’t even a fall guy? “Now that’s because we are black.” The modern force would very much like to think of itself as having learned painful lessons. Brooks is sceptical. “If I was the commissioner, I’d want to say: ‘There were a number of recommendations in the Macpherson report, and this is where we are with them.’ But Cressida won’t. Because in terms of victim support, racism, discrimination, it’s still the same. Are victims and witnesses afforded the right support when they have to go to court? I don’t think so. That’s based on a number of cases where perpetrators have got off, because witnesses didn’t want to give evidence. Because they didn’t trust the police.” He pauses to consider ways in which he feels the Lawrence case has genuinely transformed the Met, then thinks of one improvement: “First aid.” For Kapadia, too, having made a series called The Murder That Changed a Nation, the question is how much change has really happened – or at least, if we are in danger of changing back. In the first episode of the series, Lawrence’s cousin Mat Bickley mentions the poisoned atmosphere created by Brexit. Kapadia’s instinct was to cut the reference, until he decided he had to make clear that racism was oozing back into public life – and why. “I’m worried about where we are,” Kapadia says. “There’s a reminder in the programme of the time a few years before Stephen was killed when people felt OK, maybe racism was disappearing. And then the mood shifted, and suddenly you were being told you don’t belong here again. You’re not from here. You’re not wanted. And all of that is back now.” Duwayne Brooks glances around the lights of Westfield. After the murder, his solicitor arranged some counselling. Otherwise, there was nothing. Twenty-five years later, he says, in most of London the only trauma counselling for teenagers has to be paid for privately. “One person gets stabbed to death, everyone feels that pain. The friend who is with them, the whole network of friends on Facebook and WhatsApp. So that trauma just keeps rippling out, into different houses, into different lives.” And what if it isn’t dealt with? “If it isn’t dealt with? Then it stays with you. And then it starts to eat you.”