About six months ago a big Russian publishing house asked me to write a book before the World Cup. I suggested the story of the Russian national team. The faces of editors clouded over. “Nobody will read it. Russians don’t believe in the national team. They wouldn’t like to read about losers.” According to the latest survey, only 4% of those interested in football in Russia believe the host team could win the World Cup. Instead of dreaming of victory, most Russians hope just to celebrate an event of global significance, show foreigners their cities and entertain them with pure icy vodka and mighty zastolie. Don’t believe the scare stories about violence, racism, hooliganism and so on. There’s no way foreign fans will face any of it (assuming, of course, they don’t provoke locals). They will be protected better than some might deserve. It’s true that the diplomatic rows are getting a lot of attention on Russian TV and ordinary Russians don’t think an awful lot of Boris Johnson, Theresa May or other major British politicians. But the same happened in Soviet times, in even stronger terms. That didn’t affect the attitude of Russians to English football or ordinary English citizens. The English Premier League is broadcast on national Match TV for free, and some English games have much bigger TV ratings than most Russian ones. Former superstars such as Steven Gerrard, Frank Lampard or Wayne Rooney are better known to many than English and even Russian politicians. Harry Kane with his goals could easily neutralise the negative political and diplomatic mood. If the British government does boycott the World Cup, it won’t influence the Russian response to the England team, because politicians don’t play football and their absence won’t be noticed. The only thing that matters is the presence of the Three Lions themselves. The Confederations Cup in 2017, which took place without one serious incident on or off the pitch, showed Russia can organise everything perfectly. Ask the 7,000 Chilean fans at that tournament who were accepted with absolute hospitality. On the night train from Moscow to Kazan, I saw Russians from Siberia pour them free vodka and cognac for half the night. Potentially violent fans will have no access to the stadiums because of the fans’ passport system, successfully adopted at Confederations Cup. The political message from the top and from the police couldn’t have been clearer. Ultra leaders know better than to show any aggression during World Cup month. Events like Marseille in June 2016 won’t be repeated inside the country and civilised English fans shouldn’t be worried about safety. Don’t behave like pigs and nothing will happen. At least I can’t imagine any prepared attacks. One piece of advice for foreign fans: there was a story before the start of Confederations Cup when a Chilean fan, who didn’t know the rouble rate, was cheated by an airport taxi driver. A supporter had to pay 50,000 roubles (about £600) for the 45-minute drive from Domodedovo airport to Moscow city centre. The driver was caught by the police, repaid the victim and barely escaped prison. But just in case: don’t use airport taxis. Uber is much safer for your pocket. Igor Rabiner is a columnist for the Russian paper Sport Express