Judged on chatter alone, The Assassination of Gianni Versace: American Crime Story is an immense disappointment. Ratings have been down. Reviews have been mixed. It hasn’t reached the mainstream crossover event-TV status of its predecessor The People Vs OJ Simpson. People have been infuriated that – spoiler alert – in an entire series of television called The Assassination of Gianni Versace, Gianni Versace gets assassinated in the very first scene of the very first episode. Things are looking bad. Not quite True Detective 2 bad, but the consensus is that this did not go the way it should have. In short, The Assassination of Gianni Versace: American Crime Story needs a defender. Reader, I am that defender. Because the chatter is nonsense. This is an astonishing, bold piece of television. By some distance, it’s the best of the year so far. This is an astonishing, bold piece of television. By some distance, it’s the best of the year so far Of course it suffers by comparison. The People Vs OJ Simpson was a shameless crowd-pleaser. It was a retelling of The Trial of The Century, a murder case dripping with fame and sex and violence. Every character was a celebrity – many were Kardashians – and every role seemed to be filled by a down-on-their-luck megastar determined to chew every last piece of scenery available as aggressively as possible. Travolta, Schwimmer, Gooding Jr; all going goon-eyed hell-for-leather bananas in every single scene. It was precision-designed to draw eyeballs. But that’s not what The Assassination of Gianni Versace is. This is a vastly different beast, and its weakest moments come when it overtly tries to ape the Simpson series. The scenes that actually feature the Versace family – played by Édgar Ramírez, Penélope Cruz and Ricky Martin – are ever so slightly too broad, even without the cognitive dissonance that comes from hearing a Venezuelan, a Spaniard and a Puerto Rican all loosely attempting to hit a convincing Italian accent. Their scenes are rendered even flabbier by the fact that they butt up against a bone-tight horrorshow. Because The Assassination of Gianni Versace isn’t really about Gianni Versace. It’s about his killer, Andrew Cunanan, and the gut-churning tilt-a-whirl of his mid-90s murder spree. The show’s entire mid-section barely features Versace at all, and it counts among some of the most gripping television in recent memory. Tracking back through Cunanan’s murders, episodes blast through genres with a breathtakingly confident swagger. The murder of Lee Miglin is shot and paced like a horror movie, full of lurching unease and escalating dread. David Madson’s death is a claustrophobic thriller that feels tragically inevitable right from the very first frame. And the episode about Jeff Trail’s murder is just a thing of towering majesty. It manages to simultaneously move the story along, draw a graceful one-off character arc and dish out the most stingingly furious rebuke to the US military’s “don’t ask don’t tell” policy I have ever seen. It was stunning and heartbreaking, and if there’s a better episode of television broadcast this year, I will be genuinely staggered. Holding all these disparate tones together is a mesmerising central performance by Darren Criss. A former Glee star in danger of being lost to the world of cartoon voiceovers, Criss is horrifyingly convincing as Cunanan. He’s needy and manipulative and utterly empty; a blank that slowly draws you in to your doom. I’m watching the series at BBC pace, so I don’t know whether or not the wheels will fall off in the weeks to come, but for now it has the look of a star-making performance. Criss deserves to be huge because of this role. He cannot win enough awards for it. American Crime Story’s producers Brad Simpson and Nina Jacobson have previously said that their show exists to tell stories that say something “bigger and deeper and more disturbing about America”. So far, that’s exactly what The Assassination of Gianni Versace has been. It’s dark and complex and tragic, and it deserves a much better reception than the one it received. If you haven’t seen it, you’re missing out on something special.