Radical politics, psychedelic drugs, experimental sex: there were many dangers haunting nervous parents as they sent their children to university in the 1970s. But Jenny Chandler was warned about a different threat: “My father gave me this lecture about being sensible, not getting drunk at parties and never eating red kidney beans, because back then there was this whole thing about the toxins you have to boil out of [raw] red kidney beans. As a student, I was terrified of them.” Now a teacher and writer, author of the cookbook Pulse, and formerly the UN’s European ambassador during its 2016 pulse campaign, Chandler has overcome that fear in style. Yet pulses (dried legume seeds including lentils, chickpeas, beans and peas) still suffer from a serious image problem. Britain hoovers up hummus and baked beans, but, outside foodie circles, cooking with pulses – especially dried pulses, which need pre-soaking – is often regarded as too much hassle, for a food that is commonly portrayed as a right-on penance rather than a source of pleasure. Clean-eating’s wispy gurus have given many obscure health foods a glossy modern sheen, but, in pop cultural terms, the lentil’s most famous exponent remains Neil from The Young Ones. Yet, despite all that, quietly, British pulses are rising. I meet Chandler at the British Dal festival in Bristol, a new event held in March, funded by the British Edible Pulses Association (Bepa). A week-long patchwork of community events from lentil planting in Millennium Square to a dal cook-off at the closing Grand Dal Finale (attended by almost 1,000 people), it sought to celebrate all pulse stews, from mushy peas to chana dal. Fresh from a primary school dal cookery class and lunch at Bristol farmers’ market (where Thali Cafe gave away more than 200 portions of dal), Chandler is evangelical about pulses – be it dried or tinned. “They’re incredibly economical and versatile chameleons in that they’ll take on whatever Italian, Spanish, Mexican or Indian flavours you want, and they’re delicious,” she says. “They’re also nutritious, full of protein and fibre, and a no-brainer if you’re worried about gaining weight or blood-sugar levels because you’ve got this complex carbohydrate, slow-release energy. They keep you full for hours, and feeling content rather than sluggish.” Across town in Bristol’s staunchly indie Stokes Croft enclave, the eco-focused Poco Tapas is fully engaged with the potential of pulses. In particular, it is an early adopter of the UK-grown pulses distributed by Suffolk’s pioneering Hodmedod. A bustling, unvarnished bar-restaurant, Poco uses Hodmedod’s fava beans to make silky hummus and crisp, airy falafel, just as the Egyptians do. It also uses earthy carlin peas (AKA Lancashire’s black peas) in a dish of merguez sausage and labneh, and Hodmedod’s yellow split peas – larger than a lentil, but with that same creamy, melting quality – in its dal. “People overlook pulses because we’re brought up eating tins of overcooked processed pulses or sad, stale [dried pulses] which have sat in the cupboard for years,” says Poco co-owner Ben Pryor. “But when they’re fresh and high-quality, split peas or carlin peas can be an exceptional part of a meal. They’re the most amazing colour, shape and texture.” A diminutive cousin of the common broad bean, the fava bean has been grown here since the iron age. However, its fate in modern Britain (the best beans are exported to Egypt, most are sold as animal feed) encapsulates how UK pulses have faded. A hardcore of farmers take advantage of pulses’ nitrogen-fixing qualities to use them as a natural fertiliser in crop rotation, while a coterie pride themselves on growing traditional UK varieties, such as the marrowfat peas used in mushy peas. But pulses are grown on just 4% of UK arable land (cereals take up more than 50%) and many farmers grow pulses only sporadically, when prices rise. Currently, we export tonnes of fava beans, while importing three times as many lentils, chickpeas, haricot beans and other more popular pulses. Sitting in Poco, fresh from manning Hodmedod’s stall for the dal festival, Nick Saltmarsh, one of its co-founders, explains: “All over the world, as societies become richer, pulses are shunted away as the food of the poor, and those who can afford it eat meat. In Britain, from the Black Death onwards, we ate more meat and dairy, stopped relying on beans as a main protein source and they fell out of fashion.” However, the growing cost and ecological impact of eating meat, along with concerns about food security, could help pulses stage a comeback. The few hundred tonnes of UK pulses that Hodmedod distributes annually, sourced from a small network of dedicated farms, is a tiny fraction of total UK production, estimated at 730,000 tonnes, and Hodmedod’s wackier projects, such as last year’s first commercial UK lentil harvest, are at this stage totemic. But its rapid growth has demonstrated that you can create an appetite for UK pulses, even the neglected, mysterious fava bean, and that is has been noted by the larger pulse players. Originally inspired by a research project looking at the future of sustainable food in East Anglia, Hodmedod found its plan to retail fava beans laughed at by pulse processors. “They thought it was ludicrous,” says Saltmarsh. Five years later, Hodmedod is regarded as a trailblazer. “Before [Hodmedod] existed, the only UK market [for fava beans] was for cattle or fish feed,” says the president of Bepa, Franek Smith. “Hodmedod is developing a new and more profitable human consumption market for farmers and processing businesses.” Long-term, Hodmedod wants to see a transformative shift in UK agricultural policy, away from huge, monocultural cereal farms reliant on artificial fertilisers, to a more diverse farming culture that would include the cultivation of a variety of low-intensity pulses for UK consumers. This would be hugely beneficial, it argues, ecologically and for public health. There are precedents for such a change. In the past 30 years, Canada has radically increased its pulse production. It is now the world’s largest exporter of peas and lentils. However, as outlined in a recent Processors and Growers Research Organisation report, a similar British revolution would require significant state intervention, in everything from the funding of seed research to procurement directives for schools and hospitals. Bepa met MPs at Westminster in 2016 and Bristol East MP (and vegan) Kerry McCarthy has, says Smith, made Bepa’s case to ministers Liam Fox and Michael Gove. But getting the cabinet interested in pulses is difficult. “We’re starting to make waves, which is good, but until the last six to 12 months, we’ve had absolutely no impact at governmental level,” he says. For its part, Hodmedod continues to scatter its seed beyond wholefood stores by introducing products into delis and farm shops, promoting UK pulses to restaurants such as River Cottage, Mark Hix and Honey & Co, and embracing convenience with its tinned fava, haricot and carlin peas. It even makes its own baked beans and salted beans, the latter tapping into what Saltmarsh believes could be a big growth area: pulse-based snacks (he namechecks Yushoi’s baked pea crisps and PepsiCo’s Off the Eaten Path brand). “The increased interest in pulses is striking,” he says. Hodmedod’s 99p-a-tin pulses are not the cheapest. “We can’t compete with 30p imported chickpeas. At our scale that’s hardly the cost of the can,” admits Saltmarsh, but, perversely, the wider visibility of premium pulses – which gram-for-gram are still cheaper than most meat and other proteins – may positively improve the image of fava beans and field peas. “Pulses became maligned as this really cheap thing. You’ve got to take the deprivation out of it and make people realise how delicious pulse dishes are,” says Chandler. But what of another significant problem? Not one of price or convenience, but flatulence? Will pulses always be followed by an ill wind that inhibits their popularity? Chandler thinks the issue is overblown: “My family had 18 months of serious pulse-eating for my book and, this sounds bizarre, I think you become more tolerant and less windy as you get used to them.” Failing that, there are ingredients you can add, such as cumin or seaweed, that are thought to break down the oligosaccharides that cause those explosive after-effects. If you are keen to explore the world of pulses beyond baked beans, it’s worth bearing in mind. Your family and friends will be forever grateful.