According to the ONS data, over recent years Louis has been hovering between being the 70th and 80th most popular boys names for new babies. The Cambridges’ previous name choices have been much more popular in the country at large – George was in the top 10 most popular names. Whether the new baby’s name sparks a rise in popularity for Louis remains to be seen: Charlotte has fallen slightly in popularity since their second child was named. Most pundits and bookmakers had made Arthur or Albert the firm favourite to be picked – with Louis an outside bet. The Duke and Duchess of Cambridge already had used the name when they named their first child. Prince George, third in line to the throne, has the full given name of George Alexander Louis. The name has not been universally well received on Mumsnet. Founder and CEO Justine Roberts said: “Kate and William have form for picking traditional names and Louis fits the bill. On the Mumsnet talk boards there is a clear split between those who love traditional names and those who prefer something more unusual. The royals have followed one strong rule: don’t announce the name before the baby is born. It’s much harder to dislike a name if a cute baby is attached to it.” Blackpool zoo had a baby camel calf born on the same day as the new prince, and wasted no time giving it the same name. The animal is cute, so we can just about forgive them. Our little superstar's lap of honour #PrinceLouis #LouisTheCamel https://t.co/IFGi4kNuC7 We anticipate at least one tabloid headline exclaiming “Sacre bleu!” on Saturday at the idea that the British royal family have adopted such a French name. The French monarchy were historically very keen on the name Louis, and ended up with 18 monarchs bearing that name. In fact, for 186 years between 1610 and 1798, every king was called Louis. The 19th King Louis of France ruled for about 20 minutes before abdicating in 1830. His father, Charles X, had given up the throne that day during the Second French Revolution, and Louis Antoine, Duke of Angoulême, clearly saw which way the political wind was blowing. The Frankish roots of the name are said to derive from the words for fame and warrior, and its original form was Hlōdowik. The English derivatives have become Louis and Lewis, with the name becoming Ludwig in the Germanic tongue. He doesn’t feature in the Horrible Histories Kings and Queens song – but Louis VIII of France spent some time in England cavorting around as king, even having a proclamation of it at St Paul’s Cathedral. He was being preferred as ruler by the barons who despised King John. However, having landed at Thanet in 1216, Louis was removed from the throne when King John died, and the barons decided it was easier to deal with making his nine-year-old son King Henry III than carry on working with the Frenchman. In 1217 the treaty of Lambeth was signed, and Louis was paid 10,000 marks on the condition that he accepted he had never been the legitimate King of England. This was one of the few times when “let us never speak of this thing again” became a clause in an international agreement. There’s a closer personal link for the present-day royal family. The last prominent British royal names Louis was Louis Mountbatten, the great-grandson of Queen Victoria and uncle to Prince Philip. Lord Mountbatten, one of his twin grandsons, and a local boy were killed when a bomb planted by the IRA exploded on their leisure boat in Mullaghmore, County Sligo, Ireland on 27 August 1979. Another passenger, Lady Brabourne, died the day after the attack. Bringing us right up to date, several commentators have spotted a Brexit angle on the name. Piers Morgan said it was “two fingers up” at Brexit from the royal couple, and ITV’s political editor, Robert Peston, used Twitter to deliver his instant verdict on the Cambridge’s selection: "Louis Arthur Charles". I know about the Mountbatten and royal connections. But these are so of-the-moment, London bubble names. Let's be clear, they are basically Remainer names How do you pronounce Louis? Prince Louis is fifth in line to the throne, and would be pushed down the line of succession were his elder siblings, George and Charlotte, to have kids of their own. But that hasn’t stopped people thinking that the prospect of a King Louis might be an opportunity to ditch God Save the King in favour of something with a little more jungle swing. The #RoyalBaby is officially Prince Louis Arthur Charles, so we might one day be treated to a real King Louis! pic.twitter.com/NmbCOzvi0X