A white North Carolina officer is shown putting a black pedestrian in a chokehold in videos released on Monday that offers more footage of a police beating that has sparked outrage over use of force. City officials in Asheville, North Carolina, released nine body camera videos of the August 2017 encounter – most of it made public for the first time – from multiple officers. Earlier this year, a shorter clip obtained by a newspaper sparked anger in the community and helped lead to assault charges against former officer Christopher Hickman. One of the new clips from an officer arriving as backup appears to show Hickman using both arms to restrain Johnnie Jermaine Rush by his neck. Police have previously said Hickman put Rush in a chokehold, but it was difficult to see on Hickman’s own body-worn camera that leaked to the newspaper. A judge ruled a week ago that the new videos could be made public. North Carolina law generally prevents the release of body camera footage without court approval.  In one of the new clips, Rush argues that a supervisor who arrived on the scene, Sgt Lisa Taube, appears to put more faith in Hickman’s account than his. “You weren’t even here to see know happened,” Rush is heard saying. “You’re just going by what your officer told you. There are two sides to every story.” Taube then responds: “There are. And, thankfully, I’ve got body-worn video camera to watch afterward.” Police have said Taube was disciplined for her handling of the case. While the encounter happened late last year, it took six months for it to become public through the leak to the Citizen-Times. Hickman, 31, was arrested in March on a felony charge of assault by strangulation, plus misdemeanor counts of assault and communicating threats. His lawyer, Thomas Amburgey, released a statement on Monday saying that he believes his client will be found innocent once a jury hears the case. The 25 August encounter came months after the city implemented the use-of-force policy that included training on de-escalating tense situations. The policy was drafted in the aftermath of a white officer killing an armed black man after a high-speed chase. Despite the policy, Hickman is shown on the videos subduing Johnnie Jermaine Rush, then punching and shocking him with a stun gun. Rush was stopped because officers accused him of crossing outside a crosswalk near a minor league ballpark and cluster of breweries popular with tourists. An arrest warrant for Hickman said Rush suffered head abrasions and swelling and that he lost consciousness when Hickman pressed his arm on his throat. Community outrage spilled over with angry comments at a March community meeting with the police chief, and even the city council expressed anger that they weren’t informed of the case for months.