Mathematicians could quibble but Newcastle United have practically banished the threat of relegation thanks to this accomplished victory at Leicester, their first away win in the Premier League since New Year’s Day. Goals by Jonjo Shelvey and Ayoze Pérez, before Jamie Vardy pulled one back for the hosts late on, took Rafael Benítez’s side to 38 points, a tally that will almost certainly ensure they finish above at least three other clubs. There is a distinction between a team that battles for survival and one that calmly asserts its right to play in the top flight. Newcastle played here like a side that knows it belongs in the Premier League. Coming into the game on the back of two home wins, Benítez’s team showed confidence and polish. They were helped by another sluggish start by Leicester, a bad habit that Claude Puel’s outfit have fallen into in recent weeks. The King Power crowd were treated to free beer and fireworks before kickoff to celebrate the 60th birthday of Leicester’s chairman, Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha, but the home team were not supposed to be generous to the opposition. Leicester’s early diffidence seemed like an invitation to Newcastle to take the initiative and Benítez’s men did not need to be asked twice. They came close to scoring in the second minute when Kasper Schmeichel had to bat away a glancing header by Pérez following a corner by Kenedy. Dwight Gayle forced another save from the goalkeeper a minute later. Leicester’s play for most of the first period was slow and bitty, the opposite of Newcastle’s. Shelvey intelligently ran midfield, where Leicester missed the dynamism of the suspended Wilfried Ndidi. It was no surprise that Shelvey was instrumental when Newcastle opened the scoring in the 18th minute. After Pérez picked him out on the edge of the area, Shelvey used a foxy dummy to send Wes Morgan and Harry Maguire on a wild goose chase. Then he guided a shot from 18 yards past Schmeichel, helped by a slight deflection off Ben Chilwell. It was Shelvey’s first goal in the league for Newcastle and, allied to how he orchestrated play for much of the first half, the ideal way to strengthen his chances of convincing Gareth Southgate to take him with England to the World Cup. Maguire seems certain to go to Russia but will need to avoid sulphurous incidents like the one into which he lumbered in the 20th minute, when he reacted to Gayle’s pesky jostling by turning around and giving the striker an open-handed shove in the face. The referee, Stuart Attwell, decided to show only a yellow card. If Leicester fans hoped that incident would serve as a metaphorical slap in the face to wake up their team, their wish was not immediately granted. Not until the 37th minute did Leicester show the class they undoubtedly possess. Adrien Silva was to thank for that, as he opened up Newcastle with a wonderful pass from the centre circle to Riyad Mahrez. As the winger wound up for a shot from 15 yards, Paul Dummett slid in and took him down – but Attwell again took a lenient view, apparently believing the defender connected with the ball. At last Leicester had perked up. Silva helped create another chance before the break, pinging a pass to Mahrez and he slipped the ball on to Vardy, who had barely been involved up to that point. Vardy fired the ball across the face of goal and Jamaal Lascelles cleared. Now Newcastle had to fight. Leicester were working up a head of steam but the visitors stayed cool enough to stop them creating clear chances. And then, in the 75th minute, Leicester’s defence imploded. There seemed no trouble when Florian Lejeune punted a long ball forward but Morgan and Maguire looked slack-jawed at it as if it were an unidentified flying object. Their bewilderment allowed Pérez to dart in and send a 25-yard lob over the stranded Schmeichel. Vardy stabbed the ball into the net from close range in the 83rd minute after a knock-down by Shinji Okazaki following a cross by Demarai Gray but Newcastle would not be denied a precious and deserved win.