“I actually almost always have a nap at 2.30pm,” says David Shrigley, as we sit down in an upstairs room, a jug of water and a plate of chocolate digestives between us, at Graphica gallery in Brighton. I check my watch: it’s five to two. “It’s not going to work today,” he sighs. “But this isn’t really work, this is just blah blah blah, it’s easy. The hard thing is writing things in the studio and thinking of stuff that’s interesting.” An afternoon nap might sound indulgent, but it is hard to fault 49-year-old Shrigley’s work ethic. An excellent new book is imminent: Fully Coherent Plan for a New and Better Society features 254 new illustrations, all drawn in his distinctive thick black pen on stark white paper, the naivety of the image offset by the scabrous, surreal or darkly comic text. He’s also the guest director of the 2018 Brighton festival (he moved to Brighton three years ago with his wife, Kim, and miniature schnauzer Inka, after 27 years in Glasgow). Shrigley has been involved in selecting performers for the festival – which features everything from art to comedy to music to a lot that is indescribable – and will be making several appearances himself. To that end, below us, in a large room that still has the stained-glass windows and pulpit from its days as a church, the finishing touches are being applied to Shrigley’s installation Life Model II. The work, which revisits a piece he made when he was nominated for the Turner prize in 2013, is an imposing 9ft nude woman with a severe fringe and long eyelashes that blink every so often. Surrounding the model are easels, paper and drawing materials, and visitors are invited to make a “life” drawing. These will then be tacked to the gallery walls and, in Shrigley’s mind, become artwork just as interesting as his original sculpture, if not more so. The show hasn’t yet opened when we meet, so on the walls are some examples from the last time Life Model II was shown, in Vienna, which will act as a “giddy-up” to the people of Brighton. “So they are drawings by Austrians,” says Shrigley, as though this fact might explain a lot. The Austrians struggled with the feet, I note. “Well, of course hands and feet are always the hard things to draw,” Shrigley replies. “The [model’s] feet are an awkward size anyway, so I’m giving you a get-out, but the hands are quite elegantly rendered, I suppose. Hands and feet – hard.” He points his long index finger at me: “Foreshortening of the hand, oof, difficult!” Life Model II is a just part of Shrigley’s contribution to the festival. What’s really disrupting his sleep right now is a new work called Problem in Brighton, which is billed as “an alt-rock pantomime” starring Pauline Knowles and Gavin Mitchell. In some ways it’s a companion piece to Shrigley’s 2011 “opera”, Pass the Spoon, but the truth is that even the artist is unsure what it will look and sound like. “I’ve always wanted to direct a performance on stage,” says Shrigley. “I did the opera thing a few years ago, but I didn’t direct that, I just wrote the words. But the word ‘pantomime’ suggests, ‘oh well, it’s a pantomime, it’s like a rubbish, funny play for children’. Then you say it’s ‘alt-rock’… I didn’t say ‘avant-garde’, because that’s pretentious. Basically I’ve set the bar really low, so I can do whatever I like and make a cacophonous noise.” Doing something totally different clearly appeals to Shrigley. Alongside his best-known work – the books and merch; his 2012 solo show, Brain Activity, at London’s Hayward gallery; his huge bronze thumb, titled Really Good, which until last month sat on the fourth plinth in Trafalgar Square – he is also drawn to more esoteric commissions. In 2015, he designed a new mascot for the Scottish football club Partick Thistle; he’s called Kingsley and looks like a furious sun. He’s made music videos for Blur and Bonnie Prince Billy, and hosted pop-up tattoo stations, at which he draws directly on to people’s bodies and, if they like the result, they can have it inked permanently. Now, for the Observer, Shrigley is submitting himself to interrogation by our readers. At 6ft 5in, he’s not hard to spot – does he generally have pleasant interactions with the public? “They give me the fear, if I’m honest,” says Shrigley. “In Glasgow it used to be, ‘You’re that guy, aren’t ye?’ And I’d be like, ‘Aye, I am.’ Then he’d say, ‘I thought you were, right, I think you’re that guy. All the best to ye.’” Shrigley laughs, “The thing is, who was he talking about? Was he talking about me? We’ll never know.” Hans-Ulrich Obrist, artistic director of the Serpentine Galleries Don’t listen to people like me. Or Hans-Ulrich. There’s that famous statement: every generation invents rock’n’roll, or whatever it is, for itself. And every generation invents its art anew. So, don’t find excuses not to do it. I’m sure a lot of young people have more excuses than I did when I was in my early 20s: I was lucky, there were no fees to pay then. But yeah, if you want to do it, get on with it. Yinka Shonibare, artistTommy Cooper was funny. The thing about Tommy Cooper is that he walked on to the stage and people laughed. That’s magic, isn’t it? If you can just look at people and they start laughing. I’m not really a nostalgic person, but when I watch things from the 1970s, when I was a little kid, The Two Ronnies and Dad’s Army are still funny. I couldn’t really say that about a lot of other things that have happened in the interim. I like standup, but I don’t go to it often. When it’s good, you always think: “Why don’t I do this more often?” Just laughing for a whole hour, it’s so therapeutic. But then you see something that isn’t that funny and you’re like, “Shall we go to the bar?” and you realise why you don’t do it so often. It’s very subjective as well. My wife and I went to see Stewart Lee and then we went to see an American guy whose name I can’t remember. She really liked the American guy and didn’t like Stewart Lee. And I was like: “How can you not like Stewart Lee?” And she said, “I think it’s a man thing. He’s just so bloody clever.” And that’s a criticism. That’s part of the reason I like him: because he is so bloody clever. Anyway, subjective, innit? Jess Kidd, authorRight, a bank holiday weekend – because it’s bound to be raining, isn’t it? So you’re indoors with this bloody ghost. I’m actually reading Jess Kidd’s book at the moment, which is all about ghosts. Anyway, who would it be? It would have to be Duchamp, because he could perhaps teach me to play chess – he was one of the best chess players in France. People have taught me to play chess before but it’s never stuck, so I’d like to go over it with him. And I could sit there in the park playing and tell people: “Well, Marcel Duchamp taught me to play…” Actually no: “The ghost of Marcel Duchamp taught me to play chess.” That would be cool. It would probably take longer than a weekend. Obviously there’d be a lot of questions I’d want to ask him: Duchamp is a kind of god, or a touchstone. And if Duchamp wasn’t available then Andy Warhol, but Duchamp would be my first choice. Sir Nicholas Serota, chair of Arts Council EnglandWell, I live in Brighton, so that’s really handy. And part of the reason they need a guest director as a marketing figurehead is because it is so disparate in terms of the things that are on. It’s very difficult to pull them all together into one unified blurb, other than: it’s here and there’s lots of really good things on. My programming was basically sending a list by email to somebody and, fortunately for me, a lot of the things came to be. So Deerhoof and Ezra Furman and Bridget Christie among others: Deerhoof are one of my favourite bands, Ezra Furman I’ve never seen before and Bridget Christie, I missed her show as well. So it was a way of filling in the gaps and not having to go to London and get the vomit express back at the end of the evening. Emma Jane Unsworth, authorWho! Who! Who! I let the dog out at 6am, and I don’t know why she wakes up at 6am but it’s always me that has to take her out. And it’s only when we’re in Brighton. We spend part of our time in Devon and she gets up at 8am when we’re in Devon. I think it’s the seagulls that wake her up here. Anyway, I’ve taken to wearing shorts in bed, so I don’t have to take my pyjamas off, I just go out in shorts and a coat and wander like a zombie around the block. She does what she has to do and then we go back to bed for another two hours. Evie Wyld, novelistI don’t like frogs and toads very much. They look, particularly toads, like dirt when you see them from a distance. I saw one on the doorstep the other day and I thought it was dog shit. I wish them well, toads, I wish them long, healthy lives, but if you said, “Would you like me to put a toad on your bare chest right now?” I’d say: “Absolutely not.” Ezra Furman, musicianI think they’re both. For some people they can be quite annoying, if you look at them too much. I’m aware of that. As an artist, you have to do what you’ve gotta do. There is some cathartic thing about making art: if you don’t get it out, it’ll fester inside and damage you somehow. I do feel a bit like that. So it’s healthy for me to make art; whether it’s healthy for other people to look at it, I don’t know. Part of the reason I’m so into football is that it takes me away from art. I go to see a football team in Brighton called Whitehawk, who are in the sixth tier currently; they are going to be in the seventh tier next season unfortunately. But that’s really good fun. You can take your dog and drink a pint while you watch. Also they are very progressive: they’re anti-homophobia, anti-sexism, anti-racism and no bad language, so it’s an interesting club and I really appreciate a Saturday afternoon there. Like tomorrow, I’ll go and I won’t have to think about this bloody performance [Problem in Brighton]. Will Self, authorI seem to remember him interviewing me when I got nominated for the Turner prize, and he was like: “Oh yeah, man, you’re like part of the establishment now you’ve been nominated for the Turner prize, it’s really disappointing for me.” And I felt like, it’s not like I’m running for office for the Conservative party, or I’ve bought a tweed jacket or anything. I thought it [the fourth plinth] was a great opportunity to make a massive bit of work and put it in a public space. If that’s selling out then so be it. Amanda Palmer, singerI guess so, but sometimes I misunderstand lyrics. There’s a famous old blues song called He’s a Mighty Good Leader; Beck did a version of it on one of his early albums. I really liked it, but I always thought the lyric was, “Is the monarch a leader?” and it was only fairly recently that the Beck album was reissued on vinyl and I realised, Oooh… yeah: is the monarch a leader? And a picture of the royal family: are they a leader? Or is it just a token office? I’ve made a couple of pop promos in my life. I’d do it for Beck but not for anybody else. Now Mark E Smith is dead, Beck is probably the only one I’d do it for. But not this year, I’m too busy. Matt Haig, novelist (who lives in Brighton)I love it. It was hard to leave Glasgow and Brighton was probably the one other place I’ve always felt really at home. It’s my kind of people in Brighton, it’s by the sea, and the weather’s better than Glasgow. But it depends where you live as well. I’ve never actually met Matt but we have a friend in common, so doubtless I will soon. I think he lives in Hove, while I’m in Kemptown. The bad thing about Kemptown is that it’s full of dogshit and lunatics. And I suspect Hove isn’t. I’m not talking about homeless people, I’m just talking about genuinely mad people, barking at the moon, who live in houses and who are mad. To wit, the day after we moved in, I’d parked the car on the pavement and I was unloading it. Some guy was walking down the street and he was wearing a pair of shorts, flip-flops, a cowboy hat and a pair of sunglasses, and he had “Get High” written in lipstick on his chest. This was about 8.30am and he was smoking a joint and he said: “You can’t park like that, mate. I’m just telling ya.” Now, I like that, but I’d like to be like the people who come from a different part of town just to visit, to look at Mr Get High. Ed Vaizey, Conservative MP for WantageOh yeah, I know your mum. My mum lives with maybe two and they are both ceramic pieces, because she threw away all the rest. She and my dad between them discarded all of my work, probably shortly after I left home for art school. I’d say they’ve come to appreciate it a bit more over time. There was a watershed moment where there was some documentary about me on TV and overnight they went from knowing nothing to everything about what I did for a living. That’s not to say my parents haven’t been supportive, because they have; they just didn’t really have any interest in art. Also, to be fair to them, I’m slightly less bothered about them throwing the artwork away than I was about them throwing away all my football programmes. I had the programme to the 1979 European Cup final, Nottingham Forest’s moment of glory. Don’t know where that is. Gone. Peter Jenkinson, co-founder of Culture+ConflictWell, it can’t always tell you which artworks are mine and which works just look like mine, for example. On Google image search there are works that are erroneously attributed to me, and then people invite you to participate in something that they’re curating and they say: “We love your work! Could we reproduce this image on the brochure?” And it’s not one of your images. Then you have to say: “You don’t like my work as much as you think you do.” So Google image search – problem. Dan Guthrie, Stroud, GloucsThe difficult thing about answering any question about what is or isn’t art is that even before you’ve finished making the statement as to what art is or what art isn’t, you think of an exception, a contradiction to what you’ve just said. You realise you’re wrong even before you’ve finished saying it. But, just for the sake of argument: stuff that’s in hotel rooms. Authorless, inkjet prints on canvas, you have to say that isn’t really art. It just looks like art but it isn’t art. Ally Ferguson, GlasgowIt’s very difficult to say. When I was looking for somewhere to study, I found Glasgow really exciting and different and mysterious. It was everything the suburbs of Leicester, where I grew up, weren’t. It probably took about 12 years for that to wear off and then suddenly I realised I was sort of a Glaswegian. This was my home. I can’t really remember my childhood in the East Midlands that well, but Glasgow is still very vivid. I lived there from when I was 19 to when I was 47 – teenage to middle age – and it was only three years ago that I left – it’s the biggest part of my life. Glasgow does have a certain mordant humour that’s peculiar to the west of Scotland. If you watch [the BBC One sitcom] Still Game or [the BBC Two show] Two Doors Down – which is really great – the comedy and the speech is very Glaswegian. It’s a shame it doesn’t travel that well, because there’s something very poetic and special about it. Emma Richardson, BedfordGlad you enjoyed it. I guess when you make something that you invite somebody to draw, it’s going to look like what you’ve made. But their drawings can also be a critique of the work, perhaps, and it’s an acknowledgement that everybody sees an artwork differently – on a metaphorical level as well as a literal level. What I like about it is that it’s a nice inclusive work. I tend to hate all the big sculptures I’ve made after a while. But I like this one because I don’t look at it any more, I look at the people’s drawings, so it’s like going to a different exhibition every time. I just ignore the big person. Matt Wilson, Madrid/Leighton BuzzardYeah, the most difficult thing is to know whether it’s any good. That tends to change depending on what mood you’re in. Knowing whether it’s finished? Well, with a drawing, it has to be because all of the paper is covered. Then it’s definitely finished. With the new book, I made a couple of thousand drawings in order to acquire 250. So there’s a success rate of perhaps 15%. The rest generally get thrown away. Then, even within the 15%, you have to produce many, many more, so they can be edited into a book that’s nominally about sociology. That they are relevant in some way. So I’ll have quite a large pool of drawings in a big box and I go through them: yes, no, no, no, yes… I’m very aware that if somebody else were to do it, they’d edit it completely differently. But that’s the nature of work; the editing is part of the work. William Tallan, AyrshireNo. We are not getting relegated, first of all. At the time of writing, we’ve got to play Ross County and we’ve got to play Hamilton. Win both of those games, we could feasibly be out of the shit we’re in. So first of all let’s think positive. Second of all, no. I’m not going to update Kingsley. Kingsley will be as he is and he will be there next season if we have to achieve promotion again. Selma Montford , honorary secretary of the Brighton Society 1973-2016I don’t think it’s clever, for the record. And it’s my handwriting, right, so what you’re objecting to is my handwriting. It’s like you’re basically objecting to me and there’s nothing I can do about that. I accept that. That’s why I don’t correspond by social media. It’s transmit only, I’m afraid, with social media. Because otherwise you’re just opening yourself – it’s a conduit to everyone in the world, some of whom are going to be really nasty to you. Sion Williams, Ruthin, north WalesYes, I do have a Moleskine notebook, as you might imagine, as every other note-taker does. I was in Glasgow one day, before we left, in the Botanic Gardens near where we lived, and I was making a little drawing, sitting on a bench. I overheard two guys walking past and they went: “Police.” How far from the truth can you be? Stefano Turato, EdinburghSelf-delusion probably. I’ve come to realise that self-delusion is quite important if you want to be an artist: “Oh, that doesn’t tally with my view of myself” – just ignore it. That’s the way my brain works. If you want to do something, you’ve got to ignore things that are unhelpful and that’s what I do. Mike Abbott, Limoges, FranceIt is my finger, yes. I think it’s my left hand because I’ve got a wonky nail on my left hand where my school friends trod on my finger when I was 10. Does it reference Lord Kitchener? In a sense the image functions in the same way as that famous recruitment poster but it isn’t a direct reference to that image. I don’t really make photographs any more – I stopped after the changeover to digital. Though that might be a digital picture actually, but I mostly stopped making photographic art in the early 2000s. I just stopped being interested in physical paper photographs. You start taking pictures on your phone and now there’s Instagram and that somehow seems to be enough: to make digital images and stick them on there. Luke, CopenhagenYeah, it’s a bad idea; it’s been done. We’ve all got to be unique. Get “Finger” tattooed on your toe, that’s my advice. As far as I know that hasn’t been done and I’ll happily provide the text. Fully Coherent Plan for a New and Better Society is out on Thursday (Canongate, £14.99). To order a copy for £12.74, go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99. The 2018 Brighton festival runs from 5-27 May