Labour’s latest bitter row over antisemitism could hardly have come at a worse time for the party’s army of activists in the north London Tory stronghold of Barnet. Demographic changes, controversy over the council’s performance, and the cumulative impact of eight years of funding cuts mean Labour believes it has its best chance in more than a decade of winning control here. Even before the election campaign got under way, an internecine battle within the Conservative group saw one deselected councillor resign in March, losing the Tories overall control. “Barnet has been moving towards Labour now for quite a while. We have been campaigning almost non-stop for eight, 10 years. It’s hard work,” says the leader of Barnet’s Labour group, Barry Rawlings. But on a Monday evening last month, Rawlings and many of his local colleagues, including Jewish councillors, joined the protest in Parliament Square against their own party’s botched handling of antisemitism. With Golders Green, Finchley and Mill Hill, all of which have thriving Jewish populations, in their patch, local councillors here are acutely conscious of the issues. Ten of the 63 candidates they are standing in May are Jewish, including a rabbi. Barnet Labour has been at the forefront of efforts to tighten up the party’s rules on hate speech. “It does sometimes come up on the doorstep,” Rawlings says. “We’ve got good relations locally but I won’t pretend the national picture’s helped us. On the other hand, we’ve made it clear where we stand, and asked them to put their trust in us – whatever faith they are.” Last Friday, in the spring sunshine, Rawlings and a group of Labour colleagues were out knocking on the doors of an estate of well-kept semis in the swing ward of Hale, sandwiched between the A1 and M1. If Labour could take those two seats, and the political makeup of the rest of the borough remained unchanged, it would seize control of the council, which has been in Tory hands since 2002. Rachel Barker, a sparky 25-year-old Labour candidate, hands a householder a leaflet describing the Conservatives as “Heartless Nationally, Hopeless Locally”, and listens to his concerns about potholes, policing and antisocial behaviour. Chatting afterwards, she says Labour’s handling of antisemitism comes up occasionally with voters, but insists hopefully that they are sophisticated enough not to punish the party’s councillors for it. “People around here are quite aware of the difference between national and local,” she says. This great wedge of north London, extending from lively Cricklewood in the south, to the golf courses and garden centres of Chipping Barnet and Mill Hill, where the capital segues into Hertfordshire, is gradually shifting in character. Adam Langleben, the Labour councillor for West Hendon, points to last year’s general election result in Chipping Barnet as a sign of the changing times. The seat had been Tory-held since it was created in 1974, but Theresa Villiers held it by just 353 votes. Party activists are now working hard to find those local Labour voters and turn them out on 3 May. “There are wards where Labour had never knocked on a door, where we now believe we can win,” Langleben says. “It looks like it’s Islington, Camden people – young families – who are moving out there.” He adds: “Barnet’s always been a place where you settle down, you have a family and you move in. The difference between now and 40 years ago when my parents moved up here is that people are bringing their politics with them. “It used to be that you moved to Barnet, you bought your three-bed semi, and became a Tory – and that’s that. But something has changed in the last 10 years. I think it’s the housing crisis, but something has changed the mindset of younger people.” Langleben’s own patch includes the vast West Hendon estate, alongside the Welsh Harp reservoir, where a fiercely contested regeneration scheme has dragged out over more than a decade. The 680 low-rise council homes on the site are being demolished and replaced with up to 2,000 new-build properties, the vast majority of which will be privately owned and well out of the reach of existing residents. Only those with long-term, secure tenancies – which the council long ago stopped granting – will be rehoused here. Langleben helped represent local residents at the two inquiries into the project. “It’s taken up a lot of time – and it’s a scandal,” he says. He works for the Jewish Leadership Council, which jointly organised the Parliament Square protest, and is clearly exasperated about the way his party has handled accusations of antisemitism – not least against former mayor of London Ken Livingstone. But as Langleben strides through the estate, where the remaining council properties are dwarfed by towering new blocks branded “Hendon Waterside”, whose hoardings promise a gym and a concierge, it is clear he would much rather be discussing Barnet council’s record. And there is plenty for the opposition to get their teeth into, from library cuts, to children’s services judged by Ofsted to show “a legacy of widespread poor practice and ongoing systemic failures”. Tory Barnet has been the trailblazer for public sector outsourcing. In 2012, the council signed a pair of all-encompassing 10-year contracts with services giant Capita that saw a swath of basic local services contracted out, in a model dubbed easyCouncil. Labour says the project has failed to deliver promised savings, undermined accountability and allowed public services to deteriorate. Another local candidate, Sara Conway, who is Jewish and standing in nearby Burnt Oak, says: “It may not be something you could change overnight, but to me the politics of that have taken Barnet into a dreadful place. It has failed; it has not delivered anything it was meant to at all.” A volunteer at a local youth charity, she says Labour’s approach would be the opposite of the Conservatives’ laissez-faire attitude. “We would be proactive. You need to be driving things. You can’t just sit back and let it happen, particularly in a borough that is quite disjointed, that doesn’t really have a strong borough identity. You need something to bring things together.” As campaigning begins in earnest, Richard Cornelius, the leader of Barnet council, insists he and his colleagues will not be exploiting Labour’s discomfort in strongly Jewish wards. “It’s not something I want to campaign on,” he said. “We have got a good record as a council, we need to be positive about the future, not focus on our opponents’ disarray.”