Pep Guardiola has said how long he stays at Manchester City will depend on his energy reserves and his players’ hunger. He believes the closing five matches of this season will offer an indication as to whether the Premier League title can be retained next term. City host Swansea on Sunday with the manager demanding a continuation of their excellent season-long form. He has a year left on his contract and will sit down with the board in the summer to discuss a new deal. His longest previous tenure was four years at Barcelona, from 2008-12. The 46-year-old, who is in his second season at City, would not commit on Friday to staying for longer than that. “Now the people say we are champions, everyone’s happy,” he said. “You feel the team are an amazing group of guys, the players and the staff, but you can lose that. You can drop it. I don’t know how we are going to react, even myself, after winning the Premier League. “I don’t know how the players will see me after winning or how I will see them. Now it’s OK. Everything’s good. But football changes over nothing. In these next five games we will see how we react to success. It will be a good test for all of us to see what will happen next season. “We’ll speak to the club at the end of the season about a new contract. I have one more year, I am going to be here. We have to see what they think of the future. “It also depends on my energy. Now I feel good. We’ll speak with Ferran [Soriano, chief executive] Txiki [Begiristain, sporting director], Khaldoon [al-Mubarak, the chairman].” After Swansea, City end the season by facing West Ham, Huddersfield, Brighton and Southampton and Guardiola believes that to improve next season his team will have to mature. “Still we are young,” he said and he cited Tottenham being allowed to score shortly before half-time of City’s 3-1 victory at Wembley last Saturday as an example of their shortcomings. Only Manchester United and Chelsea have retained the title in the Premier League era, the former having twice won it three seasons in a row. “You’ve seen how difficult it is,” he said. “No club has done it four times; here it’s so complicated to do. There are a lot of contenders – it’s a good challenge.”