Opposition protests have resumed in the Armenian capital after talks broke down between the ruling Republican party and the opposition, which forced the prime minister to resign on Monday. Thousands of people descended on Republic Square in Yerevan on Wednesday morning after a call from the opposition leader, Nikol Pashinyan, to return to the streets until the government agreed to a transition of power. Drivers beeped their horns in support of the demonstrations and opponents of the government shouted demands for an election. Pashinyan led nearly two weeks of protests against Serzh Sargsyan – Armenia’s most powerful politician for more than a decade – prompted by accusations that he had manipulated the constitution to cling to power. The latest protests will be a crucial test of whether the opposition can maintain its momentum after Sargsyan’s resignation. Karen Karapetyan, the acting prime minister and an ally of Sargsyan, suggested on Wednesday morning that a parliamentary election could be held to end the political crisis. “If Pashinyan is the people’s choice, the people can elect him,” he said. In a video appeal posted on Facebook after he led thousands of people on a march, Pashinyan said: “The Republican party is thinking about taking advantage of Serzh Sarksyan’s resignation and wants to keep power. “We can’t agree on the appointment of this party’s representative as prime minister and we can’t allow this corrupted system to continue to exist.” He urged supporters to “come to the square and finish the velvet revolution”. Pashinyan played a key role in ousting Sargsyan, organising many of the protests and calling for the prime minister to go in a televised exchange, before being imprisoned and then released. He had been due to start talks with the ruling party on Wednesday, but they were cancelled late on Tuesday. Sargsyan was a close ally of Vladimir Putin and Russia is closely watching events in the former Soviet republic, where it has two military bases. On Tuesday, the Kremlin said it was pleased the situation appeared stable for now. The Armenian president, Armen Sarkissian, another ally of the former prime minister, was sworn in as president earlier this month after being elected by parliament. Under a revised constitution approved in a 2015 referendum, most state powers shifted to the prime minister, while the presidency became a largely ceremonial post. In another move likely to prolong the political crisis that has rocked one of Russia’s closest allies from the former Soviet Union, Pashinyan said he was ready to be the country’s next prime minister “if people put this responsibility on me”, and would keep up pressure on the ruling elite until it agreed to real change. In Los Angeles, thousands of demonstrators attended a rally on Tuesday to mark the 103rd anniversary of the Armenian genocide. Reuters contributed to this report