When I was 11, I wrote to George Martin and asked him how I could become a record producer. He replied promptly, advising me to keep up my classical guitar lessons and music theory studies and not to give up my schoolwork. He said it was important to be passionate about music, but you had to be pragmatic too. Conflict lurks around every corner and you need a cool head to avoid it. As we’ve been rehearsing my new play, Mood Music, about a warring record producer and a young female singer-songwriter, the cast have been asking me why musical conflicts are so volatile. As one of my characters says: “Musicians don’t really like each other. They just like the music. When they’re actually playing, everything’s fine. The rest of the time it’s like Stockholm syndrome.” When it comes to creative differences, there’s nothing like a fight over music. From the Beatles to Fleetwood Mac, who have just split for the umpteenth time – replacing Lindsey Buckingham with the calmest man in rock, Neil Finn – quarrelling bands almost never escape or outgrow that conflict, even in old age. My assumption was always that because music is one of the most overwhelmingly emotional art forms, arguments about it were correspondingly emotional. It comes from the heart so you take it to heart. People sacrifice their lives for a career in music, so the stakes are high when things go wrong. Then I talked to psychotherapists, psychologists, psychoanalysts and entertainment lawyers to make sense of it and learned it’s even more complicated. Some music psychologists – yes, there is such a job – even argue it’s Darwinian. A character in Mood Music says: “Music affects the reward centre of the brain. It literally creates emotions. It stimulates the same neural pathways that are stimulated by love or addiction. It generates dopamine and serotonin. It’s very difficult to control your emotions when music is involved.” Research indicates that music can be used as therapy, to calm and reassure, or to inflict what the US military in Iraq calls “torture lite”. In a 2008 Guardian article, Clive Stafford Smith documented the way the US military claimed to have made “a quantum leap in psyops” by playing death metal to prisoners, inspired by the Biblical tale of Joshua destroying the will of the people of Jericho by using “loud horns”. The American band Deicide’s track Fuck Your God was deployed to destroy their will. But loud music with a hard backbeat is usually considered adrenalising because it stimulates our fight or flight response, going back to our primitive roots. When you’re in fight or flight, you’re volatile. It gives you courage and fortitude. You become fearless. Music affects emotion because it stimulates episodic memory and alters mood. It reminds you of emotional moments in your life, making you sad or joyous, bitter or nostalgic. “Evaluative conditioning” means that listening repeatedly to a song during an especially enjoyable activity results in that song causing enjoyment of its own accord. Navigating shifting emotional states is good for our social skills. It helps fend off trouble. But it also starts it. If somebody insists on changing or controlling the music you make, or taking it away from you altogether, it betokens a lack of empathy. If you’re in a recording studio, doing take after take, forced to listen over and over again, you’re in a heightened state of volatility – especially if you wrote the music and it means more to you than anybody else. When you combine music with drugs and alcohol, anything can happen. It’s no coincidence that drunk people tend to sing as well as fight. There is a phenomenon called “emotional contagion”. Listening to happy music is like being around happy people. Listening to angry or depressed music is like being around angry or depressed people – the mood is infectious. But we need it because by helping us to match other people’s emotions it helps us to practise empathy. When you throw gender into the mix, as Fleetwood Mac have admitted, it gets more complicated. Five years ago at an industry talk, Stevie Nicks told the crowd: “We fought very hard for feminism, for women’s rights. What I’m seeing today is a very opposite thing. I don’t know why, but I see women being put back in their place. And I hate it. We’re losing all we worked so hard for.” The music industry doesn’t just monetise talent, it monetises trauma, more often than not women’s trauma. Nina Simone, Janis Joplin, Karen Carpenter, Amy Winehouse, Kesha – there’s an endless list of female recording artists broken on the wheel. The musicians, lawyers and psychotherapists in my play ask infuriating questions stemming from music industry articles of faith. Are men better songwriters, or just better arrangers? Are men more technical, or just better bullshitters? Can women write riffs, or only lyrics? Does songwriter Cat have the detachment required to write a classic or is she too temperamental? In denying Cat a songwriting credit, producer Bernard ponders the notion that music is “more important than gender”. But I learned from a Harley Street psychotherapist that to rob somebody of their due credit is “just another way of subjugating somebody, breaking down their free will and sense of self and denying their very existence. It’s a particularly intimate form of betrayal, which can leave you feeling completely empty and engender powerful feelings of futility.” By labelling her a “diva” and scrutinising her sexuality, he inflicts upon her feelings of emptiness and futility. But he also, inadvertently, adrenalises proceedings, stimulating her survival instincts. It fires her up and makes her fight. Gender politics, just like “musical differences,” are about asserting and protecting identity – and a source of deep-seated, instinctual conflict. When war breaks out on both fronts, it’s explosive.