China has raised the stakes in the escalating trade showdown with the United States by unveiling tariffs on a wide-ranging list of American imports in response to levies on Chinese goods put forward by Donald Trump. Beijing will impose additional tariffs of 25% on 106 American products from 14 separate categories, including soybean, cars and chemical products, covering imports to China worth up to $50bn (£36bn), Chinese state news agencies said on Wednesday. The measures come after the US announced details of new 25% tariffs on $50bn worth of imports from China drawn up by the Trump administration. The list of more than 1,300 products targets China’s industrial base, covering everything from industrial robots and electronics to metal alloys and aircraft parts. Washington said the levies were in response to China’s “unfair trade practices related to the forced transfer of US technology and intellectual property,” adding that the list of products had been designed to target China’s industrial plans while minimising the impact on the US economy. The array of Chinese products that would be affected is lengthy and varied, covering everything from aircraft jets and tyres, to uranium and nuclear reactor parts, poultry incubators, haymaking machines and guns and ammunition. Technology products are also hit, including TV cameras, jukeboxes and cassette players. The proposed list will undergo a public review process before trade officials ultimately decide which products should be hit by tariffs. The Chinese state news agency Xinhua said the country would only implement its tariffs on American goods once the US government imposed levies on imports from China. Some types of aircraft, lubricants, tobacco and orange juice are on the list of products targeted by Beijing, along with some trucks and SUVs. The inclusion of agricultural and food and drink products such as soybeans, whisky, beef, corn and wheat is likely to raise eyebrows for targeting southern American states where Trump drew much of his support while running for the presidency. The rising tensions come following an investigation into Chinese intellectual property practices ordered by Trump, as well as at a time when the US is entering negotiations with Beijing over its $375.2bn trade deficit in goods with China. Financial markets across Europe slumped after the Chinese response, which comes as the strongest signal yet that tit-for-tat responses could escalate towards a full-blow global trade war. The fall in prices included a sharp drop for soybean and corn futures on derivatives exchanges.