Voters in Montenegro are casting their ballots in a presidential election that the former prime minister Milo Đukanović is expected to win after his party defied Russia and took the small Balkan country into Nato last year. The vote is the first since Montenegro joined the western military alliance in December. It is seen as a test for Đukanović, who favours European integration over closer ties to its traditional ally Moscow. Đukanović, the country’s dominant politician, and his Democratic Party of Socialists have ruled Montenegro for nearly 30 years. The outgoing president, Filip Vujanović, is not running, due to term limits. About 530,000 voters can choose between several candidates in the country on the Adriatic Sea. Đukanović’s main challenger is Mladen Bojanić, who is backed by several opposition groups, including pro-Russian parties. Polls suggest the 56-year-old Đukanović could win more than half of the votes on Sunday and avoid a runoff. Casting his vote on Sunday, Bojanić described Đukanović as an “autocrat leading Montenegro into a dictatorship”. “The majority in Montenegro want a free and democratic Montenegro,” Bojanić said. Đukanović was prime minister during a tense October 2016 parliamentary election when authorities said they thwarted a pro-Russian coup attempt designed to prevent the country from joining Nato. He led Montenegro to independence from its much larger neighbour Serbia in 2006 and was behind the Nato bid. He hopes next to steer the country into the European Union. Bojanić, an economic expert and former lawmaker, has accused the ruling party of corruption and links to organised crime following a spike in crime-related violence. The fractured opposition parties supporting Bojanić include the pro-Russian Democratic Front, whose two main leaders are on trial for taking part in the alleged 2016 coup attempt. Two Russian citizens also are being tried in absentia for the plot, which prosecutors said included a plan to assassinate Đukanović. The Kremlin has denied involvement. Voter Zdravko Ivanovic, 84, praised Đukanović’s leadership after leaving a polling station Sunday in Podgorica, the capital. He described Đukanović as “the best statesman and prime minister, the best and finest Montenegrin giant”. Radmila Čagorović, a voter in her late 50s, disagreed. “We have waited so long for a change,” she said. “I hope it will happen today.”