Indian sweets are the Marmite of the pudding world: either you can’t stand their intense sweetness or you would happily sit chomping them all afternoon. Jalebi were my favourite as a child – golden, almost iridescent swirls of crisp batter soaked in a spiced sugar syrup. Traditionally, the batter is left overnight to ferment, giving it a sour tang. I’ve taken a shortcut and used yoghurt, but if you have any spare sourdough starter, it would make a perfect base for jalebi batter. Just add extra flour or water until you have the correct consistency. Apple juice is not part of the traditional recipe, but its sharpness works well with all the sugar. Any leftover syrup is fantastic drizzled over ice-cream or added to a glass of prosecco. Prep 10 minCook 20 minMakes 12 For the syrup1 litre apple juice500g granulated or caster sugar4 green cardamom pods1 pinch saffron1 tbsp rosewater For the batter85g plain flour2 tbsp gram flour¼ tsp ground turmeric⅛ tsp bicarbonate of soda120ml Greek yoghurtA few tbsp water500ml-1 litre vegetable oil (depending on the size of your pan) Start by making the syrup: pour the juice and sugar into a saucepan and bring to a boil. Continue to boil until the volume has reduced by half, then turn off the heat and add the cardamom, saffron and rosewater. Set aside to cool. Make the batter by stirring together all the dry ingredients and then the yoghurt to make a thick paste. Gradually add water a little at a time, until you have a thick but pipeable consistency. Heat the oil in a frying pan on a medium heat (about 160C/325F if you use a kitchen thermometer). When the oil is the correct temperature, a drop of batter should float to the surface and start bubbling almost immediately. Transfer the batter into a piping bag, snip off the end and quickly pipe swirls of it into the oil. Depending on the size of your pan, you will be able to fit two or three swirls per batch. Don’t worry if your piping skills are poor; the batter has a habit of coalescing into an appropriate-looking shape on its own. Fry for 45 seconds on each side until the jalebi have taken on a slightly golden colour, then set aside on greaseproof paper to cool. Once the syrup and jalebi have cooled to just-warm, dip the swirls of batter into the syrup and leave to stand for a couple of hours before eating.