Rory McIlroy did not have to search for a Friday reminder of Augusta National’s recurring capacity to inflict psychological torture on world class golfers. Jon Rahm, playing in the company of McIlroy and Adam Scott, did not take kindly to a bunker shot which flew over the back of a green. In specific order; Rahm smashed his wedge into the sand, threw said club away, booted his bag, retrieved the club and, having holed out for a bogey four, tossed his ball into a hedge. The Spaniard had played only four holes. That McIlroy has encountered so many trying times in the first major of the year added to the sense of what he accomplished on day two. Augusta National is probably the most passively aggressive venue in the world, as endorsed by menacing pin positions which, combined with wind, leave competitors grasping desperately for air. Standing still represented progress. Patience was rewarded. Enter McIlroy, who produced a 71 which, in terms of context if not bare statistics, represented one of his finest rounds here. McIlroy has been unflappable during a tough opening 36 holes and he felt that this 18-hole stretch should have yielded more points to the legitimate ambition of a four-time major champion. McIlroy’s round had got off to the kind of start which suggested a long day’s work. In previous years it would have been. He three-putted the 1st for a bogey and found sand from the 2nd tee. The response owed so much to mental fortitude; the 28-year-old converted from 30ft for a surprise birdie and collected a further shot at the 3rd. He had dropped back to an aggregate of two under at the 12th before producing birdies at the 13th and 14th; a 27ft putt sealed the latter. From there the Northern Irishman displayed calmness to ease home with a series of pars. His halfway total is four under. “I’m pretty happy,” said McIlroy. “I feel I could have shot in the 60’s but overall 71 out there was a pretty good score. I’m in a nice position going into the weekend. I’ve always felt comfortable around the lead, it’s a place I’m thankfully familiar with.” McIlroy was undecided as to whether he would have taken this scenario before a competitive ball was struck. “I’m happy with how I have felt and handled certain things, how my thought process has been. That’s been pleasing.” For now, McIlroy and co must hunt down the inspired Patrick Reed. The Texan hadn’t broken 70 in 12 Augusta rounds before this week. How that has altered; Reed backed up Thursday’s 69 with a stunning 66. At nine under, he leads Marc Leishman by two. Henrik Stenson’s afternoon charge propelled him to five under. In providing a blue-chip complexion to the leaderboard which grew stronger as Friday progressed - slowly - Jordan Spieth recovered from slipping to three over par after two holes to card a 74. He shares McIlroy’s aggregate. Spieth recounted a key chat with his caddie, Michael Greller, on the 3rd tee. “I’ve taken a lot of punches on this golf course, and in tournaments in general,” Spieth said. “I told Michael, ‘Look, when this course plays tough, I’m good for a double here or some bogeys there. Let’s make these the only ones.’ He was really good at saying, ‘Man, you always take punches out here and come back stronger.’” Dustin Johnson is a shot adrift of McIlroy and Spieth with the world No1’s second round of 68 notable as a five-stroke improvement from Thursday. Justin Thomas matched Johnson’s minus three. Rickie Fowler is at two under as he continues pursuit of a first major success as overdue. Justin Rose, defeated in a Masters play-off 12 months ago, and Bubba Watson sit alongside Rickie Fowler on a board now dominated by major winners. If forecasts are to be believed, heavy rain and thunder storms will hit this corner of Georgia on Saturday. That being the case, the tournament dynamic will shift once more. Tiger Woods will form a part of it. Having flirted with the five over cut line, the 14-time major winner played his closing 13 holes in level when piecing together a 75 and total of plus four. Woods won’t win, but his unforeseen comeback continues. Phil Mickelson had been just one from the lead when standing on the 9th tee. What followed entered the realms of circus. The left-hander cracked the centre of a tree from pine straw when playing his second shot, found his ball in a bed of azaleas and wracked up a seven. A birdie at the 10th was cancelled out - and some - by a bogey at the 11th and the double bogeying of the 12th. He later signed for a 79. “It was a rough day,” said Mickelson. Rahm, incidentally, shot 68; perhaps green jackets and red mist do mix.