Hundreds of protesters have gathered outside Labour’s headquarters in London to campaign against antisemitism in the party. A crowd waving union flags and placards converged on Labour HQ in Westminster on Sunday for a demonstration organised by the Campaign Against AntiSemitism. Messages on placards read “zero tolerance for antisemitism”, “Labour hold Corbyn to account” and “antisemitism is racism”. There were some shouts of “racist” and “shame” and jeering when the Labour leader was named by speakers at the rally. There were also boos for the Momentum leader, Jon Lansman, and Christine Shawcroft, the former NEC member who resigned last month after backing a party member accused of antisemitism. The actor Maureen Lipman said she attended the protest “as a disenfranchised socialist”. She said: “[Corbyn] is standing with elements who are against everything that we stand for: hardworking, decent Jewish people of whom I am incredibly proud.” Andrew Gwynne, the shadow communities secretary, was the latest MP to be embroiled in the row after being named as a member of a Facebook group where offensive content was posted. It was reported that Gwynne was listed as a member of the Labour Supporters page on Facebook, where posts last week included one that said: “Jews will pay seven times more for their sins – Islam will unite the religious world.” Gwynne said: “I was added to this Facebook group without my knowledge or permission. I do not support the posts and I abhor antisemitism. It has absolutely no place in the Labour party or in society. End of.” Margaret Beckett, the former foreign secretary, has said Labour needs to address antisemitism. She told BBC Radio 4’s The World This Weekend: “I don’t think anybody really now disputes that there are problems within the Labour party – of course I would dispute hotly that they are worse than anywhere else or than other political parties – but that doesn’t alter the fact that we have this problem and we must deal with it.” Beckett said some on the left who were guilty of antisemitism claimed they were being “persecuted” for their political beliefs. She added: “There is no doubt that there are people who are guilty of antisemitic actions and words and so on who are pretending that it is only because they are really just good little leftwingers. “I think that’s disgraceful and it brings them – but unfortunately other people around them – into disrepute and it’s incredibly unfair.” Corbyn has acknowledged that the party had been too slow in dealing with cases of antisemitism and apologised for the hurt it had caused.