Kim Jong-un will be served Swiss rösti with a Korean twist at a summit on Friday with the South Korean president, Moon Jae-in, the South’s presidential Blue House said on Tuesday. The fried potato dish was chosen as an homage to the North Korean leader’s childhood in Switzerland, the Blue House said in announcing the menu for Friday’s welcome dinner. Baked John Dory, a dish made from the flat sea fish, will also be served in recognition of Moon’s younger days in the South Korean port city of Busan. North Korea has never confirmed Kim was educated in Switzerland, but former classmates and teachers have described their time with him in the country. Swiss newspapers have also reported Kim went to school under a pseudonym in Switzerland. The North may have found a way to make a nuclear warhead small enough to put on a missile, but firing one at the South is likely to provoke retaliation in kind, which would end the regime. Pyongyang has enough conventional artillery to do significant damage to Seoul, but the quality of its gunners and munitions is dubious, and the same problem – retaliation from the South and its allies - remains. In the event of a non-nuclear attack, Seoul's residents would act on years of experience of civil defence drills, and rush to the bomb shelters dotted around the city, increasing their chances of survival. Another item on the menu will be Pyongyang-style cold noodles, or naengmyeon, served in a chilled meat broth. “President Moon had requested Pyongyang-style cold noodles from Okryu Gwan be included on the menu and North Korea gladly accepted,” said Kim Eui-kyeom, the Blue House spokesman. Okryu Gwan is North Korea’s best-known restaurant famous for the dish, and has branches in China as well. The cold noodles will be made by Okryu Gwan’s head chef, who will travel to the truce border village of Panmunjom where the two leaders will meet on Friday, the Blue House spokesman said. Kim and Moon will be offered a fragrant wine made from azaleas. Also on their table will be a distilled liquor called munbaeju, which is 40% alcohol by volume and which originated in North Korea, but is now traditionally made in South Korea.