In what will be viewed as a further departure from age-old prejudices, Augusta National has revealed it will host a women’s amateur tournament from 2019 – the first competition for women to be staged at the home of the Masters since it opened in 1933. The Augusta National Women’s Amateur Championship will be a 54-hole event featuring 72 players. Rounds one and two are, initially at least, to be hosted at the Champions Retreat club in Augusta before the top-30 proceed to Augusta National. The final round will take place on the Saturday preceding the Masters. “We believe this event will have a significant and lasting impact on the future of the women’s game,” the Augusta National chairman, Fred Ridley, said. “Our hope and expectation is that this event will further energise those who already love the sport and inspire others through the dream of competing at Augusta National.” The new tournament will raise eyebrows given Augusta National’s previous attitude towards women. It took until 2012 for the first females to be admitted as members of the club; one of them, the former secretary of state Condoleezza Rice, was in the audience as Ridley made the announcement – a significant moment in his first Masters as chairman. While the aim is to deliver an international field, there is an obvious element of scheduling conflict. The first women’s major of the year, the ANA Inspiration, currently finishes on the same weekend as Augusta’s new event. Unless that changes, there is potential for leading amateurs to face a choice between tournaments. Ridley said he had spoken with Mike Whan, who heads the LPGA Tour, and foresees no problem. An Augusta National statement said: “The event is expected to be televised and will be distributed on digital platforms around the world. Daily tickets on to the grounds of Augusta National for the final round will also be made available through a random selection process that will be announced at a later date.” The Ladies European Tour expressed pleasure at “very welcome and interesting news” from Augusta. Ridley also confirmed the winner will not receive a Green Jacket, as is the case for Masters champions.