Belgium’s prime minister has criticised one of the country’s leading universities over its plan to honour the film director Ken Loach, following complaints that it has overlooked alleged antisemitism. In a speech at Brussels Grand Synagogue to mark the 70th anniversary of Israel’s foundation, Charles Michel said on Wednesday night that Loach’s comments about Israel and its policy towards Palestinians justified the withdrawal of the honour. “No accommodation with antisemitism can be tolerated, whatever its form. And that also goes for my own alma mater,” Michel said. Michel, 42, studied law at the Free University of Brussels. It has stood by plans to award Loach an honorary doctorate on Thursday after the celebrated 81-year-old director denied accusations that his long-time support for Palestinians was in any way antisemitic. “Michel’s statement may be read as a rejection of the honorary doctorate,” the prime minister’s office told the Belgian news site De Standaard on Wednesday night. “The prime minister has studied the file and believes that [Loach] has recently made controversial statements that justify the withdrawal of that honorary doctorate. “Obviously, the prime minister does not have to deal with academic freedom, the university does not need the permission of the prime minister in any way, but he does give his opinion. At the moment it does not seem appropriate to him to honor such a person.” It was not clear what remarks by Loach the prime minister was referring to, although the director has strongly defended the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, against accusations of allowing antisemitism to continue in the party. Loach said this month said that Labour MPs who joined a protest against antisemitism should be kicked out. Loach, winner of the 2016 Palme d’Or for his film I, Daniel Blake and director of numerous other hard-edged films going back to the 1970s, has attracted criticism over his calls for a cultural boycott of Israel. He has always strongly denied being antisemitic. The row comes as Jeremy Corbyn’s Labour party, of which Loach is a vocal supporter, battles allegations of antisemitism.