The year is 2020. With the US presidential election fast approaching, a leading contender for the Democratic nomination takes the stage in front of thousands of supporters and wows them with the snappy soundbite: “My favorite poet was Aeschylus.” Such erudition would be hard to imagine today when the most sophisticated stump speech coming from the current incumbent of the White House is “CNN sucks!”. But there was a time, not so long ago, when ancient Greek poets could – indeed were – invoked on the campaign trial by a politician well read and brave enough to do so. Just such an event is recalled in a new Netflix documentary series that explores the climactic career and tragic end of one of America’s most cherished presidents-who-never-were. Bobby Kennedy for President looks at the “Bobby phenomenon”, his stellar political rise that seemed destined to see him follow his slain brother Jack into the Oval Office until he was himself felled by a gunman in June 1968. It was in Indianapolis, two months before his death, that Robert Kennedy uttered those lyric words from the back of a flatbed truck. He had just broken the terrible news of the assassination of Martin Luther King to a largely African American crowd, provoking gasps of horror and prompting fears of rioting. Despite the volatility of the moment – or maybe because of it – it was then that Kennedy, in his distinctive, slightly metallic Boston accent, quoted Aeschylus: “Even in our sleep, pain which cannot forget falls drop by drop upon the heart, until in our own despair, against our will, comes wisdom through the awful grace of God.” There was no riot in Indianapolis that night. As the 50th anniversary of Kennedy’s death approaches, there is a palpable nostalgia in the air, captured powerfully by Dawn Porter, the director of the Netflix series. Nostalgia, that is, not for the times in which Bobby lived and died. The decade was after all even more anarchic and chaotic than anything we have yet seen in the Trump era given the combination of Vietnam, the burning south, urban uprisings, not to mention the seemingly endless succession of political assassinations. JFK, Malcolm X, MLK and now RFK. As Bobby Kennedy’s friend, journalist Pete Hamill, puts it in the film, America in the 60s was “like some shooting gallery instead of a civilization”. There is growing nostalgia today though for the kind of thoughtful, compassionate and visionary politics that Bobby Kennedy grew to espouse over the less than five years that separated his brother’s untimely death from his own. As the commentator Joe Klein, whose book Politics Lost lamented the decline in the quality of American leadership a decade ago, told the Guardian: “It’s a long way from quoting Aeschylus in front of an enraged African American crowd in Indianapolis to tweeting about ‘slimeballs’ and Stormy Daniels.” It took Bobby Kennedy a lot of introspection and hard work to become the formidable politician that he was at the point he was shot by a Jordanian citizen Sirhan Sirhan in the kitchen of the Ambassador Hotel in Los Angeles. Adding to the tragedy on 6 June 1968, it was the night of his victory party in the Californian Democratic primary which significantly boosted his chances of winning the presidency. Kennedy didn’t begin as the darling of progressive Democrats as he ended. He cut his teeth as an aide to Joseph McCarthy’s anti-communist witch-hunt. As US attorney general in JFK’s administration he was lukewarm on the civil rights struggle in the deep south, and was discovered later to have ordered the wiretapping and surveillance of Martin Luther King Jr. An even greater shadow hanging over him was that he was entirely in the pall of his older brother. For years Bobby’s only focus was Jack Kennedy; his politics were Jack’s politics and his ambition was to make Jack’s ambition become reality. “He had this superhuman devotion to family and to duty, and to the fulfillment of his brother’s career. He never knew independence,” said John Bohrer, author of The Revolution of Robert Kennedy. And then on 22 November 1963 he lost not just a brother, but everything. “In Dallas, he lost his direction,” Bohrer said. Porter’s documentary tracks the re-emergence of Bobby Kennedy as his own man. He finally embraced civil rights, going head to head with the white supremacist governor of Alabama, George Wallace. He forged an unlikely alliance with the Latino farm workers leader Cesar Chavez. Most importantly he cast off his brother’s yoke of Vietnam, becoming steadily more anti-war. In February 1968, shortly before Kennedy declared his presidential candidacy, he embarked on a poverty tour of the US. He witnessed harrowing scenes of hunger and destitution in Mississippi and the coal country of Kentucky. Professor Peter Edelman of Georgetown Law Center was by Kennedy’s side throughout the tour. He recalls the impact on the man when they came across malnourished children with bloated stomachs in Mississippi. “He was stricken, we all were, we couldn’t believe we were seeing this in the United States,” Edelman told the Guardian. The Netflix film relates that when Kennedy got home that night to his wife Ethel and 10 children (the 11th Rory was born after his death) he banged his fist on the dining room table and said to his kids: “You have to do something! This is so terrible, you have to do something!” Kennedy’s firsthand experience of visceral hunger in America ran as a lightning conductor through his run for the White House. “There is today,” he said in one speech, “an alien land within our own borders, another America.” That’s another reason why the Robert Kennedy story resonates so strongly today. His “other America” is alive and kicking in 2018, with 41 million Americans still officially living in poverty. Paradoxically, the places he toured, the scenes of devastation he took in, are now core Trump territory. Edelman sees a profound contrast between the reaction that Kennedy had in 1968 and the current president’s relationship with his base. “Kennedy listened, he supported people who were hurting and was determined to help them,” Edelman said. “Today this man comes along and offers promises that are less than empty, with no intention of doing anything. It’s tragic.”