 The police shooting of Saheed Vassell in Crown Heights has raised a number of issues for residents in a neighborhood that has seen vast demographic change over the past few years. On Thursday evening hundreds of people gathered in the Brooklyn neighborhood to protest about the killing of Vassell, who was shot nine times by police on Wednesday. Police reported receiving calls about a man wielding a gun; the object turned out to be part of a welding torch. Speakers lamented that officers had shot Vassell in the head and torso, rather than seeking to merely incapacitate him; the lack of adequate mental health services; and the issue of gentrification in the historically black neighborhood of Crown Heights. The points raised at the rally demonstrated a number of obstacles to reducing police shootings, which disproportionately kill black men. The issue of policing was at the heart of many people’s concerns. Some at the rally condemned the lack of police officers who were local to Crown Heights and knew the community. Vassell was well known among residents in the area of Utica Avenue and Montgomery Street, where he was killed, and he was viewed as a harmless man who suffered from mental health problems. “There has to be some sort of community engagement where they know the community,” Prince Mapp, who lives in Crown Heights, told the Guardian. “Because when they come here they’re scared.” The NYPD says it does designate officers to certain neighborhoods. It says it divides precincts into four or five areas. Within each area, the NYPD says, “the same officers work in the same neighborhoods on the same shifts, increasing their familiarity with local residents and local problems”. But, perhaps significantly, in Vassell’s case the people who responded to the calls were not those officers. Instead, the NYPD chief of department Terence Monahan said two officers from the strategic response group and three officers from the NYPD’s “anti-crime” unit were sent to the scene. The strategic response group is a team that responds to incidents such as shootings and bank robberies and is also deployed to handle crowd control at protests and parades, while anti-crime unit officers, who are generally plain-clothed, frequently deal with gun violence. Monahan said three plain-clothed officers and one uniformed officer shot at Vassell. The NYPD has not released the names of the officers. People in Crown Heights questioned why police shot Vassell in the head and torso. “They need to be retrained to shoot a body part, not to shoot to kill,” Latitia Richardson, 45, told the Guardian. Police in the US are trained to shoot at a person’s “center mass” – the torso – because it is a larger area and they are most likely to hit the target. Experts say attempting to shoot at a limb is impractical as officers are shooting under pressure at a potentially moving target. Aiming at the center mass is seen as the quickest way to incapacitate their target. The issue of police being familiar with certain communities is an important one, residents say, because of Vassell’s known mental health issues. His father, Eric Vassell, told the New York Times that Vassell had been prescribed medication for bipolar disorder but had stopped taking it. The subject of mental health is a recurring theme in police shootings. In 2015 The Counted, a Guardian project that tracked police shootings, found that mental health issues were reported in relation to more than one in five people killed by police. The Treatment Advocacy Center (TAC), a not-for-profit group that researches policies and laws related to mental illness, has blamed underfunding of mental health treatment for playing a role in the shootings. In its 2015 report “Overlooked in the Undercounted: the role of mental illness in fatal law enforcement encounters”, the TAC recommended expanding the number of hospital beds for psychiatric treatment and reforming current laws to make it easier for courts to order people with mental illness to receive treatment. Vassell’s shooting has brought other issues to the surface. On Thursday speakers at the rally urged people not to call 911 in the event of an emergency, due to the risk of black people – specifically black men – subsequently being killed. Black people are much more likely than others to be killed by police in the US. According to the Washington Post, 294 people have been shot and killed by police in 2018. Of those, 124 were white, 60 were black, 38 Hispanic, and the Post defined nine people as being of other race. The race of 63 people was unknown. Of the people whose race was known, 20% were black – although black people make up just 12.7% of the US population. Vassell’s shooting has also brought to a head ill-feeling over the gentrification that has swept through Brooklyn neighborhoods. Crown Heights has been a predominantly black area for decades, but in recent years a number of white people have moved into the neighborhood. From 2000 to 2015, the number of white people living in North Crown Heights and Prospect Heights, just to the west, increased by 203%, according to data from the New York City comptroller’s office. The number of black people in those neighborhoods declined by 23%. At the same time, rent has increased in Crown Heights. In the North Crown Heights/Prospect Heights area the average rent increased by 29.9% between 2010 and 2014, according to New York University’s Furman Center. In South Crown Heights, where Vassell was killed, rent increased by 18.1%. Some residents said that demographic change had contributed to Vassell’s shooting. At the rally on Thursday speakers questioned whether people who were familiar with the neighborhood would have called the police. The NYPD is yet to release the names of the officers who shot Vassell. On Thursday the New York attorney general opened an investigation into the shooting, but whatever the findings, it is clear that for people in Crown Heights, there is no single solution to the underlying problem of police shootings.