What were you hoping for?Marriage and two children. First impressions?He made me feel at ease straightaway. He was reading a book I liked, which was encouraging. What did you talk about?Working abroad, women’s empowerment and vegetarianism. Any awkward moments?Maybe when I ate food off his plate. Good table manners?Much better than mine. He let me pick and taste the wine. Best thing about Killian?He let me eat food off his plate. Would you introduce him to your friends? I think he’d find us a bit intimidating all together. Describe him in three wordsEnthusiastic, friendly, engaged. What do you think he made of you?He probably thought I was quite drunk, especially by the end of the evening. Did you go on somewhere?We discussed the potential, but I was really tired (and drunk) and he had a 10k the next morning. And... did you kiss?No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I’d order the steak instead of the chicken (I was taking a night off vegetarianism). Marks out of 10? 7. Would you meet again?Maybe, if he wants an (unromantic) cold-water swimming lesson. What were you hoping for?I’ve just returned from India, so wanted to carry on the excitement. First impressions?Very pretty and well spoken. What did you talk about?The cultural appropriation of yoga by the west, my parents’ jobs, ratatouille and Welsh accents. Any awkward moments?Not a single one. Good table manners?Yes – we even shared our dishes with each other. Best thing about Sophie?Outgoing, active and intelligent. Would you introduce her to your friends? Yes, I can’t see why not. Describe her in three wordsConfident, loquacious, pretty. What do you think she made of you?Outgoing lad who should probably consider eating less meat. Did you go on somewhere?No, I was due to run a 10k race the next morning. And... did you kiss?No, but one of us has the other’s number. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?That I hadn’t planned to do a 10k race the next morning. Marks out of 10?7.5. Would you meet again?Yes, I quite fancy some cold-water swimming. • Sophie and Killian ate at The Megaro, London WC1. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com