A beautiful woman confidently strides through a chic backyard party on a sun-dappled Italian afternoon. The house is perfect, the festivities are perfect, she’s perfect. Just when it looks like she’s snuck away for a midday dalliance with an older lover, she draws a knife from the tastefully placed chopstick in her hair and stabs the man in the eye. A few more jabs, and she leaves him bleeding out on the ground, power walking out of there with the satisfaction of a job well done. To Eve Polastri, the unstimulated desk jockey at British intelligence agency MI5 portrayed by Sandra Oh in BBC America’s wonderful new thriller Killing Eve, a fascination with this woman and her work cannot be denied. Eve comes to learn that the contract killer in question is named Villanelle (Jodie Comer), and develops an obsession with her casually sociopathic exploits. The show gets good when this dynamic starts running two ways, as Villanelle comes to be aware of Eve and cultivate a matching interest in the other woman’s life, but creator Phoebe Waller-Bridge establishes Eve’s side of the story first for good reason – she’s the closest thing an audience gets to a surrogate in this lethal game of now-you-see-me. Eve’s half of the narrative speaks directly to the public’s enduring fascination with the assassin figure, and the complicated mix of aspirational envy and queasy relatability that its fiction still inspires. Killing Eve has already amassed a vocal contingent of supporters in the critical community, falling in line with a recent uptick in superficially similar material. Also building a dedicated fanbase is HBO’s Barry, a black comedy revolving around a masterly but reluctant hitman improbably played by less than commanding presence Bill Hader. The title tough guy of the long-running Ray Donovan isn’t a gun for hire per se, a distinction about which he can get testy, but ending lives is no small part of the job description. Looking a ways into the future, Hulu recently gave the green light to a series adaptation of shoot-em-up video game Hitman courtesy of John Wick creator Derek Kolstad, who’s also executive producing a spinoff for Starz set in the world of Keanu Reeves’ unstoppable killing machine. Bullets are whizzing by in every direction. While the shows containing these characters manage them with a wide array of tones ranging from deadpan humor to pitch-black brutalism, their appeal and thematic concerns remain surprisingly consistent in their commentary on the average joe’s relationship to work. A highly specified profession requiring years of careful training, the assassin business offers “competency porn” in its purest form, dazzling viewers with the pocket-watch precision of its procedure-based elements. Both Killing Eve and Barry relish their scenes in which the camera can quietly sit by as the main character goes through the steps of expertly dispatching a target. Barry can be a bumbler from time to time, but he’s never more comfortable than when going through the elaborate process of unpacking and assembling a sniper rifle. His lifestyle is a few shades grittier than that of the international spy, while sharing in the excitement and danger that captures regular folks’ imaginations. Barry doesn’t feel so unambiguously positive about his work, however; few hitmen do. For all the slimming black outfits and clever one-liners and ravishing locales, contract killers must always wrestle with a reluctance over being bound to the kind of job a person can’t just quit. The primary action of Barry is the main character’s fish-out-of-water attempt to professionally pivot to acting from murder, an existential lunge at redemption that he sees as freeing him from a life beyond his control. As she observes Villanelle from afar, Eve might as well be a Barry viewer, at first taken with all the glamour before recognizing that resignation to her own fate. Her pilot episode begins with Eve trudging into work hung over on a Saturday, positioned parallel to Villanelle having no choice but to take on a bloody new assignment. Whether wielding pen or firearm, everyone’s bound to some manner of labor. Broaden the scope a bit, and this trend stretches back to that unwitting architect of the modern TV drama, Tony Soprano. He commanded the small screen for so many years on merit of his authoritative presence, winning over both viewers and the other people in his life through his masculine sense of capability, before revealing the morass of anxiety that this work creates. In his instance, the internal conflict was a touch more clear-cut and primal, clearing the way for the million little offshoots to follow. Forever torn between the things he had to do and wanted to do, he was forced to down the same bitter pill everyone must take at some point in their lives, that Barry and Eve and Villanelle know all too well: that to fully commit to any line of work is to let it define you.