A Spanish police officer and thriller writer who was investigated over allegations that he was using his day job to promote his work and damaging the force’s reputation says he has been told to retire by his superiors. Esteban Navarro, who has served as an officer in the Policía Nacional for 24 years and written 10 novels, found himself in trouble last year after he published a thriller about a gang of corrupt cops set in his own station in Huesca, north-eastern Spain. The book – Una Historia de Policías (A Police Story) – is described as “a debate about the origin of evil, but also a reflection on how friendship and camaraderie can drag us to the darkest side of dishonour”. Although Navarro stressed that it was a work of fiction, complaints were made by fellow officers and he found himself under investigation over claims that he was bringing the force into disrepute and using his uniform to further his literary career in social media posts. He received a warning at the conclusion of the investigation, which was later rescinded. But then Navarro began receiving anonymous messages criticising his writing and telling him no one wanted him back at work. Navarro has been on sick leave for almost a year and says he has developed ergophobia – a fear of the workplace – as a result of the situation. “My superiors told me we had to look for a way out of this and that I should go and work in a police station in a different city,” he told the Guardian. “But I told them that I live in Huesca, my son is studying at university here and my wife works here. And anyway, this isn’t my fault, so why should I have to leave?” It was then suggested that he hang on for two years until he reaches the age of 55, when officers can pass into the reserve force on 80% of their basic salary. However, Navarro claims that idea was dismissed by police headquarters in Madrid: “They told me I could never go back to work as a policeman and that I should retire.” He points out that he was commended three years ago for bringing credit to the force and is at a loss to understand why a policeman can’t write about being a policeman – “it’s like a journalist writing about being a journalist or John Grisham writing about the law”. Navarro believes an appeal would be expensive and pointless and wants to put the stress of the last year behind him. He said: “I’m just an ant in an anthill.” “In a couple of weeks, I’ll go back to the station and, US-style, I’ll leave with a cardboard box holding a trophy and a picture of my wife,” he said. “It seems there are some people who want a policeman to be a policeman and nothing more. I want to get back to my writing. It’s my escape route. Literature never lets you down.” The Policía Nacional did not respond to requests for comment.