Born in Wolverhampton, Syal, 56, wrote the screenplay for the 1993 film Bhaji On The Beach; her first novel, Anita And Me, won the Betty Trask Award in 1996. She co-wrote and starred in the award-winning BBC comedy Goodness Gracious Me and was Bafta nominated in 2003 for her role in The Kumars At No 42. She stars in Abi Morgan’s new BBC1 drama The Split. She is married to the actor Sanjeev Bhaskar and lives in London. What is your earliest memory?My mum used to take me home from nursery on the same bus as a load of ladies coming out of a factory at the end of their shift. I used to stand at the front and sing requests. They’d shout out, “Sing us Puppet On A String, love”. I would sing the hit parade while sand would slowly seep out of my knicker leg from the sandpit in the nursery. Which living person do you most admire, and why?My parents. They have been the best example of a loving and respectful marriage over 60 years. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Overestimating how much I can pack into a day. I am always saying yes to too many things and then I wonder why I end up lying on the sofa shouting at everybody with a bag of ice on my head. What was your most embarrassing moment?Being asked for an autograph in the middle of a smear test. What is your most treasured possession?An album of old black and white photographs of my parents’ lives in India and their early days here. My parents only had one wedding photo because they eloped. I have one of the day my dad left for England and my mum seeing him off at the railway station, and a picture of them in Trafalgar Square with mum wrapped up in a woolly coat over her sari. Aside from a property, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought?Holidays. For years, I would book a big house in Britain for a week for the entire family. There would be 14 of us. I don’t regret a penny. What is your most unappealing habit?Standing at the bottom of the stairs holding shoes, hats or a toothbrush and shouting like a fishwife, which seems to be my morning routine. What do you most dislike about your appearance?Increasingly, I see the scars and stretch marks as badges of honour. If you could bring something extinct back to life, what would you choose?Formal dances, a much nicer alternative to Tinder. Who would play you in the film of your life?Freida Pinto, with a lot of padding. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?In the 90s in New York, I was introduced to this quite famous Indian director at a party. He said, “My God, what happened? You got so fat!” in front of 20 people. I said, “Well at least I can lose weight, you’re stuck with that face.” What do you owe your parents?Optimism, a fierce work ethic and emotional resilience. What is the worst job you’ve done?Having to clean out my daughter’s digs at university. The memory of the state of that toilet still lives with me. What has been your biggest disappointment?Not being able to keep up piano lessons. I did a year and I was really good and loved it and then my parents couldn’t afford for me to continue. If you could go back in time, where would you go?I would love to see the first performances of Shakespeare’s plays in the Globe. How do you relax?Playing netball for a local team called The Ravens. What is the closest you’ve come to death? On a school trip to Wales when I was 12. My canoe capsized and got stuck upside down next to a rock. I was underwater for about 30 seconds but it felt a lot longer. What has been your closest brush with the law? I was driving my mum to an appointment last year and, while she was trying to tell me how to drive, I bumped into the car in front, which happened to be a plain-clothes detective. He was not impressed. How would you like to be remembered?Often, with laughter. What is the most important lesson life has taught you?Roll with the changes because that’s what life’s about. Tell us a jokeQ: How many Indian mothers does it take to change a lightbulb? A: Don’t worry about me, I’ll sit in the dark.