At weekends I like to go to my local farmers’ market and head straight to the fish stand. I know exactly where the produce has come from, and it seems to cost half the amount of the fishmonger. My four-year-old begs us for the rollmops when we visit – she calls them “the sugar fish” because of their sweet cure, and devours them. They add a delicious pickled note to this earthy beet salad. If you can’t find fresh horseradish, look for jars of it ready-grated in the supermarket (but don’t confuse it with horseradish sauce). Prep 15 minCook 45 minServes 4 1 garlic clove, peeled600g small red, golden or candy-cane beetroots, scrubbed and cut into 4cm wedges1 tsp coriander seed, freshly ground2 tbsp olive oil5 celery sticks2 large handfuls parsley leaves2 tbsp baby capers, rinsed300g pickled herrings or rollmops, chopped into large chunks For the dressing2-3 tbsp freshly grated horseradish120g natural yoghurt1-2 tbsp red wine vinegar3 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil1 garlic clove Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas 6. Crush the garlic clove and toss with the beetroot, coriander and olive oil, and season well. Roast in a baking tray for 35-45 minutes until the beets are tender and crisp on the edges. Let cool. Next, make the dressing. Put the horseradish in a small bowl and whisk in the yoghurt, followed by one tablespoon of the vinegar and the olive oil. Crush the garlic clove, stir in and season. You may want to add more vinegar – adjust to taste and set aside. Wash the celery sticks and slice as thinly as possible, keeping any of the leaves for the salad. Toss these slices, and any celery leaves, with the parsley leaves, capers and half of the dressing. Arrange on plates and then nestle slivers of fish and wedges of beetroot in among the leaves. Drizzle over the remaining dressing and serve with crusty bread or a warm rice salad. The same dressing can be used for the warm rice salad to serve alongside the rollmops and beets. Combine long-grain brown rice with a wild nutty rice and mix in small, sautéed currants, large handfuls of chopped dill and toasted sunflower seeds. If you want to make this dish veggie, leave out the rollmops and dot with clusters of crumbled goat’s cheese, feta or even spoonfuls of a young cow’s curd.