Russia sought to fend off looming US-led airstrikes against Syria on Tuesday, throwing its weight behind a visit by UN weapons inspectors to investigate the scene of a chemical attack that killed more than 45 people in a Damascus suburb this weekend. The US and its European allies have accused the Syrian regime of Bashar al-Assad of being behind the attack in the rebel-held area of Douma, Eastern Ghouta, but Russian officials have claimed that no trace of chemical weapons could be found at the site, and argued that the attack was staged by rebels to provide a pretext for western military intervention. The rising tensions and the dramatic risks of a clash between the major powers was evident in the eastern Mediterranean where Russian warplanes flew over US and French naval vessels, armed with cruise missiles. After Donald Trump hinted heavily on Monday that he was on the verge of ordering airstrikes, the US-Russian struggle shifted back once more to the UN security council where both sides promoted rival resolutions. Russia proposed two resolutions, one of which was in support of a fact finding mission by the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to the scene of the attack, after an invitation of the Syrian government on Tuesday. The OPCW is unlikely to complete its work for at least a week, placing some pressure on Washington to defer gathering plans for a military assault until the OPCW has reported. Trump called Theresa May and Emmanuel Macron to discuss the standoff, but the official accounts of the conversation gave away few details of what if anything was decided. Meanwhile the US, UK and France are supporting a UN resolution that would recreate a UN independent body with a mandate of at least a year, dedicated to investigating chemical weapons attacks in Syria. The body would “identify to the greatest extent feasible, individuals, entities, groups, or governments who were perpetrators, organisers, sponsors or otherwise involved in the use of chemical weapons”, according to a draft seen by the Guardian. Russia opposition killed off a similar body – a UN-OPCW joint investigative mechanism – last November, but US officials have warned that if Moscow does not support the creation of a replacement, Washington and its allies would take matters into their own hands, based on their own conclusions that the Syrian regime carried out the Douma attack. Russia advanced a counter resolution, that would establish the new investigative body but strip it of the power of naming perpetrators of attacks. That power would be left in the hands of security council. Under the Russian variant, the Syrian government would also have more influence on the UN body’s work. In a sign that Trump may be willing to press ahead with military action even though OPCW inspectors are traveling to Damascus, the president cancelled plans to travel to Peru for a Summit of the Americas, sending his vice-president Mike Pence in his stead. The US defense secretary, James Mattis, also cancelled engagements that had been scheduled for the weekend. As well as Trump’s consultations with May and Macron on Tuesday, the British and French leaders held a separate call of their own. Macron told reporters that the three countries would decide on how to respond to the Douma chemical attack “within days”, adding that any air strikes would target Syrian government chemical facilities. In London, May convened a meeting of her national security council where there is strong support from her most senior ministers for military action. A Downing Street statement suggested some UK caution by continuing to state the chemical weapons attack had not yet been confirmed, and that in both calls the leaders “had agreed that reports of a chemical weapons attack in Syria were utterly reprehensible and if confirmed, represented further evidence of the Assad regime’s appalling cruelty against its own people and total disregard for its legal obligations not to use these weapons. “They agreed that the international community needed to respond to uphold the worldwide prohibition on the use of chemical weapons”. A White House statement said Trump and May “agreed not to allow the use of chemical weapons to continue”. By convention, British prime ministers cannot send UK forces into combat action without an explicit vote of MPs. May is aware David Cameron was humiliated when he lost a Commons vote to take military action in 2013 to punish Assad’s use of chemical weapons. Her leadership might not survive a similar defeat. The British Labour Party may oppose any action before weapons inspectors have formally confirmed a chemical weapons attack took place in Douma. The question for May and other Western leaders is whether they decide they do not need further confirmation from the OPCW that an attack occurred, following graphic media and video reports. In anticipation of airstrikes, the Syrian regime is reported to be moving its aircraft to the Russian base at Latakia, presumably in the expectation that they would be safe from destruction there. The US may be intent on grounding as much of the Syrian air force as possible, but will not wish to destroy Russian planes. The US Navy has less firepower in the eastern Mediterranean than it did when Trump ordered punitive missile strikes for chemical weapons use in April last year. Now there is only one guided missile destroyer, armed with the Tomahawk cruise missiles used in April – the USS Donald Cook which left the Cypriot port of Larnaca on Monday. Its twin, the USS Porter, which took part in the last Tomahawk attack, is on a port visit to Cherbourg, France. Another missile cruiser of the same class, the USS Ross has just completed exercises with the Royal Navy and left Plymouth on Sunday. It would take a few days to come within range. The USS Harry Truman aircraft carrier and its battle group are due to leave Virginia on Wednesday, reportedly bound for the Mediterranean, but it would take several days to reach the Syrian coast. However, the USS Cook is being accompanied in the area by the French frigate Aquitaine, armed with cruise missiles, which was reported in the French press to have been buzzed by low-flying Russian warplanes over the weekend.  