PSG are edging closer to deciding who their number-one choice to replace Unai Emry is after meeting Thomas Tuchel’s representatives. The talks were positive and Tuchel is one of two frontrunners, together with Chelsea’s Antonio Conte. The club’s president, Nasser al-Khelaifi, is also keen on seeing whether there is any possibility of prising José Mourinho or Massimiliano Allegri from their respective clubs, Manchester United and Juventus, but there is a realisation within the club that that will be extremely difficult. Mauricio Pochettino has also been mentioned as a possible replacement for the Spaniard, whose contract runs out in the summer. The club have already held talks with Conte’s reprentatives, although no formal approach or offer has been made to the Chelsea manager. The Italian has endured a frustrating season at Stamford Bridge, with the team in danger of losing out on a Champions League place for next season. Chelsea were eliminated by Barcelona in the Champions League and their only chance of silverware is the FA Cup, in which they play Southampton in the semi-finals on 22 April. Conte has hinted at his frustration with the club’s transfer policy throughout the season and recently said he was “very angry” and “very sad” about the current situation. “Those who know me very well know I am trying to put all of myself to change this situation because I have great responsibility,” he said in the buildup to Sunday’s 1-1 home draw against West Ham. “I feel great responsibility for my work, for my family, for everything. When I go to my house, it’s not that I am relaxed but I know that I gave everything and am giving everything for this club, 120%, every day, every day. Sometimes, it’s very difficult to sleep with these types of problem.” Tuchel, meanwhile, has been without a club since leaving Borussia Dortmund in May 2017. He spent two years at the Bundesliga club, following five at Mainz, and was widely admired for the job he did in replacing Jürgen Klopp at the Westfalenstadion. The team played attractive football and reached two cup finals, winning the second one, as well as being Bayern Munich’s main challengers in the league. The manager’s second season at the club, however, was marred by the attack on the team coach before the Champions League quarter-final against Monaco in April 2017. Tuchel, when testifying about the attack last month, said he thought there was a direct link between the incident and his leaving the club. “Aki [the Borussia Dortmund chairman, Hans-Joachim Watzke] has already said publicly that there was a major discrepancy,” he said. “This is true. The essence of the discrepancy is that I was sitting on the bus and Aki wasn’t. That’s why there was a major discrepancy about how to go about things – without wanting to hold it against Aki.” Tuchel added he was “absolutely convinced” that the attack had an effect on the performances of his players.