“If there is a doctor on the flight, please … ” The call for a doctor reflexively ejects me out of my seat and towards the sick patient. One flight in every 600 incurs a medical emergency – until recently I used to pack my trusted stethoscope that could actually hear a thing or two amid the din of the plane, but it felt too much like inviting illness. Leaving my stethoscope behind is the first thing I regret. In the centre seat is a sallow-looking, slightly built woman who says in soft, accented English that she feels a bit faint. Except she looks terrible. “I am a doctor, here to help you,” I say. “Thank God,” she says fervently as her head sinks into the lap of her startled co-passenger, jammed against the window. “Not yet,” I think grimly, with moments to gather my senses and a history. Sign up to receive the latest Australian opinion pieces every weekday She has diabetes and renal failure. She woke up very early for dialysis before boarding the cross-country flight to visit her son. She felt dizzy, no different to usual. But now, hours later, she is sweaty and uncomfortable. I have been groping her wrist the whole time; locating the faint thread of a pulse, I tell the flight attendant to summon help. Reinforcement arrives in the form of a man in whom I long to find an emergency worker because I suspect the patient is having a silent heart attack. “I am an oncologist,” is my way of conveying that it’s been a long time since I resuscitated something other than a dummy. “Me too,” he says, almost apologetically. We look at each other in dismay. Airway, breathing, circulation, I repeat to no one in particular as a sparse medical kit appears. He connects her to oxygen while I rummage for an aspirin, which I can’t find. 'Thank you', she says once, and I can’t help but feel moved, and a little scared, by her show of faith in me “I think you might be having a heart attack. Do you carry aspirin?” “I can’t have aspirin,” she replies. Before I can ask why, she is already unconscious. The blood pressure cuff works but the stethoscope is tinny and useless. “What do you think?” an anxious attendant asks. “She might arrest.” “The captain says we are landing in an hour, do your best.” A nurse has heard the commotion and has made her way to help. But she doesn’t feel confident inserting an IV amid the mild turbulence and I don’t blame her. The patient opens her eyes, allowing the frightened window-seat passenger to scuttle from her seat. To prevent crowding, the other oncologist returns to his seat and the nurse takes a seat across the aisle. I put my mouth close to the patient’s ear. “I know this must feel frightening but I won’t leave you.” I turn my attention to her husband, pale-faced and utterly silent, riven with apprehension and foreboding. “I didn’t know this would happen.” “You can’t predict these things,” I reply. Having made my promise to the patient, I slide into the window seat and put her head in my lap as she curls against the other two seats. Pretending to read a book, I keep a grip on her elusive pulse. “Stay with me,” I whisper after every paragraph and she flutters her eyelids in response. “Thank you,” she says once, and I can’t help but feel moved, and a little scared, by her show of faith in me. In this confined space, my knowledge seems useless. Instead, all I have to give is the reassurance of my presence and the comfort of a human touch. My mind scoffs that this isn’t enough. My heart says it’s better than nothing. Her pulse can’t agree, skipping too many beats for my liking. I fake calm with my senses on high alert. With 20 minutes to land, I lose her pulse, forced to confront the scenario that was only ever meant to be a simulation – a patient without a pulse and me as the first responder. There is a yawning silence before the nurse shouts the blindingly obvious: “No pulse? Start CPR!” CPR in a row of economy seats? How? With stricken passengers watching? And a husband who has begun grieving? I clamber awkwardly on to the middle seat, my head hitting the ceiling. And then, miraculously, just as my hands are about to bear down on her chest, the nurse exclaims, “Wait, I feel a pulse!” I breathe. “Doctor,” the attendant whispers conspiratorially. “We are running out of oxygen.” The longed-for landing causes my patient to vomit. “The paramedics are here,” I soothe her, wiping her face. As she is bundled up, I seize the opportunity to prepare her husband. “There will be a lot going on, but you are in safe hands.” He seems unconvinced. Looking as if he is about to lose a tenuous connection, he asks desperately, “But how will I find you again? How will I let you know?” His genuine gratitude in the midst of palpable fear moves me, although I am aware of how little I have actually done. I want to say that her arriving alive is my reward, but I scribble down some details and hurry him in the direction of the rushing paramedics. A week passes, then a month and more. I keep hoping for some news but there is no word from him and no medical record for me to quietly look up, as I don’t even know her full name. In time, she turns into a rare entity in this hyperconnected world of ours – a complete stranger whose life became entwined with mine in a tense mid-air drama before we parted ways. The lack of closure goes both ways – I still find myself thinking about the patient when I am about to fly and console myself with the old adage, no news is good news, while I ponder whether or not to pack my stethoscope. • Ranjana Srivastava is a Guardian Australia columnist and oncologist