Jürgen Klopp has said Liverpool do not fear the challenge of trying to wrest the Premier League title from a Manchester City team he expects will be even stronger next season. Liverpool have beaten the newly crowned champions three times this year, sealing a place in the Champions League semi-finals against Roma as a result, yet trail City by 17 points in the Premier League having played a game more. Klopp believes it will be possible to close that gap next season despite expecting City to improve. “Unfortunately, the job City have done in the last few years is outstanding,” the Liverpool manager said. “They brought together a team in a fantastic age. There is still a lot to come from them. They will not stop refreshing the squad, that’s clear, but whatever they do it will stay possible to beat them – that’s how it is. “The gap between us and City didn’t happen in the games against them, it happened in the other games. It’s not important how good City will be, it’s about how we can get all the other points plus the points we got so far again. That is why it is always possible to be closer. But are they able to dominate? They don’t have a limit to spending, so I don’t know. “Maybe it depends on all of us. Our age group is good as well, the best years are coming. That’s why we try to build on it.” Klopp has vowed to field a strong team at West Bromwich on Saturday despite hosting Roma in the first leg on Tuesday, insisting qualification for next season’s Champions League remains a priority. And he believes competition at the top of the Premier League will intensify next year with Liverpool aiming “a little bit higher”. “I don’t fear the challenge,” he said. “This year, if City plays a normal season, which they didn’t do, then it would be really close until the end because we are now all close together. “United is four points ahead, Tottenham is two points behind. It’s a real fight for all positions. All the big six pretty much delivered this year but City delivered best. It’s difficult to deal with success just as it is difficult to deal with other things in football but I’m sure they will be strong again. It doesn’t make life easier but it’s not impossible for us to step a little bit higher.”