The dilemma I have a new partner after my wife died three years ago. We are very compatible and happy together, emotionally and sexually, but the one distressing issue is our different sleeping requirements. I need a good, solid, uninterrupted nine hours and an early night, otherwise I get extremely irritable. She is more of a night owl, often waking in the night to use her iPad or even make a cup of tea. She has an amazing ability to catnap and fall asleep seemingly instantly, whereas I need a long period of peace and quiet before dropping off. I am also a light sleeper and her snoring is a problem for me. Earplugs don’t work. I accept that I’m a prodigious snorer myself, but that doesn’t seem to bother her so much. Do I carry  on retreating to the spare room, or is there another solution as I’d rather we stay together? We don’t live together (yet), but after a few days spent with each other,  I need a couple of days alone to catch up on my sleep! Mariella replies And you say you’re compatible? There’s more to a relationship than good sex and emotional back-up. When we mature, compatibility is about more intimate and intricate stuff than simply rubbing along during daylight hours. It’s all very well coexisting when you’re wide awake and rational, but what about when you’re barely conscious, immensely vulnerable and aching for a good night’s kip? That’s when coupledom is properly put to the test, and I should know. Driven to the edge of sanity by my husband's snoring, I kicked him hard on the shin You readers share such intimate stories with me that’s it’s only fair I should reciprocate occasionally. My husband loves to shame me with the tale, much exaggerated naturally, of when I kicked him in the middle of the night. Desperate for sleep as I was, and driven to the edge of sanity by his snoring, reason was replaced by irrepressible rage. I kicked him hard on the shin in the hope that, like hiccups, the shock would curtail the nasal crescendos filling the room. He leapt up, outraged, expressed his displeasure in no uncertain terms and then fell straight back to sleep, snores soaring to even greater discordant heights, while I lay wide awake and fuming beside him. It’s a shameful confession which shows that what happens at night is not insignificant. In serious cases it can be sanity-depleting and life-threatening, so I’m grateful to you for raising this pernicious problem. Our inability to enjoy the restful sleep we’ve taken for granted for decades is one of the most frustrating things about ageing. If I’m asked what I miss about youth, the answer is all too easy: the blessed unconsciousness you sink into when you finally make it to bed. It’s all I can do to refrain from sobbing in envy when my daughter staggers into the kitchen at midday rubbing her bleary eyes, having been out for the count for 14 hours. Indeed, I’d sacrifice every one of my twentysomething dawn chorus debauches for the ability to take a full night’s sleep for granted now. When I look in my bedside drawer, it’s hard not to be devastated by the obvious indications of decline. First and foremost are the melatonin pills that I happily discovered recently are available on the NHS to the over-55s. It’s certainly confirmation of the epidemic of sleeplessness among my contemporaries. Magnesium spray reduces the aches and pains, particularly for those restless-leg sufferers such as myself. Then there’s an eye mask, silicone earplugs (unlike foam, they do work), headphones in case I need to listen to whales singing or a talking book and a torch so I can read without disturbing my aforementioned happily snoring husband. Every day a new scientific study confirms that the key to health, happiness and longevity is a good night’s sleep. You’re faced with a challenging conundrum and I’m not convinced companionship into your twilight years is going to be worth the cost. Then again, the alternative is equally bleak. Remaining single for long periods seems to create a marked decrease in what you’ll put up with from the rest of your species, so surviving your new partner’s opposing sleep pattern is a timely test of your ability for tolerance. Happily, we are an ingenious species and having focused a lot of our efforts on the battle against insomnia, there are numerous approaches and cures now available to test. I’d recommend that you turn to all or some of the products I listed from my own bedside stash and particularly silicone earplugs for yourself and melatonin for your catnapping girlfriend. As an impetuous youngster, I used to think that sleeping entwined was the ultimate affirmation of romance. Nowadays, the increasing appeal of my own bedroom (and bathroom) is the greatest threat to my romantic status. If you can afford to have a spare bedroom, I’d highly recommend hanging on to it as a last-ditch solution. Meanwhile, stock up on all the many little items that will make your cohabiting life run smoother and embrace the necessity of compromise, without which we’d certainly never pair up at all. If you have a dilemma, send a brief email to mariella.frostrup@observer.co.uk. Follow her on Twitter @mariellaf1