A former Northern Ireland MP’s tweet almost collapsed the trial of two Irish rugby stars who were acquitted of rape, it has emerged. A tweeted message from Naomi Long, the leader of the cross community Alliance party, led to demands from the defence team of the players and two friends that the trial be stopped. The controversy only came to light after the judge in the trial, Justice Patricia Smyth, lifted most of the reporting restrictions on the case after a hearing on Wednesday. Details were revealed of how the barrister representing Ulster and Irish international Stuart Olding described Long’s tweet as “the straw that has broken the camel’s back in this case”. Frank O’Donoghue QC had made his remarks in court but with the jury not in the courtroom at Belfast Laganside courts on day 40 of the 42-day trial. Long posted her tweet after O’Donoghue described “middle-class girls” who were in the house at the time of the alleged rape. In response Long posted on Twitter: “I genuinely have no words for how atrocious this statement is. ‘Middle-class girls?’ What? Because working-class girls wouldn’t care/don’t matter/think rape is normal? What is the implication of that comment even meant to be?” The Alliance party leader’s comment was then re-tweeted 36 times and received 277 likes, the court was told at the time of the trial. O’Donoghue said he was “aghast” that the former East Belfast MP had tweeted an opinion on the case which was still ongoing, having not attended the trial. He argued that the tweet could influence the 11-strong jury as the Alliance party had 10% of the vote and was the third-largest political party in Belfast. O’Donoghue said Long’s intervention “is such to create a substantial risk of prejudice. That this cannot be cured. And that, regrettably, this jury shall now have to be stood down and discharged.” However Smyth rejected O’Donoghue’s application to collapse the trial due to the tweet. Paddy Jackson alongside Stuart Olding were cleared of rape last month in a high-profile trial in Belfast in which their two friends Blane McIlroy and Rory Harrison were found not guilty of indecent exposure and perverting the course of justice. The revelations over the legal argument about Long’s tweet only emerged on Wednesday after a number of Belfast-based media organisations mounted a legal challenge to have reporting restrictions lifted regarding the trial. Long has yet to respond in person to the revelations but the Alliance party said in a statement: “We are always conscious of our responsibilities when making any comment related to live court proceedings and exercise great care to avoid any remarks which would be construed as prejudicial. “The tweets related to a comment from a counsel’s closing address regarding class and not evidence before the court, so were entirely unrelated to and made no reference or inference whatsoever to the guilt or innocence of those on trial.” The Alliance party statement stressed that the trial judge had disagreed with the defence team and refused to dismiss the jury. Earlier on Wednesday, supporters of the two Irish rugby players took out a full-page newspaper advertisement demanding they be reinstated for both province and country. The advert in the Belfast Telegraph states that as “Ulster and Irish rugby fans we want these innocent men reinstated and rightly allowed to resume their roles for both both and country. The IRFU (Irish Rugby Football Union) should take note of the silent majority and not bow to the court of social media.” The supporters of Jackson and Olding pointed out that both men have apologised for the content of WhatsApp messages. “What is reprehensible is the extent of the social media backlash aimed at incriminating men unanimously acquitted of any crime. We are fed up with this cyber persecution.” The full-page advertisement written in red ink on a white background is signed: “Real fans standing up for the Ulster men.” Their backing for Jackson and Olding who are currently suspended for all Ulster and Ireland duties comes just ahead of a planned protest outside the Kingspan Stadium in Belfast on Friday. Feminist groups and other campaigners are holding a demonstration at the home of Ulster rugby ahead of the province’s clash with Welsh side Ospreys on Friday evening. They want Ulster and Ireland to ban the pair from playing.