Despite the last few years being a bit inconsistent and at times disappointing, the fact is Wenger’s Arsenal teams often played incredible football and it’s been an absolute pleasure being a fan. He’ll have a special place in the history of the club forever. He’s also been instrumental in the transformation of English football from something which was very parochial into something more outward-looking. Adieu boss, et merci.JahLion Firstly, I think Wenger is great and essentially responsible for revolutionising the English game in the mid 90s. Built some fantastic football teams and never compromised on his visions for how the game should be played- though his teams lost the crucial bite that had made them so formidable in his first ten years. The “Invincibles” alone ensure he goes down in status as a legend - I always love the fact that he had the stone cold nuts to predict it in public too. Ridiculed at first, proven right. Glad that he’s going now. It’s been time for a while I think. From a cold, selfish perspective, I don’t want Arsenal to win the EL as a lack of CL football hurts them as a competitor to Liverpool. I’d struggle to not be happy for Wenger though. Would be great for him to go out by lifting his first European trophy.wige1001 One of the best managers the English league has had - and that counts before Sky invented football. Up until the past few seasons the football Arsenal played was a thing of beauty. (Moss was right: Thing about Arsenal is they try and walk it in: but when it worked it was stellar) Thanks for the entertainment over the years. Yes he could have left a little sooner maybe, but someone with his record deserved the respect to pick their time. And Arsenal fans; careful what you wish for. This could be the start of a bright new exciting era but it could quite so easily be that 6th place will be something you yearn for in coming seasons.He can now of course devote more time to his class at night school “how to do up a coat”. And I for one wish him the best with that.catchytitled As a Spurs fan I spent years hoping Arsenal would leave. he made our lives a misery. But in the past few years I was happy every time they extended his contract. But he’s left a real legacy behind. The titles, the stadium, the style of football - a real identity. And this was all built on the back of success on the pitch, rather than cash injections. One of the great managers.Magnusson Thanks for the memories Arsene... when I was a kid I seriously thought Arsenal was named after you.charlescabbage Like very many great talents in every walk of life, he’s probably hung on too long and been in some denial about the fact that his time has passed. But we shouldn’t forget that he did more than anyone to modernise English football and turn “boring, boring Arsenal” into millions of people’s second favourite team and, for three or four years, the most thrilling football team I’ve seen. Au revoir, Arsene, et merci.chasm