The Week in Patriarchy is a weekly roundup of what’s happening in the world of feminism and sexism. If you’re not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. In the wake of the Bill Cosby verdict and a new investigative piece about NBC’s failings when it comes to dealing with sexual harassment, it’s worth asking – what’s next for #MeToo? Calling out abusers is important, but are we finally going to start looking at the systems that allow those harassers to flourish? We need organizations and industries to start looking inward – asking tough questions that will ensure these kinds of abuses don’t happen again. We need the criminal justice system to do the same. Most of all, the women and feminists leading the movement should be asking ourselves what our end game is right now – is it punishment for the accused? A culture shift? All of the above? The more time that goes by with the world paying attention, the more power and space we have to make lasting impact. Thanks to the tireless work of comedian and documentarian Hari Kondabolu, The Simpsons’ Hank Azaria says he would be willing to step aside from playing controversial character Apu so that a South Asian actor could take over. Andrea Constand brought her civil case against Bill Cosby 13 years ago. This remarkable profile, which included her story & that of other named women, was published in 2006. Twelve years ago! Years in which everyone knew, yet didn't exactly care. https://t.co/TyCh0pdPMA Wow. This says it all. Wow. https://t.co/S0PymSJf7U not all heroes wear capes, sometimes it's a cardigan https://t.co/jwFOCd0iU3 For the past little while, I've been working on a piece about Toronto's relationship to the alt-right, especially the "manosphere." Unfortunately that research has become relevant. I'm going to share as much as I can here for people who may not be familiar with these movements. Stacey Abrams with an important and moving piece on debt, generational wealth, and running for office; Adam Serwer on how Bill Cosby’s “pound cake” speech helped lead to his downfall; and Brittany Spanos with this incredible cover story on Janelle Monáe, who comes out as pansexual. On Bill Cosby and not getting overly optimistic. Remember the guy a few years back who said if women didn’t want to become pregnant, they should just “put an aspirin between their knees”? Well, he’s running to be governor of Wyoming. On a scale of one to 10, I’m going to take a nap. Taking a long drive (yes, even New Yorkers drive) and watching this corgi puppy have the time of his life.