Talking with Julia Samoylova, Russia’s Eurovision entry, it’s easy to forget that a year ago she was at the centre of a diplomatic crisis. The 29-year-old chats away, all smiles and nervous laughter, like any other entrant, as she covers everything from her childhood in Ukhta, an industrial town in Russia’s north, to her first singing gig in a restaurant (she belted out the likes of I Will Always Love You until the owner said he wanted something less dramatic). She wants to “bring light to the people” at next month’s event in Lisbon, and laughs about her dog, Tima – a fluffy Pomeranian Spitz who makes regular appearances in her vlogs. When conversation turns to last year’s Eurovision the mood gets more serious. Samoylova was due to compete in Kiev, but a couple of months beforehand was banned from entering Ukraine because she had sung in occupied Crimea. As soon as the ban was announced, Samoylova found herself a proxy for the Russia-Ukraine conflict, with politicians in both countries tossing her name about (one called her “a live bomb in the propagandistic hybrid war”). The European Broadcasting Union, which organises Eurovision, wasn’t happy. “We are increasingly frustrated, in fact angry, that this year’s competition is being used as a tool in the ongoing confrontation,” it said in a letter to Ukraine’s prime minister. Samoylova seemed trapped in the middle, her voice largely unheard in the west until the day of her Eurovision semi-final, performing in Crimea. She was, depending on your viewpoint, either a Russian tool or an aspiring singer who’d been overtaken by events. “At first I couldn’t understand it,” she says via Skype from Moscow, when asked about the ban. “I couldn’t understand what acts I’d committed. I was thinking they would talk for a bit, soon forget, and I would compete. Until the very last moment I was sitting on suitcases, as we say, hoping I’d get to go.” Russia eventually withdrew from the contest. How does she feel coming back this year, knowing she might get a hostile reception (even if the audience forgets Ukraine, they may boo her as a protest against Russia’s ban on gay “propaganda”)? “I do understand that I’m going to get a lot of attention – a lot of questions,” she says. “But I just hope I will perform well. I want something magical from it.” Russia has made surprising use of music to make political points in recent years. In 2016, it held a classical concert in Palmyra, Syria, after the ruins were liberated from Isis. Among the performers was cellist Sergei Roldugin, one of Vladimir Putin’s best friends and a man who’d just appeared in the Panama Papers as the beneficiary of millions in offshore deals. Last year, singer Alisa Vox released Baby Boy, a pop song alleged to have Kremlin backing that took aim at anti-government protesters (the lyrics go: “You want change, baby boy? Change yourself, sweetheart”). Eurovision is never without controversy and countries have long used it to make political statements – including those against Russia. Georgia withdrew its 2009 entry, bluntly titled We Don’t Wanna Put In, that was clearly aimed at Russia following the war in South Ossetia. Ukraine’s 2016 winner, Jamala’s 1944, seemed like a direct comment on Russia’s invasion of Crimea (“You think you’re a god, but everyone dies”). Was Samoylova’s participation Russia’s way of using the contest in a similar fashion, an attempt to embarrass Ukraine, forcing them to ban the singer from taking part? Russia says it wasn’t – Bulgaria’s act that year had also played Crimea and wasn’t banned – while Samoylova insists she’s just another Eurovision hopeful who’s dreamt of performing at the event since seeing it on TV aged 10. “I’m one of those people who when they have a dream knows it’s going to happen,” she says. “I just didn’t know when.” Samoylova certainly has the emotional backstory that suits a Eurovision winner. She was born in 1989, just as the Soviet Union was crumbling. Her dad was a coal miner, her mum a hairdresser, but when Russia’s economy collapsed they soon had to do everything from wait tables to barter at street markets to get by. As a child, she was diagnosed with a rare neuromuscular disorder, and has used a wheelchair ever since. Her parents made sure she didn’t see her disability as a problem. “They always told me I’m not worse than other kids,” she says. “I can’t walk, but so what? There are other qualities – my character – and they always told me I’m very beautiful. When I was naughty, they gave me a bad time. When I was lazy, they were strict with me. I was brought up like any other kid.” Samoylova entered her first singing contest aged 11. “I always liked to be the centre of attention,” she says. She won some, lost others, but after a few years, the judges’ comments started wearing her down. “When I was taking part in contests, the members of the jury, famous people, told me that I am talented, I am gifted, but because I can’t walk nothing is going to come of it.” She studied psychology for a while, but missed performing too much and realised she did have the strength to keep trying. She entered Russia’s X Factor, came second, then basically waited to be invited to compete at Eurovision. “We were sitting at home drinking tea when I was told I’d been chosen. I was, like, ‘Finally!’” She is patriotic, she says, but insists that wasn’t why she performed in Crimea. She went simply because she was invited to sing before 10,000 people. She admits, though, that she has benefited from the row. “We had to switch the telephone off,” she says of one moment when she got deluged by calls from journalists. She’s also been in demand to perform ever since. “I have no time for feeling sad or anything like that.” Samoylova’s song this year is a power ballad, I Won’t Break. Some will interpret its title as another shot at Ukraine. But Samoylova says she chose it simply because it sounds like the “music I listen to” and it “fitted me very well”. She seems genuinely happy to be getting her Eurovision moment. “It’s a song about every person,” she says. “Whatever’s happening outside of your personal life, if you decide not to break, you will not break.” Netta, Toy (Israel) The first Eurovision entry to involve vocal looping, Netta’s joyful tune is the early favourite. With its “I’m not your toy, you stupid boy” chorus, it’s also an attempt to bring #MeToo into the Eurovision spotlight. Madame Monsieur, Mercy (France) France’s fantastic entry – it’s like a Christine and the Queens track – is about a girl, Mercy, born on a refugee boat. Ermal Meta and Fabrizio Moro, You Haven’t Done Anything to Me (Italy) Terrorist attacks may not seem a good fit for Eurovision, but that’s the subject of Italy’s powerful number. A duet by two Italian stars, the video already has more than 19m views on YouTube. Saara Aalto, Monsters (Finland) Not a hint of politics to it, just a banger from the X Factor runner-up. Mikolas Josef, Lie to Me (Czech Republic) Mikolas is the Czech Justin Timberlake, but his video for Lie to Me features a camel and so is the best video to emerge from Eurovision so far.