David Simon, the creator of The Wire and The Deuce, will turn his attention to the Spanish civil war for his next project. A Dry Run will focus on a group of Americans who travel to Spain to fight for the republic against Francisco Franco’s Nationalists. The show will follow the Abraham Lincoln and George Washington battalions, part of the International Brigades, which fought in the conflict. The struggle lasted from 1936 to 1939 and saw Franco’s forces – aided by Nazi Germany – defeat the republicans. Simon told Variety that the conflict still resonates, saying: “[The] Spanish struggle against fascism and the misuse of capitalism as a bulwark to totalitarianism [represents] the pre-eminent political narrative of the 20th century and of our time still.” The production will see HBO, Simon’s longtime home, team up with Spanish company Mediapro, although the show’s main language will be English. Simon expects the show to be a six-episode mini series and said it will discuss the failure of non-fascist countries to offer support to the Spanish republic. “We are interested in realism,” Simon said. “And we don’t sell much in the way of redemption or happy endings. And, well, 1939 was no happy ending. Nor was it redemptive. “When the Spanish republic was threatened, capitalism chose tyranny,” he added. “So, the better men who could not abide that choice came to Spain [to fight]. Today, that same choice confronts us again.” About 40,000 volunteers, men and women from around the world, fought alongside the forces of the Spanish republic against the fascist rebels. George Orwell joined the cause, and documented his experience in his non-fiction book Homage to Catalonia. The International Brigades included about 2,800 Americans and are still controversial in Spain. In 2013, a row erupted after a monument in honour of the foreign fighters was taken down after a legal challenge that asserted: “There is nothing to celebrate, and especially not in a public space devoted to education. The International Brigades were created and managed by Stalin, the most genocidal leader in history.”