The news on Sunday morning that Saint Are, now a veteran of five Grand Nationals, was well enough to return to Tom George’s stable after Saturday’s race at Aintree capped another great weekend for the sport’s most high-profile event. For the sixth year running since the old wooden cores in the fences were replaced by more forgiving plastic, every horse returned to its yard afterwards and, where the last National on heavy ground was a grim, attritional spectacle, the race this year produced a close finish and a popular winner in Tiger Roll. “He had a good, comfortable night,” George said of Saint Are on Sunday morning. “They looked after him well at Aintree. His lad stayed up with him and the vets checked him every few hours. He’s eaten his breakfast and he’s ready to come home. He walked out brighter this morning, I just think he was a bit shaken [when brought down at The Chair]. He’s feeling good about it and we’re looking forward to getting him home.” There is, of course, an element of risk attached to any horse race and it is inevitable that a horse will suffer a fatal injury in the National eventually. But we are now at a point where the effect of the changes to the fences before the 2013 renewal is becoming increasingly clear. The new fences look like the old ones and the race itself looks little different, while the number of finishers has risen slightly over the past six runnings compared with the six years from 2007, from 38% to 43%. This in itself is good news, as more punters are getting more of a run for their money. But the most significant difference, as might be expected since the fences are now more forgiving, is in the number of fallers. Proper statisticians may flinch at this point, because half a dozen years is not, admittedly, an extended sample, but the effect does seem obvious and unmistakable. Between 2007 and 2012 there were 57 fallers in the National from 240 starters. Since the changes to the fences there have been 32 from 236. Fewer fallers, inevitably, also means fewer horses being brought down in their wake. The ratio of falls to riders being unseated, meanwhile, has shifted from 1.4:1 to, in effect, 1:1 because the number of unseats is virtually unchanged. It appears that mistakes that were once bad enough to cause a fall are now more likely to unship the jockey, while lesser errors that might have been 50-50 to unseat in the past are more likely to leave the rider sitting tight and going on to complete, or pull up when their chance has gone. In other words the redesigned fences – which received unqualified approval when they were unveiled six years ago – have worked precisely as the organisers intended and reduced the rate of fatal injuries in the National much closer to the rate of just below 0.4% of starters in the rest of National Hunt racing. The sunshine at Aintree on Saturday also added to the generally positive mood around the big race, especially after a damp and chilly Ladies’ Day on Friday. It was not, perhaps, welcomed quite so warmly by ITV’s senior executives, however, as sunny weather was cited as a reason for a slump in the National’s audience figure last year, the first since it grabbed a monopoly on terrestrial racing coverage from Channel 4. The theory is that on one of the first spring-like Saturdays of the year, many potential viewers preferred to be outside with their families rather than stuck in front of the TV. It seemed to be borne out last year by a big drop in the total audience on Saturday afternoon, of which the National took a peak share of 62%. The peak viewing of 8.5m for this year’s race was a 3.6% increase on last year’s peak of 8.2m, although the peak share of total viewers while the National was being run was down slightly, at 60%. It was still well short of the 10m viewers for the last National on Channel 4 in 2016, however, and even further adrift of the 12m peak that John Baker, Aintree’s managing director, suggested would be “at the low end of expectations” when the contract was signed. Last year’s ITV coverage is up for a Bafta next month and this year’s also seemed to be well received. Both racing and ITV will hope earnestly for a spike in the figures next year, however, before negotiations start in earnest on a possible extension to the £30m contract. Windsor 2.20 Maygold 2.50 Blown By Wind 3.20 Sevenna Star 3.50 Bombero (nb) 4.20 Mobsta (nap) 4.50 Lady Alavesa 5.25 Bakht A Rawan Kelso 2.10 Delire D’Estruval 2.40 Geronimo 3.10 Tikkandemickey 3.40 Buffalo Ballet 4.10 Las Tunas 4.40 Whisperdale 5.10 Lastin’ Memories Tips by Greg Wood.