Looking down at my mother’s pale, papery face as she lay on her care-home bed, eyes closed, breaths sounding as if they were gurgling up from the bottom of a mud swamp, I accepted at last that she was going to die. My sister, who had arrived half an hour before me and requisitioned the “best” side of the bed, clutched Mum’s head in the crook of her arm and cooed at her. I held Mum’s hand but she was twisted away from me towards my sister. I felt excluded from her death. I’d received a message 40 minutes before, while at the launch party for my first book, that Mum was turning blue, so I left the party and raced across town in a cab. I was relieved when I arrived to see that my mother was still alive and annoyed to see my sister had her in a headlock. After an hour I suggested she let go for a while, that we take turns on the side Mum was facing. She declined forcefully, with swearwords. My sister had lived on the other side of the world for 40 years. I’m the one who’s been here for Mum, I fumed, the one who’s looked after her. Been there for all her Christmases and birthdays. Taken her on holidays. Why should I be hustled out of her death? I raged inside. I hadn’t a clue how to handle myself or the situation. I couldn’t recall any honest accounts of sibling rivalry at deathbeds. Or remember hearing the accepted protocol. Not even any gossip. I’d read about siblings squabbling over wills often enough, but even they kept the deathbed scene a secret. My new book is shot through with flashbacks from the night my mother died. I couldn’t bear to write down the events in one go. The emotions are still too uncomfortable to conjure up as one whole linear memory. I didn’t intend to write about my family or myself. I set out to write a thriller about an unpleasant, middle-aged woman who constantly fantasised about murder. It turned out that woman was me. During the writing of the book I spoke to friends and acquaintances about that night. First they listened with amazement and then they recounted their own deathbed scenes. Out of the cracks in their happy-family facades crawled tale after tale of sibling rivalry at this stressful and painful moment. Stories that, had I known them at the time, would have provided me with guidance the night my mother died. But my friends’ revelations came too late. I’d already blundered and bludgeoned my way through my mother’s death and made a right hash of it. My book may not be the thriller I intended to write but it is a kind of detective story. More of a whydunnit than a whodunnit. Why on earth were my sister and I unable to contain our deep resentment of each other for even those few precious hours on the night our mother was dying, and where did that resentment come from? Lulled by the daily routine of tapping out words on my laptop, my fingers and brain unclenched and I began to explore how our mutual hostility came about. Two sisters so close in age yet nothing left between us but fury. I had to make sense of our relationship. I wrote without mercy. I went where the book led me. I gouged into my character and my childhood, scrabbled through my mother’s life, surfacing briefly, blinking and dirt-covered, only to dive back down and burrow some more. I wasn’t concerned with who was right and who was wrong, I needed an explanation. To solve the puzzle. As I wrote I discovered that the roots of our transgressions that night went back a very long way. That particular domestic crime scene was decades in the making. I’ve never had any interest in reading the real-life stories of criminals. I don’t want to get inside their heads. But I did learn through writing this book how important it is not to just judge the end result (the crime), but to understand – without excusing the criminal – that if you’d had the same upbringing, education, genes and ancestors, you’d do the same bad things that criminals do. It’s not a comforting thought, that you don’t have a lot of agency in the way your life and personality turn out, your successes and your failures. Especially your smug successes. After handing in the book to the publisher I called my best friend and wailed: “What have I done?” I’d just lived three years of extreme discomfort with my face pushed into my own muck and now I was going to have to talk about it. It didn’t seem a very smart thing to have done. But writing was my way of making sense of my dysfunctional family, and I needed to do it, no matter what the consequences. I’ve burned all my bridges for the sake of getting as near as I can to the truth If my 18-year-old daughter asked me whether she should lead a truth-hunting, artistic, uncompromising life as I have done, I’d say no, don’t do it. It’s a difficult and lonely path for a woman. I’ve burned all my bridges for the sake of getting as near as I can to the truth. And after years of searching for the truth, you find that that’s all you can bear. The truth and nothing but the truth. I’m an isolato now and there’s no going back. No partner can tolerate the searching questions, the rigorousness of it. And you don’t so much lose friends when you write honestly as find that you can’t stand all the little dishonesties and jealousies that underpin so many relationships (I felt the same after having cancer, I let go of a bunch of “friends”). I have no work colleagues as I work from home. I can’t play the game of grinning and appeasing bosses any more. I was always bad at it, and was sacked for not doing it a couple of times. My days consist mostly of sitting at the kitchen table rehashing vile thoughts and deeds on my computer or sleeping too much. I’m unemployable now. The older I get, the more the lying, the losing touch with your true thoughts and feelings and the compromises required to fit in seem not worth the effort. It’s my one go on Earth, why spend any more of it conforming to other people’s rules and ideals? Still, I hope I’m making a small contribution with my truth-telling. The more that people tell the truth about difficult subjects – from feelings towards siblings, marriages and parents, to loneliness, inadequacies and death – the more palatable truthful communication becomes. The more honest we are with each other, the easier it will be to detect the constant warped coercive distortion, via advertising, politics and capitalism, of what it is to be a natural, successful human. Because if you’re not vigilant, you can end up living the wrong life for yourself. And then you die. At the moment I find myself in a privileged position. I am a single woman with no one to answer to, living an uncompromising life, writing uncompromising books. And most radical of all, for a girl who wanted so much when she was young to please and appease and be pretty, I no longer care what other people think. My resentful, militant mother got me here. She coached me to be antagonistic, question all authority and not to conform. She badgered me every day to take an unconventional path through life – a rare thing for a working-class girl to be taught in the 1960s. She drilled into me: never rely on a man; have an interesting life; make your own money; work hard at school – the one thing “they” can never take away from you is your education. All of which (except have an interesting life) I took absolutely no notice of. In my late 30s I stopped thinking my mother was a miserable cynic and wished I’d listened to her more. She was right, as always • To Throw Away Unopeed is published by Faber. To order a copy for £11.99 (RRP £14.99) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.