Extinction is a sad process, as it means the irreversible loss of a species. However, as species do not exist in a vacuum, the effects of extinction do not simply extend only to the loss of species X or Y, but ripple through a whole ecosystem. Particularly for island ecosystems, which have a limited number of species, the loss of one species can lead to ecosystem collapse. For instance, the Hawaiian Islands suffered dramatic extinctions of bird species with the arrival of Europeans. Microscopic studies showed pollen grains adhering to the head feathers on preserved specimens of these extinct birds. Not only did we lose a large number of unique bird species, the Hawaiian ecosystem also lost many of its pollinators (Cox, 1983). The result? Dwindling numbers of many native plants. Ecosystems are intricate webs of organisms that are held together by invisible yet vital strings of ecological interactions. Species compete, eat each other, work together, use one another and, in essence, are rather dependent upon each other to survive. Fossils tells us about which species was where in the past, and which ones we have lost over time. But to reconstruct which place they filled in this intricate web, we have to look beyond the bones. For paleontologists, fossil poo, or coprolites, are an incredible source of information about diet, parasites and behaviour that are seldomly preserved in what remains of the animal itself. Coprolites have been studied for a long time, but most focus has been on identifying what exactly was in them. Now, with powerful molecular tools like high-throughput sequencing, which allow for large quantities of ancient DNA to be analysed at the same time, the study of old poo can be taken to a whole new level. In a new study, Alexander Boast from the University of Adelaide and his colleagues (Boast et al, 2018) focused on fossil coprolites from New Zealand. After having been blissfully isolated for over 55 million years, New Zealand was settled by modern humans in the 13th century. As a result, its unique native fauna, which lacked mammals and contained several species of large, flightless birds, the moa, underwent dramatic change. Within 200 years, 41% of all native birds were extinct, including the moa. Fortunately, for us scientists, the relatively recent extinctions and New Zealand’s temperate weather mean that whatever remains of New Zealand illustrious former inhabitants is exceptionally well preserved, and well suited for ancient DNA studies. Boast and his team sampled 23 coprolites, ranging in age from 124 and 1557 years in age, and deposited by kakapo (the only living species in the study) and four species of moa. Despite all being large-bodied herbivorous birds, differences in the bill shape and different abundances of moa fossil remains across the islands suggests that different moa species had different feeding strategies. For instance, the little bush moa fed nearly exclusively on forest vegetation, whereas the heavy-footed moa was a grazer in open vegetation habitats. Analyses of the DNA fragments preserved in the moa and kakapo coprolites showed that moa and kakapo fed on fungi. Moa also chomped on mosses and ferns. As expected based on morphological and fossil evidence, there were considerable differences in the types of plants in the coprolites of each species of moa, especially in areas where two or more moa species are known to have occurred together. This supports the idea that moa species had specialised diets. The relatively small upland moa had the most wide-ranging taste; its coprolites show that it consumed a diversity of mosses, ferns, and fungi, as well as aquatic plants. The presence of these foods show how the upland moa was able to co-exist with the much larger South Island giant moa, by feeding on relatively inaccessible plants. Upland moa coprolites also contained aquatic parasites that the birds may have picked up in he small enclosed lakes in the mountains. Finding these aquatic parasites in coprolites of upland moa outside the mountain zone suggest that these small moa migrated seasonally up and down the mountains. The finding that moa fed on fungi is particularly interesting, since much of New Zealand’s forests are tightly connected to fungi networks. Moreover, fungi species identified in moa coprolites form so-called sequestrate mushrooms, fruiting bodies that never open and rely upon animal consumption to disperse their spores. In New Zealand, such mushrooms are uniquely brightly colored. This is thought to be an adaptation to the consumption by birds, even though most ground-dwelling birds are extinct. The presence of these fungi in moa coprolites indicates that moa played a major role as spore dispersers of fungi essential to the dominant New Zealand forest type. The authors argue even further that, since kakapo and moa fed on both seed and fungi, they may have provided a unique mechanism for codispersal of native trees and fungi that is now lost. This highlights the unique role that New Zealand’s native birds played in the ecosystem, a role that has no modern analogue. Although moa coprolites have been studied with traditional techniques before, applying swanky new techniques to things we think we know, shows how much there still is for us to discover. Not only resulted this study in a wider range of plants and fungi detected in moa coprolites than traditional studies, it also detected several rare species that had gone unnoticed before. In addition, it identified a range of parasites, some of which were even shared between moa species. Moreover, it also serves as a reminder that when we lose a species, the effects are felt throughout the ecosystem it formed part of. For each species lost, the sum of its loss is larger than just the space it once filled. References Boast, A, et al, 2018. Coprolites reveal ecological interactions lost with the extinction of New Zealand birds. PNAS 115: 1546-1551 Cox, P A, 1983. Extinction of the Hawaiian Avifauna Resulted in a Change of Pollinators for the ieie, Freycinetia arborea. Oikos 41: 195-199