Who are the contenders to be the next home secretary? Downing Street has said a new appointment will not be announced until later on Monday but these are the ministers and MPs who are in contention to replace Amber Rudd. Javid is the favourite for the job and is already being tipped by Tory MPs. The timing could not be better from his perspective; he was on the front of the Sunday Telegraph talking about his personal anger over the treatment of the Windrush migrants, saying: “I thought that could be my mum ... my dad ... my uncle ... it could be me.” Having backed remain, Javid would keep the balance in the top jobs, though he has made it clear since the referendum he is sceptical of softer Brexit options such as remaining in the customs union. Gove has courted the spotlight since his return to the cabinet table, with a series of eye-catching environmental policies, including a well-publicised war on plastics. However, the key test will be whether his personal relationship with May has mended, since the two clashed during the coalition government in a furious briefing war over her performance at the Home Office when she was home secretary. Were he to get the job, it is likely to re-ignite tensions over the anti-immigration messages of the Vote Leave campaign. Hunt made it clear at the last cabinet reshuffle that he did not want to leave the Department of Health. When May attempted to move him to Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, he convinced her to keep him in post. However, the Home Office is certainly a bigger draw and it could be the promotion to tempt him, perhaps even paving the way for an eventual run at the top job. Lidington is only just settling in at the Cabinet Office, replacing May’s old friend Damian Green who was sacked for making misleading statements about pornography found on his office computer. In Rudd, May has lost another ally that she trusted and confidants are now getting fewer by the day in the cabinet, so Lidington could get the role if May believes the priority should be a safe pair of hands. James Brokenshire, the former Home Office minister and Northern Ireland secretary who left the cabinet due to ill health, also fits that bill. Bradley worked under May at the Home Office, giving her direct experience of the complexities of the department. The former culture secretary was moved to Northern Ireland in the latest reshuffle, currently one of the most difficult jobs in government due to Brexit tensions over the Irish border and the collapse of devolved government in Belfast. Appointing Bradley would also mean keeping the 50/50 balance of men and women in the four great offices of state. They are unlikely appointments, but both are capable and experienced former cabinet ministers. To appoint either of them would strip the pro-remain rebels in parliament of a key voice. Both, however, may find the compromise too much, and there is mutual animosity between May and Morgan after a fallout last year over a pair of leather trousers worn by May.