Matej Vydra came off the bench to fire Derby into the Championship’s play-off places and put a dent in Cardiff hopes of securing the second automatic promotion spot. Neil Warnock’s team were set to tighten their grip on second place behind Wolves when Callum Paterson gave them the lead here, but Cameron Jerome and Vydra struck back in the second half to inflict a defeat on the Welsh side. Cardiff remain in second place but only by one point, meaning Fulham or Aston Villa could yet overhaul them with two rounds of matches to go. Warnock is aiming for his eighth promotion in a managerial career spanning more than three decades. When he achieved his first, by leading Scarborough out of the Conference in 1987, Gary Rowett was coming to grips with secondary school. Although a rookie compared to Warnock, Derby’s manager is not without wiles. But, as with his recent predecessors at Pride Park, he has yet to solve the riddle of how to make Derby consistent. This was the second attempt to stage this match, the original meeting having been postponed at short notice last month due to heavy snow. Warnock had not been shy about expressing how suspiciously convenient he found that postponement at a time when Derby were afflicted by a raft of injuries while Cardiff were aiming to go 10 points clear in second place. Cardiff fans pointedly sang: “It’s going to snow in a minute,” at kick-off here but both managers claimed beforehand that no hard feelings lingered. Warnock could take comfort from the fact his team still had formidable momentum going into the rescheduled fixture and Derby were still sagging even if their casualty list had eased. A fourth league defeat in a row would amount to Derby’s worst losing streak since 2011. In a bid to avert that and resurrect their promotion challenge Rowett started with Cameron Jerome up front instead of Vydra, the top scorer who made no impact during Saturday’s defeat here by Middlesbrough. Rowett redeployed the back three system he introduced for that match. Cardiff’s danger from set plays is well-established and Aron Gunnarson was quick to show he would fling in throws at every opportunity. But Derby dealt with them well and were the first to threaten from set pieces, with Bradley Johnson shooting wide following a corner by Tom Lawrence, who, in the 11th minute, produced a free-kick that Neil Etheridge only caught at the second attempt. Six minutes later Lawrence should have scored from open play, Johnson leading a rapid counterattack down the right before feeding Lawrence, who had a clear shot on goal from 15 yards. Etheridge charged off his line and made an excellent save. Scott Carson barely had a meaningful touch before Paterson blasted the ball past him in the 28th minute, the Scotland international running on to a cross by Joe Bennett and lashing a crisp volley into the net from eight yards. Derby were still reeling two minutes later when Junior Hoilett went close following a similar move down the left. The hosts’ pace on the break remained a concern for a mostly sturdy Cardiff but Etheridge’s speed off his line helped address that, notably in the 43rd minute, when he rushed out to pounce at the feet of Andreas Weimann. From the start of the second half Derby tried to whip up a storm of pressure but roused only sporadic gusts. It takes more than that to blow a hole in Cardiff’s defence. By the hour Rowlett had decided it was time for a new approach so put on Vydra to forage behind Jerome. Still the home team struggled to produce enough precision to unhinge the well-organised visitors. Gary Madine was guilty of inaccuracy, too, in the 65th minute, as he skewed a shot wide from nine yards after a Cardiff break. The cost of that miss soon increased. Derby’s equaliser was surprisingly straightforward, coming from a route that Cardiff normally close off. Richard Keogh sent a header into the box and Jerome held off Morrison before diverting the ball past Etheridge from six yards. Vydra completed the turnaround by lashing into the net from 12 yards after a cut-back by Wisdom. Jerome made sure of the result in the last minute, pestering Morrison into another mistake before shooting past Etheridge.