The president of a junior hockey team involved in a major road crash in the rural Canadian province of Saskatchewan said his “whole community is in shock”, after police confirmed 14 people were killed and more than a dozen injured. The Humboldt Broncos team bus collided with a semi-trailer on Highway 35 near Gronlid, more than 200km north-east of Saskatoon late on Friday afternoon. Police said 28 people were on the bus, including the driver. The team had been heading to a Saskatchewan junior hockey league game against the Nipawin Hawks, officials said. The Royal Canadian Mounted Police confirmed on Saturday that 14 people had died and said: “The other 14 people were sent to hospital with a variety of injuries. Three of these people have injuries that are critical in nature.” No names were released as police worked to notify families. Officials would not say if the dead included players – who hail from across Western Canada and range in age from 16 to 21 – or their coaches. There was no mention of the truck driver. A photo tweeted early on Saturday showed three players lying in side-by-side in hospital beds, their hands clasped together. The caption said the three were “bonding and healing” in the hospital. Derek Grayson and Nick bonding and healing in hospital pic.twitter.com/DzesIoT27B “It’s one of the hardest days of my life,” Kevin Garinger, team president for the Broncos, told the Canadian Press. “There have been multiple fatalities our whole community is in shock, we are grieving and we will continue to grieve throughout this ordeal as we try to work toward supporting each other.” He described the Broncos as a close-knit team well-known in the small community of 6,000 where they played. “This team has been an incredible rock in this community,” he said. “They are incredible young men, every one of them.” This is one of the darkest days in the history of Saskatchewan, especially because hockey is so ingrained Garinger had been billeting one of the players at his home and said he did not know the player’s fate. “We don’t know who has passed and we don’t expect to know right away,” he said. “We know that the coroner and their office needs to do their work and let families know.” Reports of the crash sent parents from across western Canada rushing to the scene, fearing the worst. In Humboldt, an arena was hastily turned into a mobile crisis unit. Michelle Straschnitzki, the mother of an 18-year-old player on the team, said her son Ryan had been taken to a hospital in Saskatoon. “We talked to him but he said he couldn’t feel his lower extremities so I don’t know what’s going on,” she said. “I am freaking out. I am so sad for all of the team-mates and I am losing my mind.” Darren Opp, the president of the Nipawin team, said parents, coaching staff and players had gathered in a local church. “It’s a horrible accident, my God,” he said. “It’s very, very bad. There’s uncles and moms and dads waiting to hear whether their sons and nephews are OK.” Kevin Henry, a coach who runs a hockey school in Prince Albert and knows players on the Humboldt team, said the crash had left people reeling. “It is sort of every parent’s worst nightmare,” he said. “This is I would think one of the darkest days in the history of Saskatchewan, especially because hockey is so ingrained in how we grow up here.” Condolences poured in from across Canada, from former hockey players, sports organisations and political leaders. “I cannot imagine what these parents are going through, and my heart goes out to everyone affected by this terrible tragedy, in the Humboldt community and beyond,” Justin Trudeau, Canada’s prime minister, wrote in a tweet late on Friday. “Our thoughts and prayers are extended to the families of our staff and athletes as well as to all who have been impacted by this horrible tragedy.” Within hours of being launched, a fundraising campaign to help the players and families affected by the crash had raised more than C$220,000. 