The suspected California serial killer and rapist arrested on Wednesday in Sacramento is Joseph James DeAngelo, 72, a former police officer, authorities announced on Wednesday. In a news conference, the Sacramento county district attorney, Anne Marie Schubert, said DNA in two 1978 killings in Sacramento led to the arrest of and murder charges against DeAngelo. Prosecutors said they would seek the death penalty. Schubert said the “answer was always going to be in the DNA” and the connection came in the killings of Brian and Katie Maggiore. Authorities say the serial killer, most recently dubbed the Golden State Killer but also called the East Area Rapist, committed at least 12 homicides, 45 rapes and dozens of burglaries across the state in the 1970s and 1980s. In 2016, FBI and California officials renewed their search for the suspect and announced a $50,000 reward for his arrest and conviction. He is linked to more than 175 crimes in all between 1976 and 1986. As he committed crimes across the state, authorities called him by different names. He was dubbed the East Area Rapist after his start in northern California, the Original Night Stalker after a series of southern California slayings, and the Diamond Knot Killer for using the elaborate tie used to bind two of his victims. Most recently called the Golden State Killer, the suspect has been linked through DNA and other evidence to scores of crimes. Armed with a gun, the masked rapist would break into homes while single women or couples were sleeping. He would tie up the man and pile dishes on his back, then rape the woman while threatening to kill them both if the dishes tumbled. He often took souvenirs, notably coins and jewelry, from his victims, who ranged in age from 13 to 41. A woman who was sexually assaulted in California in 1976 by a man believed to be the East Area Rapist and who now lives in South Carolina told the Island Packet newspaper on Wednesday that she has been contacted by detectives about an arrest. The Associated Press typically does not name victims of sexual abuse. “I’m overwhelmed with joy. I’ve been crying, sobbing,” the woman said.