Should you ever need cheering up, I can recommend 11am at Stanley Road primary in Oldham. That’s when lunch starts for the youngest children and it is pure excitement; the kind you used to have when horizons were short, days were long and nothing else needed bothering about. First comes the babble of voices, far bigger than the little bodies that follow, swaddled in plump anoraks despite the sun outside. They take crockery, these four- and five-year-olds who, back in September, didn’t know how to hold a knife and fork – and get down to the serious business of choosing. Behind the counter stands Sheena Fineran: black hat, big specs, magenta polo and, after 30 years as a dinner lady, in complete mastery of her domain. “When I started, it was lumpy mash. It was liver. It was cheap, fried, nasty food. “Today we’re the best.” Oldham’s school meals are high quality, wholesome and prize-winning. “What I see now – that’s what I’d give my family.” Almost everything in these serving trays has been cooked from scratch this morning in the school’s own kitchen. That roast chicken comes from one of 14 birds that Fineran came in at 6am to roast and strip, singeing her own fingers as she did so. The fish cake is baked with catch certified by the Marine Stewardship Council. More options are laid out here than in most office canteens I’ve visited and, from the carrots up, as much of the food as possible is organic and locally sourced. Then a boy far shorter and shyer than the rest reaches the front of the queue. “How are you, sweetie?” Fineran crouches to infant eye level. Asif (not his real name) had a kidney transplant two years ago and she looks out for him. “Would you like … ” – a pause, as all good treats deserve – “a flapjack? Or would you like … a biscuit? Or would you like … ” and she reels off practically a stall’s worth of fresh fruit. A whisper comes back: “Pineapple.” “I bet there’s some hiding,” laughs a colleague, and Fineran bustles off to root it out. Any council would be proud of serving meals that prompt children to present teachers their cleaned-out plates as if they were sports day trophies – but to see what makes this daily ballet such a vast achievement you need to contrast it with those carrying lunchboxes. From one, a boy of seven pulls out some kebab and processed cheese. A few tables down sits a girl chewing stiff chicken nuggets. Others turn up with cold toast or last night’s chips. Some children come to school on an empty stomach and go home to no supper. Headteacher Rebecca Howarth runs a breakfast club and makes sure they get double lunches, even though it comes out of her shrinking budget. “We’ll find some way to do it. You can’t have children going hungry. I can’t.” In 2016 the Office for National Statistics found Oldham to be the poorest town in England . In some of its neighbourhoods, a boy born today can expect to die soon after he hits 70. His counterpart raised just off London’s swanky Brompton Road would be forecast to live until he is 96. In one of the richest societies in human history, something as simple as being born into the wrong class in the wrong town can knock more than 25 years off your life. As mementoes of its industrial, radical past, Oldham has some beautiful redbrick buildings. What it lacks is cash. While Fineran and I are chatting, one of her colleagues comes over to ask whether it’s true that Theresa May is going to scrap free school meals for the under-sevens. When she hears not, her relief is like the sun breaking through clouds: her own boy starts reception this September. What are poor children worth? What do they deserve? The official answer is everything, just like every other child. The reality is that hundreds of thousands of children across Britain go hungry now. Headteachers report grey-skinned pupils “filling their pockets” at the school canteen, while London GPs treat youngsters with that Victorian disease caused by poor diet, rickets. Yet in Oldham the school dinner service runs on the principle that those who have the least also deserve the best possible. It delivers that within very tight budgets, spending a rock-bottom 65p on food for every meal and charging a mere £2.10. For that price it serves up a menu that’s about 20% organic, with much else sourced regionally. The department runs community cookery classes for parents. Among the awards for the quality and sustainability of its produce, it’s the only council in the north-west to have won the Food for Life gold mark, “the Michelin stars for ingredient quality”, according to Rob Percival of the Soil Association. Even Jamie Oliver, who almost single-handedly killed the Turkey Twizzler, has sighed: “Feeding your kid right is all considered very posh and middle class.” Yet here it is, happening in the poorest nook of England – and not in some bijou cafe serving 20 foodies and their Instagram accounts, but a municipal office with 86 school kitchens dishing out 17,000 meals a day. Without a council subsidy, the service has to pay its way and it competes with the likes of Compass, also tendering for local school contracts. Has you or your community come up with answers to doing things differently? If so we'd like to hear from you.  Share your stories via this form and we'll be in touch. You can share your experiences anonymously. We’ll include some of your stories in our reporting. So what’s the magic formula? Whoever you ask, it comes down to two words: Anne Burns. Head of Oldham’s school dinner department, she’s also “a force of nature”, says public food academic Kevin Morgan. Visitors from Manchester mayor Andy Burnham’s office, who want the rest of the area to learn from Oldham’s example on school meals, tell her: “If only we could cut you up into pieces and spread you around.” Anyone slicing into Burns would immediately find two things: an expertise on food and a love of animals. Having done school dinners for 40 years, since training as a cook aged 16, she abhors “ping meals” and “plastic food”. When “Jamie started shaking the tree” and campaigning for better school meals in the middle of the last decade, he found a ready audience in the recently-promoted Burns. On the office noticeboard is a page from Chat magazine headlined “Saved by my dog!” It tells the story of how, early one morning three years ago, Burns began spewing blood and mucus before passing out. Only her sleek brown weimaraner, Alice (one of her six dogs and seven cats at the time) brought her round by licking her face and smacking her with her paws. Rushing her into hospital theatre, the surgeon declared: “I should be signing your death certificate.” She needs that toughness, arguing for better food in a council that can always find uses for spare money and is staffed largely by men in suits. As if to exemplify their outsider status, she and her team of women, with 125 years’ catering experience between them, work out of a bungalow plonked next to the town hall. It’s a Cinderella service, as school catering is across the country, but as she tells her team: “Tonight, girls, Cinderella’s off to the ball!” More profoundly, Burns is a public servant who looks, sounds and understands the public she serves. Born just down the road in Rochdale, she still lives there – and in over four decades she’s only ever worked for two local authorities. Mum a housewife, dad a painter-decorator who, at 80, still does the odd job. The family home had no phone, but when she remembers her “normal working-class” childhood, it’s of camping all summer long and cricket matches that lasted weeks. She wasn’t raised to be second best, nor does she expect it of the children she feeds. “Those kiddies are our future,” she says. “They’re the most important people. Without them, where do we go?” Contrast that plaintiveness with the high-flier who hops from council to consultancy and whose main job is to tell the residents who pay his salary how terrible their lifestyles are and how their homes need to be replaced with luxury flats. When Burns began altering her menu, by far and away her department’s main supplier was Brakes. Yet the giant multinational was far too big to accommodate the diet fads of some new manager at a town council. Organic wholemeal flour? Brakes was never going to keep a pallet exclusively for Oldham’s use. Which left a gap in the market for small independents, such as TC Meats. Walk into its offices and you’re in no doubt about the chief topic of conversation. Above the factory is a shrine to Manchester United’s Wayne Rooney that presumably doubles as a workplace: a giant poster hails ‘The Maradona of Manchester’, a signed shirt is on the wall, and his neon-yellow boots sit in a glass box on the boss’s coffee table. Some faceless conglomerate this is not. TC Meats sorted out Burns with organic beef and milk and, after a bit of phoning around, it also found a farm selling organic eggs. And why wouldn’t they make the effort? Unlike at Brakes, TC Meats needs Oldham for a big chunk of business. Together with a fruit and veg distributor in Preston, these two relatively local firms have taken a far bigger share of Burns’ budget – while she knows exactly where her produce is coming from. The depth of those partnerships means that Burns can sometimes lean on her suppliers to keep her costs within budget. This is localism with a small “l”. It keeps public money close to home and uses it to grow the local economy; and it’s why Morgan describes Burns as “a heroine of public-sector innovation”. For Burns, it’s a choice made not out of ideology but pragmatism. “When the horsemeat scandal came, I slept soundly in my bed,” she says. “We don’t serve stuff from the other side of the world. We know exactly where it comes from.” This can be hard, especially now that the recent Brexit-induced swoon of the pound is pushing up food prices. Soil Association surveys suggest that fresh veg prices have gone up 20% over the past 12 months, while some yoghurt has jumped 60%. Burns moans about “crazy, crazy” prices for cheese and is having to trim the proportion of organic product she serves in her meals. And while making everything from scratch is now a given, she remembers the first time the kitchen staff tried to make sponge cakes. “Oh my god! We had sponges this high [her hand rises to the level of a toddler]. We had them this low [half an inch off her desk]. But now it’s the norm. Home-baked biscuits, lasagnes, curries. We take pride in what we’re producing.” At Stanley Road primary, Fineran and her team are dishing out for the 10-year-olds. Do the students really care whether their potatoes are organic or their fish is sustainably sourced? “For me, it’s an expense; for them it’s an education. We’re giving these kids a good start here,” says Fineran. “I see them come in aged four and go at 11, and it’s an absolute joy to see them doing brilliantly in maths and English and socialising. It’s like watching my children. It’s an achievement to which I’ve contributed a small part. “We’re deprived – but we’re not.” • Aditya Chakrabortty is senior economics commentator for the Guardian Join Aditya below the line at noon (BST) today (Wednesday 25 April) for a special discussion of this piece and the Alternatives series.