Yulia Skripal has said she is recovering from the nerve agent attack on her and her father, Sergei, and thanked the people of Salisbury for their support, but said she is feeling disoriented. The first public words from either of the Skripals since the attack on 4 March came after Sergei’s niece, Viktoria, claimed from Moscow that Yulia had told her both she and her father were getting better. In a statement issued by the Metropolitan police, Yulia, 33, said: “I woke up over a week ago now and am glad to say my strength is growing daily. I am grateful for the interest in me and for the many messages of goodwill that I have received. “I have many people to thank for my recovery and would especially like to mention the people of Salisbury that came to my aid when my father and I were incapacitated. Further than that, I would like to thank the staff at Salisbury district hospital for their care and professionalism. “I am sure you appreciate that the entire episode is somewhat disorientating, and I hope that you’ll respect my privacy and that of my family during the period of my convalescence.” The statement was issued just hours after Viktoria Skripal said she had spoken by phone to Yulia. “She said everything is fine and she is doing OK,” Viktoria told the Guardian by telephone from Moscow. “That’s all I’m going to say.” Viktoria then said a transcript of their phone call would soon be released by Russian news agencies. “Even in English,” she added. The audio recording of the conversation, which was made by Viktoria despite not knowing it was Yulia calling her when she picked up the phone, was later played on a talkshow on the Russian state-run television station Russia-1. In the remarks carried by Russian television, a voice said to be that of Yulia told her relative that “everything’s OK, everything can be solved, everything can be healed”. When asked about her father’s condition, she said: “Everything’s OK, he’s resting now, he’s sleeping. Everyone’s health is OK. No one has had any irreversible [harm].” Yulia appeared to turn down a visit from her cousin, citing the commotion around the case. In the phone conversation, the voice attributed to Viktoria said she hoped to receive a visa on Friday and fly to the UK on Monday. “Vika, nobody will give you a visa,” came the reply. Viktoria responded: “If they give it, I need you to tell me whether I can visit you or not, tell me that I can.”The woman said to be Yulia demurred. “I think no, there is such a situation now, we’ll sort it out later,” she said. She added: “Later, we will get it all sorted later, everything’s fine, we’ll see later.” Alexander Yakovenko, the Russian ambassador to the UK, was asked if the phone conversation was genuine at a lengthy press conference at the embassy in London on Thursday. He did not directly reply, but said the UK must give Russia immediate access to Yulia. “We want to know what happened here,” he said. “This is not a game. For us it is not a joke, believe me. These citizens are poisoned and we want to know the truth.” Yakovenko said he was “really happy” at Yulia’s recovery, adding that she could be the key to understanding who was behind the attack. He said he expected her to eventually return to Russia. He said he also hoped Sergei would recover, adding: “Russia has no problem with him, he spent several years in prison and that is that.” On Wednesday evening, Viktoria said she had applied for a British visa and coordinated her trip with the Russian embassy in London. She said she expected Yakovenko to meet her, adding that he had helped her apply for a passport. “At the moment I have just one goal: fly there and get Yulia, at the very least Yulia,” she said on Russia-1. Sergei’s foreign citizenship made his situation “more complicated”, she said. Yakovenko said on Thursday that he hoped Viktoria would be granted a British visa to visit Yulia on humanitarian grounds, adding he personally wanted to meet Viktoria, find her accommodation and provide translation services. “The British have so far not been responsive about the visa,” he said. “The timing of the visit is up to her, and how long she stays is up to her.” He insisted a visit by Viktoria was not a substitute for consular Russian diplomatic access to Sergei and Yulia. Viktoria appeared on several Russian talkshows on Wednesday, including one with Andrei Lugovoi and Dmitry Kovtun, both accused in the 2006 poisoning of the former spy Alexander Litvinenko in London. Last week, Salisbury NHS foundation trust said Yulia was no longer in a critical condition, describing her medical state as stable. Her father’s condition was described by the hospital as still critical but stable. Sergei Skripal, 66, is believed to have been the main target of the attack. NHS England said on Thursday that its policy was only to give an update on the Skripals’ condition when there had been a significant change. If Sergei is “fine”, it would be a remarkable turnaround from the previous detailed prognosis that emerged. A high court judgment related to the case and published after a hearing on 20, 21 and 22 March revealed that both Skripals were heavily sedated. “The precise effect of their exposure on their long-term health remains unclear, albeit medical tests indicate that their mental capacity might be compromised to an unknown and so far unascertained degree,” the judgment said.