You can understand why Larry Mize feels so excited when he returns home to the Masters every year. “It’s very special to be here,” he said earlier this week. “I just can’t believe I get to come back every year. A childhood dream and I’m still living it.” Not only is Mize the longest serving champion in the field this week, but the 59-year-old is also playing in his 35th consecutive Masters. After making three of the last four cuts at Augusta, he is showing no signs of ending his love affair with the tournament. Mize grew up in Augusta and winning the Masters was always his “ultimate golfing dream” but he has often been denied the respect his achievement deserves. Before he won the tournament in 1987, Mize was known for the odd collapse or two, harshly nicknamed “Larry D. Mize”. And, when he did win his hometown major, he was derided as a lucky champion. Trawl the web for articles about the worst or luckiest players to have won a major and his name is usually mentioned. The debate about whether Mize was a lucky major winner always seems to focus on one shot he played during the play-off on the Sunday afternoon. His 140-foot chip on the 11th hole was a moment of high sporting drama, giving him victory against the two pre-tournament favourites, Greg Norman and Seve Ballesteros, but was it purely luck? Surely Mize was aiming to get the ball in the hole, just as Tiger Woods was when he struck his miracle shot in 2005? And what about the 73 holes that preceded Mize’s defining moment? A lot of water had passed under the Hogan, Nelson and Sarazen bridges by the time 85 golfers had been whittled down to just three players on that dramatic Sunday. A look at the leaderboard on the Sunday morning emphasises just how exciting the Masters was in 1987. Eight players were separated by three shots going into the final day. Ben Crenshaw and Roger Maltbie shared the lead on four-under par; Bernhard Langer and Norman were poised to attack on three-under; and Ballesteros, Mize, Chen Tze-chung and Curtis Strange were just one shot further back. Langer’s assessment of the situation was spot on: “It will boil down to what it always boils down to – the last nine holes. There are so many players within five, six or seven shots that you can’t make anyone the favourite.” Jodie Mudd hit a 69 to set an initial clubhouse lead of two-under before Mize’s superb birdie on the last pushed the lead to three-under. Various players threatened to pip his target, but holding your nerve on the final day of the Masters is easier said than done. Strange had been three-under after eight holes but dropped five shots in four holes; Langer was on three-under midway through his round but bogeys at 10, 12, 14, and 15 killed his challenge; Chen failed to recover after a double bogey on the 11th; and neither Maltbie nor Crenshaw could find the birdie they needed on the 18th to join Mize in a play-off. Norman and Ballesteros were up to the challenge. Ballesteros made a late charge for his third green jacket with birdies at 15 and 17 before a fine up-and-down from sand at the last gave him a share of the clubhouse lead. Norman also made the play-off, but only after he had come within inches of winning his second major. “I couldn’t believe it missed,” he said after his birdie effort on the 18th slipped agonisingly past the hole. And so to the sudden death three-way play-off. Mize, facing world No1 Norman and world No3 Ballesteros, was the outsider, but he came closest to victory when they played the 10th for the second time that afternoon. A superb approach shot gave him the opportunity to wrap things up with a birdie but his putt lacked conviction. He was not the only player to make a costly mistake on the first play-off hole; Ballesteros missed a simple putt and dropped out of contention. It was another sad conclusion to a Masters tournament for the Spaniard. Had things worked out slightly differently, he could have won the tournament in 1985, 1986 and 1987, but each time he left empty-handed. He walked back to the clubhouse in tears and later complained that the Masters should not be decided in a sudden death play-off format. After three-putting from 20 feet, sadly he only had himself to blame. Norman and Mize moved on to the 11th, the start of Amen Corner, and ultimately the end of the 1987 Masters. Mize’s disgusted reaction after his second to the par four said it all. Pushing his shot way right, his chances of getting up and down from 140-feet and staying in the play-off now looked slim. With Norman on the edge of the green, Mize was in trouble. And then it happened. The moment that cemented Mize’s place in golfing history forever more. As his chip moved towards the hole, the impossible all of a sudden began to look probable. The ball hit the flag and dropped in. Mize leapt around the 11th green, losing his visor in the process, with the patrons whooping and hollering in amazement. “And they say the meek shall inherit the earth,” commented Peter Alliss as the enormity of the moment hit home. “Greg Norman must be feeling rather sick in the tummy.” So true. After being denied in the previous major by Bob Tway’s bunker shot at the final hole, Norman was stunned: “I just looked up above and thought ‘Why does this always happen to me?’” Norman’s final effort slipped past and Mize, the local boy who had operated a scoreboard at the tournament during his teenage years, was the Masters champion. “I’ve got to thank the Good Lord – and a little bit of luck,” said Mize as he received his green jacket from Jack Nicklaus. It was only the second time he had won a tournament on the PGA tour and his victory gave him automatic qualification for the Ryder Cup. That 140-foot chip on the 11th hole changed his life but, as the dust settled, the murmurings about his triumph started. Mize was called lucky but he had one man on his side: the player he defeated. “I feel sorry for him, I really do,” Norman said before the 1988 Masters. “A lot of people call it a fluke. They tell me it was too bad I had to lose on such a lucky shot. I keep telling those people that he wasn’t trying to make a bogey. He was trying to make that shot and that’s exactly what he did.” Lucky or not, the last word should go to the champion. “I don’t think it was a fluke. People can think whatever they want. It doesn’t bother me. I don’t have any trouble with it. Remember, I played 73 other holes before that shot. It was an incredible shot. But that’s the way it goes. It can go in from anywhere. And sometimes, it does.” • This article appeared first on That 1980s Sports Blog• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter