The middle of April is notoriously unpredictable for those who like to eat seasonally. A quick glance at my notes reveals how this time last year we tucked into a bowl of chorizo stew by the fire and the year before a salad of broad beans, ricotta and pea shoots in the garden. Those who like to plan the week’s eating in advance might find themselves thwarted by the capriciousness of our climate. The week’s cooking has been a succession of dishes to straddle the seasons, while I tried not be caught out with an unsuitable dinner. In other words, cool-weather food with a spring in its step. One of the best meals involved bowls of pasta with a creamy basil-scented lentil sauce: a deeply sustaining bowl of carbs, but without the heaviness of a meat ragù. I made a backbone of slowly softened onions and thyme, dried mushrooms and carrots, but instead of the usual minced meat I used Le Puy lentils. I added a further mellow note with a trickle of balsamic vinegar then freshened things up by tossing the wide ribbons of pasta with a peppery basil butter. It was a dish that would have satisfied whatever the weather threw at us. Still nothing much doing on the fruit front, but we continue to be blessed with some splendid pears. I found a 2kg bag for £2.99 the other day and they have been fine for cooking. They ended their days in a light syrup flavoured with strips of orange peel and cloves, then layered with mascarpone custard, a cloud of whipped cream and a scattering of butterscotch. A spring treat, but even better the next day when the cinder toffee had time to melt into the thick layer of cream. Serves 4carrot 1, largeshallots 3, mediumolive oil 4 tbspgarlic 2 plump clovesthyme leaves 1 tbspdried porcini 15gwater 700ml, just boiledsmall green lentils, such as Le Puy 250gcrème fraîche 3 heaped tbspbalsamic vinegar 1 tbsp to taste For the pasta:pappardelle 250gbasil 25golive oil 100ml To serve: basil and parsley a chopped handful Peel and finely dice the carrot and shallots. Warm the olive oil in a pan, add the carrots and shallots and cook over a low to moderate heat for 10 minutes or so, until the carrots are soft and the shallots pale gold. Peel and finely slice the garlic then stir into the softening aromatics with the thyme leaves and some black pepper. Keep the heat fairly low. Put the porcini in a pan, pour in the just-boiled water then leave to infuse for 10 minutes. Bring to the boil, then stir in the lentils. Lower the heat and leave to cook for 25 minutes, adding salt for the final 10 minutes. Stir the porcini stock into the carrots and shallots. Ladle half the mixture into a blender or food processor and reduce to a rough purée, then return to the pan to thicken the sauce. Stir in the crème fraîche and vinegar. Check the seasoning, then cover partially with a lid and leave on a low heat. Bring a large pan of water to the boil, salt it, then add the pasta and let it boil until tender and toothsome, about 9 minutes. Process the basil and olive oil to a loose green paste. Drain the pasta, return to the pan and fold in the basil oil until the pasta is evenly coated. Divide the pasta between bowls, spoon over the lentil sauce and serve with chopped herbs. Make your own cinder toffee or butterscotch or buy it ready made. Serves 6For the trifle:pears 4caster sugar 5 tbspwater 750mlcloves 3orange zest 2 short stripssavoiardi biscuits, amaretti or trifle sponges 150gmarsala 100ml, dry For the mascarpone cream:eggs 2, separatedcaster sugar 2 lightly heaped tbspmascarpone 250gvanilla seeds a knifepointdouble cream 250ml To decorate: cinder toffee 150g Peel the pears, halve them and remove their cores. Bring the sugar and water to the boil in a saucepan, add the cloves and orange zest, then add the pears. Lower the heat to a gentle simmer, then leave to soften. Check their progress. They will take anything from 10 to 30 minutes, depending on their ripeness. Crumble the biscuits or sponge into the bottom of a large, deep bowl, pour over the marsala, then press the sponge into the liquid with a spoon until lightly moistened. Remove 100ml of the pear cooking syrup and spoon that over the biscuits, too. They should be nicely soaked in marsala and syrup. Slice each pear half into 4 then lay them over the surface of the soaked biscuits and set aside. Make the custard layer by beating the egg yolks and sugar until light and fluffy, a job most best done with a food mixer, then fold in the mascarpone and vanilla. Beat the whites until thick, then fold into the mascarpone cream and pile on top of the layer of pears. Cover tightly with clingfilm and refrigerate for 1 hour. Whip the cream, spread on top of the trifle then refrigerate for at least 2 hours or, if possible, overnight. To serve, crush the cinder toffee then scatter on top of the cream. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater