Research says that young Britons are unhappy and lack confidence in themselves and their future. But what are the reasons for this? According to the Prince’s Trust the results from its UK Youth Index shows that three out of five regularly feel stressed about jobs and money, with half saying they experienced a mental health problems, and that the figures should “ring alarm bells”. Respondents to a Guardian callout said their enormous student debt and the prospect of not being able to own a home were some of the reasons for their generation’s unhappiness. Here are some other suggestions from young people across Britain. ‘Three years in employment and my debt is £46,000’: Alex, 23, software developer, London I went to university to study physics with the hope of going into scientific research. But after considering factors such as student debt I realised the reality of the situation, and decided to look for jobs that focused around pay instead. I immediately obtained a job after uni but three years on - and despite paying monthly payments of approx £100-150 - my student debt is now at £46,000 due to interest. ‘Students study at a huge financial cost’: Eloise Millard, 23, student, Sheffield Young people are often sold the lie they need to get to university to get where they need to be. Students study at a huge financial cost, and graduate only to be able not to find work in the fields they want to go into. University has become desirable because of the freedom it gives young people who have never lived away from home. We need to encourage more into vocational jobs and reaffirm to them that these are worthy careers. ‘There’s still a stigma around mental health’: Gaby, 16, student, Huddersfield Mental health problems are incredibly common among young people. Many teens have to turn to the internet or even their friends to help them, because the resources simply aren’t there, not to mention the stigma around mental health. In terms of what can be done to improve things, we just want a government that will listen to us ‘There’s unbelievable amounts of pressure at school’: Steph, 19, student, Glasgow Schools put unbelievable amounts of pressure on young people with studying. For me personally, I was so stressed and anxious in school that I would suffer panic attacks. One time I broke down crying in the middle of class. Schools must stop scaring pupils into studying by threatening that they will be dropped from the course because this has a terrible impact on young people’s mental health. ‘I won’t be able to afford to rent let alone buy’: Dina Madan, 19, student, Glasgow My mum was able to buy and rent out a flat in Glasgow’s city centre when she was 17-years-old and working at the Department for Work and Pensions. I know I won’t even be able to afford to rent a flat let alone buy one! Housing prices and rent need to come down or young people are going to be living at home forever - it’s inevitable. ‘I can only live in shared housing on my current wage’: Rhea, 23, coordinator in the voluntary sector, Leeds I can only live in shared housing on my current wage. I have started saving for a deposit with the view to buy within ten years, and I am able to save every month only due to the fact I live in a northern city, where cost of living is cheaper. If the government and society do not act now, we will experience the consequences of a stressed out, burned out generation. ‘Social media has poisoned young people’: Joe, 24, self-employed, East Midlands The whole text generation has taken a lot of character out of young people’s communication and left a lot of them strangers to themselves. The influence of social media has poisoned the generations that have only ever known that life too. ‘Every single stupid decision is forever saved online’: Theo, 17, student, Kent People say we are lucky to have phones and all this technology when in reality it’s having a negative effect. People can’t make mistakes anymore because it will always come back to haunt them; every single stupid decision is forever saved online which makes growing up harder as you have learn and grow from these embarrassing things. ‘There’s a definite feeling of loneliness’: Harry, 21, student, Reading Although we are connected technologically like never before there’s a definite feeling of loneliness. I think much of this stems from a lack of community. The loneliness, constant competition and the feeling of not being listened to or taken advantage of takes a toll. I think we need a change in what we value as a society. Instead of focusing so much on what we produce we should instead look at what actually matters in life. ‘Being the only one in my friendship group without a job makes me feel lonely’: Lucy, 23, graduate, Derbyshire Despite having an excellent group of friends I feel lonely and isolated. I try not to spend too much time on social media, but when I scroll through and see the curated versions of people’s lives, it makes me feel worse, even though I know people only share the good stuff. Being the only one in my friendship group without a job also makes me feel lonely. They’re great friends and never bring it up or make me feel bad about it, but inside I feel worthless because nobody will hire me. ‘I’m hoping to be able to move to France’: Dominic, 16, student, London Brexit is one of the things giving young people like me the impression that the electorate is dragging this country down the toilet. I’m learning French in the hope of moving to France when I’ve finished my education as I feel I may be able to live a better life there. ‘I am ashamed to be British’: Jane, trainee with the European Commission, Brussels I think the political situation has a lot to do with it. We are disillusioned, with no good options and no clear way forward. I think it’s difficult not to be unhappy when your country/nationality (which is, after all, a huge part of one’s identity, even if it’s subconscious) is so utterly shameful - I am ashamed to be British. Some names have been changed.