Virgil van Dijk has admitted Liverpool let their standards slip against West Bromwich Albion but is adamant Roma will prove a welcome and contrasting proposition at Anfield on Tuesday evening. His manager, Jürgen Klopp, described Saturday’s 2-2 draw as “useless” for both teams but Van Dijk has urged calm and his team-mates to seize the opportunity in front of them in the Champions League, with passage to the final in Kiev on 26 May at stake. Liverpool squandered a two-goal lead at the Hawthorns after struggling to cope with set pieces late on but Van Dijk is confident they will rise to the occasion in the semi-final first leg. “We need to do better,” he said. “You have to tell each other the truth you cannot be nice and happy when we want to achieve so much as a team and a club. A draw is not good enough but there is no reason to panic. There is no need to stress.” Asked if Liverpool’s standards dropped after goals from Danny Ings and Mohamed Salah, who scored his 31st Premier League goal of the season, had put them in control. Van Dijk said: “I think so. [But] I don’t worry at all. They [West Brom] are fighting for their lives so in the end they are very direct, balls into the channel, work hard, trying to get fouls and free-kicks and we didn’t cope with that how we should have. To concede two goals from set pieces as well where we have always the same roles to do and we didn’t do that. So it is disappointing but I am not worried at all.” Klopp used the trip to West Brom to make five changes, with Roberto Firmino among those starting on the bench, while Daniele De Rossi and the Roma top-scorer Edin Dzeko will arrive on Merseyside refreshed after being rested for their comfortable 3-0 win over Spal on Saturday. After witnessing Roma’s extraordinary comeback against Barcelona to advance from the quarter-finals on away goals, Liverpool, who will hold their pre-match team meeting on Monday, will not be taking anything for granted against the Serie A side. “It will be hard work and we need to be ready for anything and then obviously the tough game in Rome,” Van Dijk said. “That will be a hard one as well, but we need to enjoy that because not many players, teams come to this stage and have the chance of getting to a final. We will prepare as well as we can and see what happens. “I have not played against Dzeko before but everyone knows the result against Barcelona. They are a very good team and we have to be ready. I don’t fear anyone. We play a different style to Roma. It will be a different game to this one. The system we played at the end today won’t be the same.” Klopp cut an agitated figure at full time on Saturday, gesticulating with Joe Gomez and Ragnar Klavan, both of whom are unlikely to feature against Roma, with Trent Alexander-Arnold and Dejan Lovren expected to be restored in defence. Andrew Robertson and Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain are also expected to return. While Klopp acknowledged a point at West Brom was not the worst outcome, he hopes his players can use any frustration as a catalyst to help them build a first-leg lead. “I don’t have to tell them that was not good enough, we can do better,” Klopp said. “It is Roma and it will be a completely different game. I like the attitude of the boys. I am sure the boys will be ready.” Asked how Roma would differ from West Brom, Klopp replied: “They have set pieces as well but they don’t play only set pieces. Their boys play sometimes on the ground and then you can play football.”