By her own admission, a fifth in her pet event in Rio was “possibly the greatest choke in Olympic history”. Such was the emotional baggage of that defeat, Cate Campbell took a sabbatical from the sport last year. But, just three days into the Commonwealth Games, Campbell is leaving behind those demons in the most emphatic fashion possible, on Saturday breaking her own Commonwealth Games record with a time of 23.78 to take gold in the women’s 50m freestyle. To Cate’s delight, sister Bronte came in equal-second with a time of 24.26, in a dead heat finish with Canada’s Taylor Ruck. Campbell shed tears during the medal ceremony and national anthem, seemingly as much in relief as joy. Speaking after the race, she admitted a “love-hate relationship” with the pressure of finals. “That’s what we thrive on, and the thing I’ll probably miss the most when we retire. As much as you hate it, you love it at the same time,” she said. Having won gold with her sister in the 4x100 medley event on Thursday, meanwhile, Bronte said she was proud of Cate’s decisive comeback. “Maybe we could switch the order around every now and again,” she laughed. “It never gets old, I could keep doing that for a long time ... I’m so happy.” Two races later, Emily Seebohm looked set to deliver another fairytale finish for Australia in the pool, turning at the 50m mark of the 100m backstroke 0.13 under world record time, before missing out on gold by a fingernail to the holder of that record in Kylie Masse. Masse would not best her own world record time, but did surpass her Games record, at 58.63. The result continued a budding rivalry: Seebohm was looking for her third consecutive Games gold medal in the event, but Masse is the current world champion since arriving on the scene as a bronze medallist at Rio. Taking bronze, Canada’s Taylor Ruck continued an excellent night in the pool, backing up a silver just several races earlier in the women’s 50m freestyle. Despite the disappointment of finishing second, Seebohm said the rivalry with Masse continued to push her swimming to new heights. “To actually finish so close together is pretty incredible in itself. It’s just another battle and she makes me a better backstroker,” she said. But it was the final race of the night that had the home crowd in raptures, as Australia finished with a thrilling 4x200m women’s freestyle relay gold with 17-year-old Ariarne Titmus just holding off an indefatigable Ruck of Canada to ensure a new Games record of 7:48:04. Emma McKeon got Australia off to an excellent start, turning under world record time at both the 50 and 100m splits. England’s Siobhan O’Connor made up significant ground for England in the third leg against Brianna Throssell, but all four Australian swimmers fought off fierce opposition to emerge triumphant. It was Australia’s seventh of eight gold medals in the event since 1986. Earlier in the night, Southport local David Morgan thrilled the home crowd in the men’s 200m final, taking out silver, but was ultimately no match for South African Chad le Clos, who broke his own Commonwealth games record with a time of 1:54:00. Le Clos became only the second male swimmer in history to win the same event at three consecutive Commonwealth events. The men’s SB8 100m breastroke final delivered Australia’s first trifecta for the night in the pool, with Timothy Disken doubling up after he took gold in the men’s S9 100m freestyle the night before. He took gold from Timothy Hodge, with Blake Cochrane finishing third. No such luck in the women’s SM10 200m individual medley, where New Zealand took their first gold medal in the pool, world record holder Sophie Pascoe blasting the field. Australia’s Katherine Downie just missed out on the silver, finishing .02 seconds behind Canada’s Aurelie Rivard. Over at the Anna Meares Velodrome, there was more joy for Australia with Kaarle McCullouch taking gold in the women’s 500m time trial, holding off compatriot Steph Morton, who took silver to go with her two gold at the Games to date. McCulloch and Morton had on Friday teamed up to win gold for Australia in the women’s team sprint. It was teammates working together in the men’s 15km scratch race however as Australia’s riders Campbell Stewart and Cameron Meyer combined to deliver Sam Welsford gold in one of the epic all-time finals.Strangely, Jessica Gallagher finished second in the women’s para (B&VI) 1000m time trial, but finished without a silver medal due to a lack of competitors in the women’s event. “It’s heartbreaking,” said Gallagher of the technicality. “We competed in the world championships a few weeks ago and won two silvers. And to come to this Commonwealth Games and not get a medal – that was a choice they [the organisers] made. “But we proved at the world champs we’re the second best team in the world. And we proved that again here. It’s not about trinkets, it’s about doing the best for your country.”Australia’s Brad Henderson picked up bronze by defeating Muhammad Afiq Afify Rizan in the men’s B&VI sprint. Earlier in the day, all did not go to plan for world champion Matt Glaetzer, favourite for gold in the men’s sprint. Glaetzer had broken the Commonwealth Games record in his initial heat with a time of 9.583 seconds, but failed to qualify for the men’s final after a shock loss to Malaysia’s Muhammad Sahrom – who had qualified last of 16 riders. The 25-year-old said the defeat was “embarrassing” and blamed a tactical error. “I was just coming into the bell too slow. I needed to be accelerating not just controlling. I tried to get through with minimum effort.” “It was a nightmare unfolding with three quarters of a lap to go. I knew I had stuffed it and had to give it all to fight but the race was gone by then. It’s devastating because just a small improvement on flow and I could have been out quicker. It was such an elementary mistake.” It was better news for compatriot Jacob Schmid, who went some way to avenging the shock loss, beating Glaetzer’s victor in the bronze medal sprint. Elsewhere, Australia’s triathlon team, consisting of Gillian Backhouse, Matthew Hauser, Ashleigh Gentle and Jacob Birtwhistle won gold at the mixed relay event, with a time of 1:17.36 ahead of rivals Britain. Gentle was instrumental in the win, at first giving up a 15 second lead in the swim before her brilliance on the bike ensured Birtwhistle a 39 second lead in the final leg. Against Alistair Brownlee – who has already experienced disappointment at the Games – he was able to stretch the final margin to 52 seconds. Georgia Godwin delivered Australia silver in the women’s individual all-around gymnastics final and Francois Etoundi snatched bronze in the men’s 77kg weightlifting.