Between eight and 10 people have been injured after a van jumped the kerb in a northern suburb of Toronto and ran into a crowd of pedestrians. A spokesperson for Toronto police said the white van left the road near Yonge Street and Finch Avenue West and continued down the sidewalk, striking various pedestrians. The driver fled the scene but was later arrested by police. Christian Ali, who drove down Yonge Street shortly afterwards, said he saw three people lying in the street. “There was a lot of blood flowing,” he told the Guardian. “Everyone was in sheer shock.” Four other people were near a bus surrounded by passersby, some of whom were performing CPR. It was not immediately clear whether the incident was a deliberate act by the driver. Toronto police spokeswoman Meaghan Gray told the AP: “At this point it’s too early to tell what if any motive there was. We are also unable right now to tell the extent or the number of persons injured.” A spokesperson for the Toronto paramedic service said emergency teams were treating several patients, but wouldn’t confirm the number or severity of injuries. In a statement, Sunnybrook hospital said seven victims had been taken to its trauma centre. It also said its emergency department was in lockdown as a precaution. Prime minister Justin Trudeau expressed his condolences to the victims. “Our hearts go out to everyone affected. We’re going to have more to say in the coming hours”, he told reporters. “We’re still gathering information and as soon as we can, we’ll share more information with Canadians”. Police cordoned off several city blocks, and services were suspended at two nearby subway stations. The incident took place about 18 miles from the city centre, where foreign ministers from the G7 countries were meeting to discuss international issues before the G7 summit near Quebec City in June. In a statement, Toronto’s mayor John Tory said: “My thoughts are with those affected by this incident and the frontline responders who are working to help those injured.”