Former FBI director James Comey has taken part in his first televised interview since the release of his book about his dealings with Donald Trump, A Higher Loyalty: Truth, Lies and Leadership. Speaking to ABC’s George Stephanopolous, Comey came out swinging, describing Donald Trump as “morally unfit” to be president. He also talked about impeachment, the Hillary letter and a president who he says “lies constantly”. Here are the key things we learned: • Donald Trump has a heavyweight opponent Prime-time television, a medium that Donald Trump understands, is attracting interviewees ready to deliver damning verdicts on the US president. But whereas Stormy Daniels and Karen McDougal were describing alleged affairs from years ago, James Comey is the former director of the FBI. As Anderson Cooper of CNN put it: “Somebody who’s actually been in the room with him, seen it from the inside.” And his account to George Stephanopoulos was as brutal as any heard from a former government official talking about an American president: “A person who sees moral equivalence in Charlottesville, who talks about and treats women like they’re pieces of meat, who lies constantly about matters big and small and insists the American people believe it: that person’s not fit to be president of the United States, on moral grounds.” .@GStephanopoulos: “Is Donald Trump unfit to be president?” @Comey: “Yes, but not in the way I often hear people talk about it...I don't think he's medically unfit to be president. I think he's morally unfit to be president.” https://t.co/nzGYlTmLXf #Comey pic.twitter.com/4eag9flFZ2 • Comey is not afraid to get personal, maybe too personal Comey’s recollection of his first meeting with Trump was vivid and colourful, with small details that are perhaps calculated to demonstrate the reliability of his memory. “He looked shorter to me than he did on television, but otherwise exactly the same ... He had impressively coiffed hair, it looks to be all his. I confess, I stared at it pretty closely and my reaction was, ‘It must take a heck of a lot of time in the morning, but it’s impressively coiffed.’ His tie was too long, as it always is. He looked slightly orange up close with small, white, half moons under his eyes, which I assume are from tanning googles.” This is catnip for Never Trumpers, confirming every scornful suspicion, raising a laugh with audiences and selling books. But the insults could also be counterproductive, suggesting Comey is willing roll in the mud with Trump and handing ammunition to his supporters. • Yes, he will talk about prostitutes and the supposed pee tape Whether motivated by a desire for transparency, animus towards Trump or an eye for publicity, Comey is willing to speak candidly about the so-called Steele dossier, which contained the salacious – and unverified – allegation that the Russian government has video of Trump watching prostitutes urinate on each other in a Moscow hotel room in 2013. Comey recalls that when he first briefed the incoming president on it during the transition, Trump replied: “Do I look like a guy who needs hookers?” And Comey carefully leaves the issue hanging: “I honestly never thought these words would come out of my mouth, but I don’t know whether the current president of the United States was with prostitutes peeing on each other in Moscow in 2013. It’s possible, but I don’t know.” • When it comes to the Hillary Clinton letter, he believes he did the right thing Many Hillary Clinton supporters have still not forgiven Comey for his handling of the investigation into the former secretary of state’s use of a private email server. Stephanopoulos challenged: “Your critics say this is where your ego got the best of you. This was your original sin?” Comey is not apologising. He said he was in a “no win” situation. Asked if he would still send the 28 October letter, which announced the FBI was looking back into the Clinton investigation just days before the election, Comey admitted he must have been influenced by the assumption she would win but that he would do it again. “If I ever start considering whose political fortunes will be affected by a decision, we’re done. We’re just another player in the tribal battle.” • Life in the Comey household must have been awkward after the election Early in the interview, Comey said he did not vote in the presidential election, explaining: “I’m the director of the FBI. I’m trying to be outside of politics so intentionally tried not to follow it a lot.” But he said his wife, Patrice, and his four daughters all wanted Clinton to win and took part in the 2017 women’s march in Washington the day after Trump’s inauguration. Patrice told Stephanopoulos: “I wanted a woman president really badly, and I supported Hillary Clinton. A lot of my friends worked for her. And I was devastated when she lost.”