When it came to choosing between Mohamed Salah and Kevin De Bruyne, perhaps it was the element of surprise that convinced the Egyptian’s fellow professionals to vote for him. Even though his potential shone brightly during his early years with Basel, particularly when he ripped Chelsea and Tottenham to shreds in Europe, few people could have anticipated Salah hitting these extraordinary heights when he joined Liverpool last summer. For all his speed and skill, the former Roma winger had a reputation for being a little rash and selfish in the final third when he arrived in England. He had struggled during his brief spell with Chelsea – not that he was given much of a chance to impress by José Mourinho – and in the era of mega fees at the highest level, it was a reflection of Salah’s rough edges that Liverpool got him for £36.9m. Alexandre Lacazette, for instance, joined Arsenal for £52.7m. Neymar went to Paris Saint-Germain for €222m, Ousmane Dembélé to Barcelona for £97m, Romelu Lukaku to Manchester United for £75m and Álvaro Morata to Chelsea for £60m. Salah cost less than Gylfi Sigurdsson, a £45m signing for Everton from Swansea. True, some of those figures sum up how the transfer market has spiralled out of control. Yet Salah’s fee also hinted at the slight air of uncertainty that hung over him when he returned to England. He had not won anything since helping Basel to secure the Swiss title in 2013 and there were some who feared that he would blow hot and cold for Liverpool, for whom the past 20 years is littered with expensive signings who did not possess the elite talent to bring the glory days back to Anfield. In that context Salah probably would have been seen as a hit if he had enjoyed a promising debut season, scoring 15 goals, say, or simply helping Liverpool challenge for the top four. Instead, he has surpassed even the most optimistic predictions. He has been the talismanic figure in Jürgen Klopp’s freewheeling side, earning comparisons to Lionel Messi because of the way he cuts in from the right flank to use his left foot to devastating effect and ensuring that Liverpool have not suffered because of Philippe Coutinho’s move to Barcelona in January. Salah has 31 goals in the Premier League – equalling the record set by Cristiano Ronaldo, Alan Shearer and Luis Suárez – and 41 overall. His finishing has been imaginative, ruthless and varied, he has scored home and away against Liverpool’s rivals and he produced when Klopp needed him most in the Champions League quarter-final victory against City. He is a deserving recipient of the Professional Footballers’ Association player of the year award. But as is the way with these individual prizes, not everyone is in agreement. For while giving the gong to Salah is not quite as controversial as the time Tottenham’s David Ginola picked up more votes than any of Manchester United’s treble winners in 1999, there are many who believe that De Bruyne has been unfairly overlooked. The Belgian, after all, has been the finest player in the league’s best team. Would City have won the title without De Bruyne? Probably. But would they have won it by such a huge margin and with such an attractive style of football? Would the new champions be on course to break the points record set by Chelsea in 2005? Probably not. Midfield excellence tends to get left in the shade by staggering goal hauls Nobody has been as beautiful to watch as De Bruyne, who looked like he had a point to prove during City’s 5-0 win against Swansea on Sunday, and it is worth remembering that the 26-year-old has regularly stepped up in the big matches, scoring the winner at Stamford Bridge, playing a key role in the 5-0 victory against Liverpool in September, dominating at Old Trafford in December and starring in the League Cup final. He has produced an array of sublime assists, none better than the eerily good no-look pass in the 7-2 win against Stoke, and his ability to run games from central midfield has drawn comparisons to Andrés Iniesta and Paul Scholes. He would have been the choice for the purists and there is also an argument that the award should always go to a league champion. Yet that has happened only 13 times in the Premier League era and it is De Bruyne’s misfortune that midfield excellence tends to get left in the shade by staggering goal hauls, which probably says more about us than him. Ultimately, however, trying to choose between these two extraordinary players is a thankless task. Salah’s achievement has been unique and as someone with a weakness for jinking left-footed wingers, I am biased towards him. But De Bruyne’s masterclass against Swansea was accompanied by a realisation that I will remain on the fence unless Salah scores the winner in the Champions League final. In a world of tribalism and furious debate, it isn’t a bad place to be. Let’s put the rivalry to one side and enjoy what both have to offer. And chuckle at the thought of Mourinho letting them leave Chelsea.