We live in the age of the confessional. In the not too distant past, private and intimate thoughts remained just that – and if we felt we needed to talk, a frank discussion with friends and loved ones often did the trick. But especially when it comes to cancer, this reticence now seems to be dissipating. Social media has turned the private into public and for many, that’s a very good thing. But for my family – and I suspect for others too – it can be difficult, upsetting and sometimes downright damaging. My wife, and I don’t want to name her or talk very much about what she’s going through because that would defeat the object of this article, has terminal cancer. The physical symptoms are the least of her problems. It’s the associated anxiety and depression that makes coping with life so difficult. So imagine what it feels like when, out of the blue, the radio or the television reminds you that you are very poorly, and you and your family are going to suffer terribly. Memorable and personal broadcasts about cancer seem to have proliferated in recent months. Steve Hewlett’s story, which ran on BBC Radio 4’s PM programme every week before his death, rightly received plaudits and awards. Tony Livesey, the Radio 5 Live presenter who lost his mother to cancer, recently ran a special series, Losing Mum. Clive Coleman, the BBC’s legal correspondent whose sister died of lung cancer, recounted his experience across the BBC network in February. These broadcasts are often worthy and important. But they can inadvertently ride roughshod over the mental health of fragile and vulnerable people. It was Coleman’s story that lit the touchpaper in me after my wife inadvertently strayed upon the coverage. His story highlighted the urgent need for more funding for lung cancer research – a good thing – but its effect on my wife was devastating. I came home to find her in a state. She was crying, terribly anxious and scared, and I was left to pick up the pieces for a week. It got me thinking about how we should talk about terminal illness, and the responsibilities of broadcasters to do this carefully. Does cancer somehow excuse journalists from the long-held belief that they shouldn’t be the story and that their job is to dispassionately report the news? Do famous people have special dispensation to bare their souls in public? Maybe even a more fundamental question should be asked too: what does this sort of coverage really achieve? It’s so hard to find the right answers. Anyone, famous people included, has the right and need to find solace and strength in the face of the terrible adversity that cancer forces upon us. These programmes certainly can raise awareness, help attract research funding, and educate the public so they might be able to spot the signs of cancer before its ravages take hold. But broadcasters need to stay sensitive to those who are suffering now, and to honestly assess the impact of telling their own stories. They need to be more careful about an issue that affects a voiceless and vulnerable group who often are not in a position to make their feelings known. I live in dread of one these stories coming on air. It’s not as simple as changing channels: by the time you have run to the radio to switch it off, it’s usually too late and too upsetting. • Mike Addelman is a former journalist and now works as a communications professional in higher education