And so, on Easter Sunday, The Generation Game rose from the dead again, in accordance with the schedules … Sunday! The Generation Game was always on a Saturday, no? Brucie will be turning in his grave. Larry Grayson, too … shut that door. Jim Davidson … well, let’s not talk about Jim Davidson. Mel’n’Sue are hosting this latest incarnation. That makes sense. Bring on hot cross puns and innuendo, in-your-end-oh. And the first contestants, who may be second cousins twice removed. “They were just cousins,” says Sue. “But we had them removed. Twice.” Yes, that’s the level of it. Anyway, they’re not cousins, they’re mum and son-in-law Sue and Simon from Cymbran, plus mum and daughter Lorraine and Rhiannon from Wolverhampton. Yay! The first game is an old favourite: the potter’s wheel! They have to make a teapot, as demonstrated – impressively – by Johnny Vegas (Vegas is a theme throughout). Body of the teapot first, fingers in, deep finger, lubricate, lubricate, groan groan. But the real fun is the handle. “You’ve got to work the clay,” says Johnny, and you may as well have replaced the O and R in work with A and N. The audience squeals and Sue hangs a tea towel over the offending “working”. You can imagine granny at home doing the same over little so-and-so’s eyes. (And little so-and-so saying: “You might as well leave it there, gran. What is this crap you used to watch?”) Sue and Simon, and Lorraine and Rhiannon, have to do it next – make their teapots, work their handles … more mess and lewd hilarity. And if you thought that would be enough priapic symbolism for one episode, you’d be wrong because there’s sausage-making, too. Pull the skin back gently over the meat, careful not to burst anything, ouch … I hope they checked that Suffolk dad and son Peter and David (surname Willie, tee-hee) and mum and daughter Ruth and Lindsey from Devon, aren’t vegetarians. If they weren’t, they probably are now. Actually, Richard Osman makes that point. He and Lorraine Kelly are a celebrity sofa panel, a new element that may upset some GG traditionalists. (Is there such a person?) They make some of the best contributions, asides from the side. “I think that was you, Mel,” Richard says when Mel asks him whose is the wurst. Lorraine thinks the pottery efforts are “all quite rustic”. There’s Bollywood booty-shaking. And plate spinning. “I’ll be smashing,” says Lindsey, getting into the spirit of it. (Watch out, Sue, she’s after your job.) Lindsey is smashing; they all are. Then the play: a holiday farce set in Club Tropicana, drinks are … “FREE”. With comedy dancing and accents, and a couple more stars from the past: Basil Brush and Spandau Ballet’s Martin Kemp, you are: “GOLD!” Come to think of it, The Generation Game wasn’t really around in the 80s, was it? Is there a conveyor belt? You bet there’s a conveyor belt, with a cuddly toy – and a canteen of cutlery. And a holiday to Las Vegas which Sue and Simon from Cymbran win, yay! Actually, I don’t think Brucie and Larry G will be turning in their graves. They might even have approved. The resurrection recaptures the spirit of show; a throwback to a simpler time when Britain had neither Talent nor X Factor, and making a mess and peddling suggestive jokes was acceptable as family entertainment. Somehow, it manages to be both a little bit glorious and groansome to the max at the same time; I found myself feeling nostalgic and thankful that the past was there, in the past. Until now … But not for long. The rebooted gameshow was originally going to have a four-episode run, but that was cut to two. It seems the BBC decided that perhaps this wasn’t their light weekend family entertainment broadside to fire at the enemy after all, even when the enemy’s a man down. Dec need not feel too threatened, even with Ant below deck, as it were. And that’s about right. Two is fun and any more would have been unbearable. So The Generation Game arose from the dead again, in accordance with the schedules, and appeared to witnesses. (Let’s hope not too many or they may recommission it.) And, although you wouldn’t say it ascended into heaven or is sitting at the right hand of the director general, it was a bit of a laugh. Amen.