Once the obvious decrees have been made – free sweets, everlasting school holidays! – most children, if asked to reign for a day, would surely wish for peace and plenty for their kingdom. So it is with Evan Pettiwhisker Tildrum, a prince made, in sudden and bloody circumstances, an exiled king who, together with a growing band of friends, supporters and assorted strays, must build an empire and an alluring constitution to draw subjects to his freshly birthed nation. Rendered in the Studio Ghibli aesthetic – defined here by artist Yoshiyuki Momose and composer Joe Hisaishi, who both worked on the Japanese studio’s Oscar-winning Spirited Away – the newly released Ni no Kuni II’s non-threatening whimsy is stylish but childlike. And for the first few hours, while searching for a patch of unclaimed land on which to settle a capital, it’s a likable adventure. You bumble over hill and dale, slaying monsters, incrementally upgrading your swords and sandals, and sleeping off the effort at local inns. You care deeply for each of your citizens because you are invested in their individual stories Once you gain a kingdom, however, the game veers into less familiar territory. You collect taxes, use the proceeds to build shops and facilities and, most compellingly, head out into the world to find prospective citizens to bring back. Having identified someone who has a talent and is prepared to emigrate, you must typically carry out some decisive errand, or help them resolve a personal quest in order to seal the deal. Their fealty pledged, you now assign them a role in the kingdom, and watch as they skitter about, harvesting wood, selling fish, building ships, or researching new technologies that help even the odds on the battlefield. In this way, grand empire-building becomes minutely personalised: you care deeply for each of your citizens because you are invested in their individual stories. Building a city to rule is not enough for Tildrum, who, in the hubristic tradition of so many rulersthroughout history, feels compelled to take his vision for society out into the world. In his fairytale naivety, the young king draws up a “declaration of interdependence” and, after reading up on his neighbouring nations, undertakes a series of royal visits in which he urges various heads of state to sign up to the document. The places you visit could have been plucked from the pages of Italo Calvino’s Invisible Cities. There’s Hydropolis, an island capital, where love has been outlawed by a beleaguered queen who ensures obedience by way of a Sauron-like magical eye that can see through walls. There’s Goldenpaw, a Vegas-like monument to coin and chance, where even the annual taxes are decided on a dice roll. Persuading the heads of state to join your peace mission takes time. They are adults and, unlike children, subject to facts and forces that complicate innocent notions of world peace. Eventually, however, you come to share Tildrum’s benevolent, quasi-evangelical mission. The game’s cat’s cradle of interlocking systems is not for the unfocused. The young king’s duties are myriad, and range from scavenging to combat to town planning to sea captaincy to international diplomacy. Your to-do list grows by the minute, and soon Tildrum’s unceasing toil makes our royal family look inexcusably lethargic. At a time when nationalism is on the rise, when presidents advocate isolationism, splendid or otherwise, and when countries are more eager to detach themselves from their supportive neighbours, rather than cleave to them, the idealistic simplicity of Ni no Kuni IIs style and message is rendered curiously potent. Far Cry 5(Xbox One) Blockbuster video games, like most mass media entertainment, shy away from grand politicising: too firm an ideological stance risks alienating a portion of the audience, reducing profitability. Far Cry 5, by contrast, appears to lean into America’s ongoing political divisions. You play as a deputy sheriff pitted against a far-right militia, similar to the kind that rose during the Obama presidency and whose support Trump has obviously courted. In this heated setting, casting the game as a traditional battle between good and evil could turn potentially instructive fiction into toothless flimflam. Either way, Far Cry 5 will be, at the very least, interesting. TT Isle of Man: Ride on the Edge(PS4, Xbox One, PC) The annual, and frequently deadly, Tourist Trophy race, in which men and women scream around the Isle of Man on powerful motorbikes, became freshly notorious following the excellent 2011 film documentary, TT3D: Closer to the Edge. Now you have a chance to feel first-hand something of the thrill and terror of competitors in a race that has claimed 146 lives since it started in 1907. From the dry stone walls to the puffing cottage chimneys and inclement weather, the Isle of Man has been meticulously recreated in a game that demands players take time to master the art of slick gear changes and weight balancing if they’re to finish.