I had never been to a gig before and I paid €3 to get in and discovered a culture I never knew existed,” Hinds singer Carlotta Cosials says of the day of her graduation, when she accepted an invitation to see a theatre group pal’s fledgling garage rock band. “People were swaying and smashing into each other. It was like being in a movie. I thought: ‘Where has this stuff been all my life?’” Shortly afterwards, Cosials took her friend Ana Perrote, now Hinds’ guitarist, to see another emerging Madrid garage band, Los Nastys, and she also had an epiphany. The pair had grown up in a Spanish culture dominated by Europop and Julio and Enrique Iglesias, and had always thought that only British or American teens formed bands. But Perrote remembers thinking: “Everything that is happening at this gig, I want to happen at mine.” At first, we couldn’t play but that didn’t matter. We just thought: We’re going to do this Nine years on, the band they formed with DJ friend Ade Martín (bass) and Amber Grimbergen (drums) – who release their second album, I Don’t Run, on 6 April – are making history as the first Spanish rock’n’roll band to make a meaningful international impact. In the US, they have been featured in Rolling Stone and the New York Times, and their success has been a gamechanger for other Madrid bands, who are also thinking globally. Los Nastys can now tour South America and the US; the Parrots signed to UK label Heavenly after playing at South by Southwest festival in Texas, where the up-and-coming Baywaves played 12 gigs last month. Such bands are the product of Madrid’s unlikely but extremely vibrant indie scene, which is mostly based around a few blocks in the bohemian district of Malasaña. Here, buskers blast out garage rock songs. The queue for the La Vía Láctea club (the Milky Way) stretches up the street. Some 500 bands have passed through the Pandora’s Vox rehearsal space since its 2012 opening, and a significant number are making some sort of garage-inspired racket. The scene is perhaps to Madrid what punk was in the UK. “At first, we couldn’t play but that didn’t matter,” grins Cosials, as Hinds gather in her flat. “We’d go: ‘Here’s the solo!’” She imitates some witless plinking and plonking, “but we just thought: ‘We’re going to do this.’” The roots of Madrid’s curious garage rock boom can be traced as far back as General Franco’s dictatorship-era Spain, when kissing in the street was banned and homegrown rock was censored. After the regime’s fall in 1975, a feeling of liberation gradually produced a flow of more raucous 80s bands with rebellious names such as the Pleasure Fuckers and Sex Museum. The latter are still going, but by the 1990s, the scene had dissipated to boring indie gigs played and attended by thirty- and fortysomethings. The Parrots’ frontman Diego García remembers hating “everything. I was the only person I knew who listened to the Velvet Underground. Everything else sounded like my parents’ music.” Cosials concurs: “As teens, you’ve no idea how bored we were.” Like many of her counterparts, the Hinds singer was not exposed to rock culture at school or within her family, and had to seek it out. One teenage friend had never heard of the Rolling Stones. “I was like: ‘Are you screwing with me?’” she laughs. Cosials and Perrote loathed the mainstream pop their peers liked, Spanish or otherwise, but once they experienced live music, they started to mix with people with whom they could “listen to the Velvets or Blondie or the Beatles for hours, read books and watch 60s pop documentaries”. None of the scene’s prime movers are garage rock purists, though. Hinds listen to hip-hop and their melodies recall classic girl groups; the Parrots recently covered a Latin trap banger, Bad Bunny’s Soy Peor. But discovering the Strokes’ 2001 debut album Is This It? – albeit long after the fact – was a big trigger for both bands. “They weren’t from decades ago,” explains García, “and the post-9/11 America that they were singing about felt very similar to Madrid: discontent in a big city, a general disillusion with society.” You think: ‘I might die tomorrow, so I might as well do what I want' Spain was badly hit by the 2008 financial crash and youth unemployment stands at 55%. The country’s most educated generation has emerged from university with wider awareness but dwindling prospects, a perfect cocktail for a musical explosion. “We’d always been promised that if we studied, everything would be there for us,” says García, who did media and communications, shouting to be heard over the music at La Vía Láctea. “But it was a lie: there was nothing left.” Thus, a feeling of being cheated out of a future and the need to make their own has led to a proliferation of artists, clothes designers, creative entrepreneurs, film-makers, photographers and musicians in the city. Cosials refers to a “change of mindset”. García explains, “You think: ‘I might die tomorrow, so I might as well do what I want.’” Playing garage rock made it cheaper and easier to get started. Los Nastys began in a grandparent’s garage and played their early shows in battle-of-the-bands competitions or with the Parrots. “We were seen as a joke band,” chuckles the latter’s García. “Like, ‘Oh, they don’t know how to play.’ Which was true.” Although people took them seriously once they started recording, it was initially hard to get shows because older people who ran venues viewed them as cheeky upstarts. “Nobody wanted to put us on because we destroyed things or threw chorizo at the walls,” chuckles Los Nastys singer Luis Basilio, in one of Malasaña’s many cafe bars. “But we wanted to be the Madrid Beastie Boys and have some fun.” At one show, they were playing a song called Policía De Los Angeles when the police actually arrived. “There was a feverish discussion. They went away and we continued playing.” As word spread, acts such as Hinds (initially called Deers), Los Wallas (a fictional-surname band name, like the Ramones), Hollywood Sinners and Lois hung out at La Vía Láctea. One night, after a Los Wallas gig, the club’s DJ, Alvaro Cobarro AKA Cobie, invited everybody back to his place for a party. “The queue for my bathroom was so long I had to pee in the street,” he chuckles. “But after that, my house became the meeting place for everyone who wanted to make music.” Spanish audiences have no idea what garage or punk is but you look in their eyes and you can see they feel like we did The scene benefits from an unusual amount of camaraderie. The Parrots helped Hinds to pick out which amps to buy and make their first recordings. All the bands are friends, share flats, hang out, cover each other’s songs and release split singles. The Spanish music industry does not have the infrastructure of its UK counterpart and the Spanish press will not cover smaller bands. So mutual support and self-releasing has been crucial. Los Wallas made the band their job after signing to the sizeable Spanish indie label Subterfuge; singer-guitarist Juan Wallas speaks to me via an interpreter, so I think he’s joking when he says “in bad times I sell drugs or supply prostitutes”. His leather-wearing neo dandismo (new dandyism) combo sing in Spanish “because we speak, dream and fuck in Spanish”. Others sing in English – because they can, and their favourite bands do – which helps with international appeal. When Hinds (as a duo) put their songs on Bandcamp in late 2013, the “internet exploded”, remembers the Parrots’ García, and seeing their friends in NME and Rolling Stone meant “the world suddenly seemed smaller. Things we’d always imagined didn’t seem so impossible”. Four years ago this month, Hinds played as a quartet for the first time as part of Make Noise Melasaña with Los Nastys and Los Wallas at Madrid’s Wurlitzer Ballroom. Cosials was so nervous she thought she wouldn’t be able to sing and fretted “the audience are going to kill me”. But today, the band have recorded I Don’t Run with Is This It? producer Gordon Raphael, have performed with the Strokes and the Libertines, and will play Barcelona’s Primavera festival for the first time this summer. They are still seen as Madrid’s most focused, hard-working band; after our interview, they hand-sign hundreds of posters. Baywaves may be the next to make a splash. Although the quartet are more dream-pop than garage rock, the scene drew them in from Santander and already they have had a significant impact. Guitarist-synth player Carlos Sevilla recruited other bands to help campaign to change Madrid’s licensing laws so that people under 18 could attend and perform at gigs. “Now people have to show ID at the bar, not the door,” he tells me. “Hopefully, this will lead to more teenagers forming bands.” Spanish pop is changing fast. The country was slower than many to catch on to Hinds, but now their crowds in Madrid or Barcelona are as big as those in New York or London. “Spanish audiences have no idea what garage or punk rock is, but you look in their eyes and you can see they feel like we did,” smiles Perrote. “The difference is, where there used to be 20, now there are thousands.” Hinds’ new album, I Don’t Run, is released on Lucky Number on 6 April. The band tour the UK from 15 to 20 Apr, starting at SWG3, Glasgow on 15 Apr. Baywaves’ It’s Been Like EP is released on Art Is Hard on 18 May.