The first Pulitzer prize for music went, in 1943, to William Schuman’s Secular Cantata No 2. It took 54 years before the judges recognised music beyond the European classical tradition, making Wynton Marsalis’s Blood on the Fields the first jazz winner. There have only been two jazz winners since then (Ornette Coleman in 2007 and Henry Threadgill in 2016) and, until this year, nothing from the world of popular song. The prize has long been criticised as stuffy and irrelevant, with even 2003 winner John Adams saying it has “lost much of the prestige it still carries in other fields like literature and journalism”. By granting this year’s award to Kendrick Lamar’s album Damn, the Pulitzer board has gone from 0 to 60mph in a spectacular way. Damn is as groundbreaking a winner as was Bob Dylan’s Nobel prize for literature last year, though less of a philosophical conundrum. While even Dylan fans disagreed over whether songs qualified as literature, Damn is clearly excellent American music. The only rule broken by its win is the archaic, unspoken one that reserves the Pulitzer for supposedly higher artforms. So the only criticism that sticks is the fact that, unlike the two composers he beat, Lamar needs neither the publicity nor the $15,000 prize money. Damn, the US’s biggest-selling hip-hop album of 2017, has already taken home six MTV awards, five Grammys, NAACP Image Awards, a Brit, a Juno, a BET award and a Clio. But needing the award comes a poor second to deserving it. Lamar’s Pulitzer has been celebrated as a vindication of hip-hop, and a particularly sweet one given that Damn features a pointed sample of Geraldo Rivera on Fox News making the absurd claim that “hip-hop has done more damage to young African Americans than racism in recent years”. But, four decades after it evolved out of Bronx DJ culture, hip-hop is both critically adored and commercially supreme. When the biggest hit on Broadway is Hamilton, it doesn’t take a Pulitzer to grant the genre artistic legitimacy. Nor is it likely that rappers will suddenly dominate the Pulitzer, any more than folk-rock singer-songwriters will take over the Nobel for literature. The award says less about hip-hop at large than it does about Lamar’s exceptional place in American culture. The Pulitzer board starchily described Damn as “a virtuosic song collection, unified by its vernacular authenticity and rhythmic dynamism that offers affecting vignettes capturing the complexity of modern African-American life”, all of which is true but could apply equally to Lamar’s previous two albums — he is currently enjoying a streak of commercial and critical success comparable to Stevie Wonder’s in the 1970s. Lamar’s 2012 major-label debut Good Kid, M.A.A.D City was the kind of cinematic coming of age story that most rappers spend the rest of their careers trying to live up to, but 2015’s To Pimp a Butterfly was something else entirely: a wildly original exploration of Lamar’s conflicted feelings about fame combined with a ferocious state-of-the-nation address, steeped in decades of soul, funk, hip-hop and jazz. Lamar was hailed as both the greatest rapper alive and the voice of black America under pressure, so nobody would have blamed him if his next full album had been a step down from that overwhelming masterpiece. Such extravagant praise has a tendency to derail artists, if not with complacency then with paralysing self-doubt. In fact, Damn, though shorter and more direct, is just as rich and audacious. Unless you count his occasionally phoned-in guest verses on pop hits, Lamar has yet to disappoint. Undoubtedly, Lamar’s cultural importance played a part in his Pulitzer win. In this hyper-political era of the Trump catastrophe and the unchecked police brutality that led to Black Lives Matter, there’s a particular excitement about works of art – Black Panther (for which Lamar produced the soundtrack), Get Out, Moonlight, Beyoncé’s Lemonade – which address blackness. But even if it weren’t a cultural phenomenon, Damn would be deserving on a compositional level. While there will always be those who flatly refuse to accept hip-hop as a valid artform, for everyone else Lamar represents the pinnacle of the form. His combination of technical virtuosity, moral complexity, political acuity, wit, empathy and musical depth and breadth makes him the only MC (sorry Kanye) who can unite teenage hip-hop fans, Golden Age aficionados and people who barely follow the genre. Raised in Compton, Los Angeles, Lamar, like many rappers, grew up amid poverty and gang violence. He continues to wrestle with survivor’s guilt and the moral responsibility that comes with success, constantly interrogating his own weaknesses and hypocrisies. When I interviewed him in 2015, he was hugely impressive in a low-key way: calm, reflective, deeply religious and wise beyond his years. He clearly took seriously the job of living up to expectations without ever being sanctimonious or didactic. “We all like to have fun,” he told me. “I like to have fun, too. But where do you stop and say, You know what? There’s actually some real shit going on out there that people can relate to more than any singalong I can bring to the table. It’s just about balance. “I don’t fault other artists. I don’t say this person should be doing that. As conscious as my music sounds, I would never point the finger because every day I make mistakes.” If Lamar’s work has a central theme, it’s human fallibility and contradiction: “I got power, poison, pain and joy inside my DNA,” he raps on Damn’s most intense track, DNA. He uses sly charm, raspy belligerence, frantic rage, solemn introspection to express different sides to his personality. He is an extraordinarily vivid and unpredictable storyteller with a tendency to radically change his music, vocal tone and lyrical direction midway through a song, zooming in or out so that the second half complicates and subverts the first. Even when he’s riding one beat for four minutes, as he does on his hit single Humble, his lyrics contain multitudes. His technical brilliance is never self-regarding virtuosity but a means to an end: more clarity, more complexity, more honesty. The listener gets the impression that, rather than competing with other MCs, Lamar is driven by a burning desire to outdo himself. When Duke Ellington was controversially denied a Pulitzer in 1965, he responded: “Fate is being kind to me. Fate doesn’t want me to be too famous too young.” He was 67 at the time. Lamar is just 30, undaunted by fame, and more untouchable than any MC in the history of hip-hop. The Pulitzer is just the latest confirmation that he stands alone. HiiiPoWer, 2011Lamar aligns himself with a roll-call of black icons on this Kanye West-influenced highlight from his independent studio album Section.80. The Art of Peer Pressure, 2012This is a storytelling tour de force that speaks of crime, friendship and a very close shave, bringing Lamar’s dangerous adolescence to life. Alright, 2015From his album To Pimp a Butterfly, its defiant but qualified optimism, elevated by soul and jazz, made this an anthem for Black Lives Matter. The Blacker the Berry, 2015A ferocious expression of black pride and rage, which attacks first white America and then Lamar’s own hypocrisy. DNA, 2017Lamar’s unflinching self-analysis accelerates into a breathtaking frenzy, like sparks flying from an overheating brain.