Nepotism alert: John Krasinski, the 38-year-old actor-writer-director, discovered the co-star of his new film, A Quiet Place, sitting next to him on the sofa. To be fair, though, the American’s wife is Emily Blunt, the Bafta and Golden Globe-winning British acor. A smart, stylish horror flick, A Quiet Place is Krasinski’s third film as a director, but he is best known for an eight-year stint as Jim Halpert in the US version of The Office. He and Blunt live in New York with their two daughters, aged four and one. A Quiet Place has a clever, innovative premise: the Alien-style monsters can’t see but have exceptional hearing, so the humans in the film have to be almost wordless. Are you someone who knows and loves horror films?No. Completely the opposite, which is crazy. I never was a big horror guy, because I was just too scared. That’s the truth. Then these producers called me one day and said: “Would you ever act in a horror movie?” I said: “I don’t know, I’m kind of a scaredy cat, but if it’s a cool idea maybe.” And they said: “Well, the idea is that this family can’t make any noise and you have to figure out why.” And I thought: “That’s as good a one-liner as you can get.” The story follows a husband and wife (Krasinski and Blunt) who are trying to keep their kids alive. Does this tap into any parent’s greatest fear?Absolutely. There was a line I wrote [in the screenplay]: “Who are we, if we can’t protect them?” And I remember it was one of the lines that when Emily read the script, that’s why she did it. She just said: “This is going to be the scariest part I’ll ever play.” And I said: “Why is that?” And she said: “Because I am always pretending my fears in movies. Like in The Girl on the Train, I’m pretending to be this out-of-control alcoholic. And in this movie, I’m actually acting out my everyday fears.” Granted, not creatures roaming around in the darkness, but keeping our kids safe and the inevitability of fearing the worst is something that we think about all the time. You had to learn some sign language for A Quiet Place. What’s been the strangest skill you’ve had to pick up for a movie?Probably in [the 2015 Cameron Crowe film] Aloha: I had to learn how to land a C-17 plane. They put me in a full Air Force simulator and I’ve got to say, it’s the weirdest thing because your brain forgets that it’s a fake plane. So as you’re landing it, you’re like: “Oh my God, we’re all going to die right now!” One of my favourite encounters was with a customs agent who said, 'Are you an actor? What would I know you from?' As part of the online publicity for A Quiet Place, you did a skit with your wife where you called yourselves, “The Krunts”. Are you going to regret coining that?Yes! I immediately regretted that – I’m not going to lie to you. I just wish I could do better for my wife, because we could have made Bluntinski, we could have done a lot of things. But Krunt is what comes out of it. I mean, just imagine if we came back to England and had a lovely estate, we’d have to call it Krunt Manor. What do people in Britain say about The Office?One of my favourite encounters was with a customs agent who said: “Are you an actor? What would I know you from?” And I said: “The Office, but don’t worry, the American Office.” Then, as he stamped my passport, he very under his breath went: “Well, I like it better.” And I went:“NO WAY!” You beefed up a lot for the 2016 film 13 Hours: The Secret Soldiers of Benghazi. What’s the best part of getting into that kind of shape?I remember Matt Damon saying this and it’s true: you pick your kids up and don’t have back pain. Like nothing. You can pick them up, toss them in the air and not feel like you’re going to the hospital that night. Do you get the feeling that your wife has a preference either way?I don’t think she does, but I’m sure she wasn’t upset that I was in great shape. You’re about to be the latest incarnation of Tom Clancy’s Jack Ryan in a new Amazon series. What’s your spin on him?Well, the whole thing for me is I’ve been a huge fan of Jack Ryan – I feel like he’s our James Bond. I mean, a lot less sex, but Bond nonetheless. So you want to play him with more sex then?No, I tried and they wouldn’t go for it. For me, he’s a character that I think resonates really well now: we’ve had so many stories about superheroes who can fly, superheroes who can shoot things out of their hands and I think to have a real person do heroic things is kind of a nice thing to put out in the world right now. You seem to have diverse tastes – what, culturally, have you loved recently?Well, when you have kids, you immediately get about two years behind. So, musically, I’m super into Leon Bridges right now. And oh, one of the best things I’ve ever seen is Billy Crudup in this one-man show called Harry Clarke [at the Minetta Lane theatre, Greenwich Village]. It’s probably the best acting that I’ve ever seen. You’re better qualified to talk about Paw Patrol then?Exactly, correct. That’s probably what I should do next: the reboot of Paw Patrol. That’s your headline: here comes the live-action Paw Patrol from John Krasinski. You have a reputation – in your roles and in press – of being a good guy, a gentleman. Is that important to you?Well, that’s very nice, first of all. And second, my parents definitely brought me up to carry myself without being negative, so there’s probably part of me that always wants to be a worthy son. But overall, hey, there’s worse things than being seen as the nice guy.