Prep 10 minCook 3 hrServes 4 3 medium garlic cloves, roughly chopped1 small handful basil leaves, roughly chopped2 tbsp balsamic vinegar4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil1 tsp salt5 ripe plum tomatoes (about 450g), blanched, peeled and cored For the peppers2 large red peppers1 garlic clove, finely grated3 tbsp sherry vinegar2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil1 tsp salt5 or 6 large basil leaves First cook the peppers on a hot cast-iron griddle over a high heat, turning with tongs to char and blister them all over, for 20-25 minutes. Put in a bowl, cover tightly with clingfilm and set aside until cool – about 20 minutes. Discard the clingfilm and drain the liquid into another bowl. Cut the peppers in half lengthways, scrape off the skin and discard the seeds. Tear into irregular strips and add to the liquid, along with the garlic and vinegar. Massage with your hands, add the oil and salt, and stir until creamy. Tear the basil into big pieces and stir in, then set aside. Heat the oven to 150C/300F/gas 2. For the tomatoes, stir together the garlic, basil, vinegar, oil and salt in a large bowl. Add the tomatoes, toss gently, then set aside for five minutes. Using a slotted spoon, put the tomatoes in a single layer in a snug baking dish. Spoon over the dressing, then roast for one and a half to two hours. Baste the tomatoes occasionally, pressing down gently on each one with the back of a spoon. Remove from the oven and leave to cool to room temperature. Serve scattered with the peppers.A Girl and Her Pig by April Bloomfield (Canongate) Prep 10 minCook 25 minServes 2 ¼ tsp fenugreek seeds1 tsp coriander seeds1 tsp fennel seedsSalt and black pepper3 tbsp sunflower oil1 small onion, peeled and sliced1 x 400g can red kidney beans, drained and rinsed1 tsp sherry vinegar½ tsp brown sugar½ bunch fresh coriander, chopped2 sprigs parsley, chopped2 sprigs dill, chopped Heat a small, dry frying pan and toast the fenugreek, coriander and fennel seeds until fragrant, then crush with a pinch of sea salt using a mortar and pestle. Heat two tablespoons of the oil in a frying pan. Add the onion and cook over a medium heat, stirring occasionally, for 10–15 minutes, until they are amber. Add the beans and warm them through. Mix together the remaining tablespoon of oil, vinegar, sugar, crushed spices, herbs, salt and pepper in a bowl. Stir this through the warm beans and serve warm or cold.Mamushka by Olia Hercules (Mitchell Beazley) Prep 15 minCook 10 minServes 4–6 350g aubergines, stem ends trimmed3 tbsp rapeseed oil150g green peppers, cut lengthways into 1cm-wide strips2-inch (5cm piece negi or 1 spring onion, peeled and sliced on an angle into 6mm pieces1 medium garlic clove, finely chopped1 tsp fresh ginger, peeled and finely chopped1 tbsp soy sauce1 tbsp sake1 tbsp brown rice miso Cut the aubergines lengthways into 1cm-thick slices. Stack the slices and halve lengthways. Cut those pieces across, in half or thirds – they should be similar in length to the green peppers. In a large frying pan or wok, heat the oil over a medium-high heat. Add the peppers and stir-fry until tender – about two minutes. Transfer to a bowl with a slotted spoon. Add the spring onion, garlic and ginger to the pan and stir-fry over a low heat for about a minute. Increase the heat to medium, toss in the aubergine and continue to stir-fry until cooked through but not melting – about three to five minutes. Stir in the soy sauce and sake, and immediately lift the pan off of the heat. Swirl the pan around for a second or so to evaporate the liquids. Fold in the cooked green pepper and miso. Smooth the miso around the vegetables with a heatproof spatula so they are evenly coated.Japan the Cookbook by Nancy Singleton Hachisu (Phaidon) is published on 6 April Prep 5 minCook 10 minServes 2-4 4 courgettes 50g butter1 tbsp olive oilSalt and black pepper 1 pinch saffron strands 2 tbsp water1 handful basil leaves Juice of ½ lemon Cut the courgettes lengthways into thin strips about 8mm thick. Heat the butter and oil in a large, heavy-based frying pan. Once the butter begins to foam, lay the courgette strips in the pan and cook over a medium heat for a few minutes until they start to brown. Turn them over, season and continue to cook for a minute. Add the saffron and water, and cook for a couple of minutes more, until the butter has taken on the golden colour of the spice. Tear in the basil leaves, pour the lemon juice over the top and serve at once.Fern Verrow: Recipes from the Farm Kitchen by Jane Scotter and Harry Astley (Quadrille) Prep 10 minCook 1 hrServes 6 200ml olive oil4 bulbs fennel, trimmed and cut into wedges5 garlic cloves, peeledZest of 1 lemon, removed in strips½ bottle dry white wineSalt and black pepper 1 small bunch fresh thyme4 bay leaves1 handful black olives (preferably kalamata) Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas 4. Heat the oil in a deep frying pan and saute the fennel, stirring occasionally, until lightly browned. Add the whole garlic cloves and the lemon zest, and continue to cook for four minutes. Add the wine, salt and pepper, and bring to a boil for a few minutes. Tie the herbs together and add to the pan, then scatter over the olives. Transfer everything to a baking dish, season, cover with foil and cook for 45 minutes, until the fennel is tender.You’re All Invited by Margot Henderson (Fig Tree) Prep 10 minCook 30 minServes 4 2 tbsp olive oil 1 pinch ground asafoetida (or half a pinch each of onion and garlic powders)½ tsp cumin seeds¼ tsp fenugreek seeds 2 large beetroot (about 675g), peeled and cut into 2cm dice2 tsp fresh ginger, peeled and finely grated 1 tsp ground coriander½ tsp ground cumin¼ tsp ground turmeric¼–½ tsp chilli powderSalt250ml water2 medium tomatoes, blanched, peeled and finely chopped Put the oil in a nonstick frying pan on a medium-high heat. When hot, add the asafoetida, quickly followed by the cumin seeds, and let them sizzle for a few seconds. Add the fenugreek seeds, stir, then add the beetroot, ginger, coriander and cumin. Stir for two to three minutes. Add the turmeric and chilli powder, and stir for a few seconds. Stir in the water and half a teaspoon of salt. Bring to a boil, cover, lower the heat and cook gently for 20 minutes, until the beetroot is tender. Add the tomatoes and cook, uncovered, stirring over a high heat, for another two to three minutes, until the tomatoes are tender and well combined, and most of the liquid has been absorbed. Season as needed and serve. Curry Easy Vegetarian by Madhur Jaffrey (Ebury)