In respect of the fervour attached to the 82nd Masters even before Austin Cook has cracked the first competitive drive, it is hilarious to recall the Tiger-proofing of Augusta National. This weekend, those presiding over a major championship that has triggered such excitement owing to the very same individual may wish they could prevent the other 86 members of the field from holing putts via remote control. Tiger-proofing? Now is the time of Tiger-mania. This is not Tiger Woods’s greatest test but the donning of a Green Jacket for the fifth time would without question register as his greatest victory. We have, of course, only Woods’s own stark depictions as evidence but progression from the point where sitting down at dinner triggered agony and retirement was a live option to securing a 15th major title – and all in a matter of months – would rank among sport’s greatest renaissances. Woods’s lowest ebb, after an arrest last May for driving under the influence, has kickstarted his life and turned public sentiment back in his favour. In a non‑tribal sport, the public clearly wants the 42-year-old to prevail here. So, too, and privately will Masters officials. It is that, the “can he do it?” narrative, which has afforded the Masters an eagerness level not seen since Woods was in his dominating pomp. The early part of tournament week has witnessed some staggering scenes, all only possible via word of mouth; mobile phones are prohibited on the premises. Galleries have deepened with every buildup move, with Woods cheered on like a returning hero. Yet, never mind the fact Woods has not won here since 2005 – eight years have passed since he recorded a Masters round better than 68. The irony is, a venue that micromanages to the point where absolutely nothing is left to chance did not have any input on this storyline at all. Woods’s return to the fold, one which has already shown he can compete with the best in his sport, has merely coincided with the first major of 2018. There are contrasting theories at play. It is without question that onlookers, especially those of sceptical disposition, have forgotten or chosen to ignore just how good a fully functioning Woods was. He is not a normal player, he cannot be judged via ordinary criteria. Woods made a career out of making the impossible seem perfectly natural. The second strand is the overlooking of so many of the world’s current best players as the spotlight is fixed on one man. It may appear callous but it is also logical – backing the field against Woods has merit. Justin Thomas, the player of the year thus far, was only part of early week chatter because he played a practice round in the company of the man he once idolised. Dustin Johnson, the world No 1, has barely been afforded a mention in this Masters build-up. Johnson was fourth and sixth in his past two Augusta outings, and the finest golfer in the world a year ago only to be undermined by a topple down a flight of stairs. Johnson has the power to batter parts of Augusta National into pitiful submission. He is, though, respectful of the Woods pull. “He has still got an intimidation factor,” Johnson said. “It is Tiger Woods. He is probably one of the best to ever play the game. So you would have to think he is going to figure out a way to get it [his game] back. He has.” That Justin Rose is as motivated as never before is patently obvious after his play-off defeat by Sergio García here, 12 months ago. The Englishman’s Masters statistics are more striking than most. He has finished outside of the top 20 only once since 2008. Rose has returned two second-place finishes in three years. A successful García defence cannot be ruled out. Jordan Spieth’s Augusta specialism barely requires repetition. The same applies to Bubba Watson, who produced a comfortable victory at the WGC Match Play in Austin last month. Phil Mickelson must have a live chance of becoming the oldest winner in Masters history. Spieth has been candid enough to admit he probably did not appreciate the scale of the Masters when first featuring in Georgia. “As an individual, I think I was a little naive to it,” Spieth said. “After 2014, I realised what it actually meant. An American winning the Masters is a really special thing. This is essentially our Super Bowl. After 2014 I saw that, which built almost an anger, a desire to win.” Rory McIlroy’s Masters destiny seems intrinsically linked to attitude. He freely admits there have been past occasions where the scale of a Masters triumph and all that comes with it has permitted the game’s most natural artist from reaching his holy grail. This week, McIlroy has exuded a relaxed, quiet confidence that renders him worthy of attention. The McIlroy completion of a clean sweep of majors, becoming only the sixth man in history to reach that peak, would not be such an awful alternative to Woods blasting back from the brink. To the masses, however, there may be just a single show in town. “This is my 42nd Masters,” the new Masters chairman, Fred Ridley, said. “I have never been a part of this week where there’s been any more excitement.” He was not exaggerating.