‘We both have a love of Bo Selecta,” says Akemnji Ndifornyen about his and Famalam director Tom Marshall’s shared appreciation of Leigh Francis’s mask-heavy 00s sketch show. Its highlights included Mel B of the Spice Girls as a Lycra-clad pottymouth and Craig David with a kestrel on his arm à la Kes. “It’s weird,” Ndifornyen acknowledges. “But good weird.” As well as weird, the show was controversial, not least for its use of blackface. Take the time Francis blacked up to play chatshow host Trisha Goddard. “I was talking to someone about that recently,” says Ndifornyen. “The reason he was able to get away with it was because Twitter wasn’t around. If he’d done that in this era he would have been done. But it was funny to me because he had Trisha and then conflated it with the Littlest Hobo, which is a show I used to watch on Sunday morning before I went to church.” Ndifornyen and Marshall also like to mix incongruous flavours and influences in their sketch show Famalam. Originally part of a group of pilot shows that the BBC aired last year, the show was given its own four-episode run, starting on 9 April. One of the show’s stars, Samson Kayo, has just been nominated for a Bafta for his performance in the pilot. Billed as a “comedy sketch show where no area of the universe is off limits”, Famalam’s skits range from a blaxploitation reworking of Midsomer Murders to a group of aunties having a Sergio Leone-style standoff over who gets dibs on the last helpings of jollof rice. It’s quickfire, playful comedy rooted in the black British experience. Ndifornyen, who worked on the Javone Prince Show and Dane Baptiste’s sitcom Sunny D, was commissioned by the BBC in February 2017 to put together a sketch show. “In the way that Monty Python and Not the Nine O’Clock News were the gang shows of their day, it felt like if there’s going to be a new gang sketch show in 2018 then it should be a diverse one to reflect the vibrant talent of today,” says Shane Allen, the BBC’s controller of comedy commissioning. Marshall, who had just finished directing Michaela Coel’s sitcom Chewing Gum, came on board after bumping into BBC head of comedy Chris Sussman at a party. From there Ndifornyen assembled a cast including Vivienne Acheampong, Gbemisola Ikumelo, Kayo, John MacMillan, Tom Moutchi and Roxanne Sternberg. “I liken it to One Direction – they put a bunch of people together and it just worked,” says Marshal. “It’s more like the Wu-Tang Clan,” counters Ndifornyen. “Everyone has got their individual attributes.” From Python and Harry Enfield and Chums to Big Train and The Fast Show, sketch shows have been a British comedy staple for decades. Few, however, have had a black or minority ethnic cast. As the first sketch show with no white principal cast members, The Real McCoy was genuinely groundbreaking when it ran from 1991-96. A mix of black and Asian comics including Felix Dexter, Meera Syal and Junior Simpson imagined Chris Eubank as an abstract painter, and featured a churlish Jamaican cash machine, while Dexter’s perfectly drawn character Nathaniel the Accountant found the funny in the subtleties of relations between West Indians and west Africans. “Sketch shows are where the sitcom talent of tomorrow cuts its teeth,” says Allen. “So from Monty Python to The Two Ronnies to Fry and Laurie to Three of a Kind to French and Saunders, it’s crucial for writers and performers to have a format they can grow in.” Historically, however, black comedians have rarely been given the chance to grow. “I watched French and Saunders grow,” said Angie Le Mar in 2010, one of a wave of standups who followed in The Real McCoy’s wake. “I watched Jo Brand grow. But we had The Real McCoy and then we didn’t get the spin-offs.” Lenny Henry was the obvious exception to the rule. But his success was often held up as part of the problem with British comedy: there was one black guy allowed to the party, while the rest had to wait outside. “It’s one in, one out,” said Stephen K Amos in 2010. “Richard Blackwood had his own show, then Jocelyn Jee Esien had hers. But I can’t remember when two black comics were ever on TV at the same time.” The predicament was hardly a secret; Amos used to have a skit in his set about Lenny Henry having to die before he got his own show. There is also a memorable scene in Extras, broadcast in 2006, where Keith Chegwin asks Ricky Gervais to name a funny British black person and the only name he can muster is … Lenny Henry. In a tribute to Dexter, who died in 2013 aged 52, his Real McCoy co-star Eddie Nestor wrote: “18 years after finishing The Real McCoy, things are worse than they have ever been.” He lamented the fact that black acts needed to go to America to get noticed – a point also made by the then shadow business secretary, Chuka Umunna. Opportunities for black comics did come in the wake of The Real McCoy, but they were few and far between. In 2003, BBC3 aired 3 Non-Blondes, starring Ninia Benjamin, Tameka Empson and Esien; the latter became the first black female comedian to front her own sketch show with Little Miss Jocelyn three years later. In 2010 Amos got his own BBC2 sketch show, which ran for one poorly received season. Recent years, however, have seen increasing numbers of black comics edge into the mainstream. In 2016 the creators of online show Mandem on the Wall were given their own slot on BBC3; Famalam is Ndifornyen’s second sketch show for the BBC after the Javone Prince Show. Writer Bolu Babalola, who worked on The Javone Prince Show, urges caution. “We have Famalam, but will the BBC be open to having two black-led sitcoms within the same season? Or is it a check-list exercise? Change isn’t one black show every few years, it’s a constant roster.” Babalola believes the success of US shows such as Insecure and Atlanta, which were comedies that came at the black experience from an off-kilter perspective, have helped. “I think the fact that these shows have done well on a global stage has a lot do with how the UK sees black-led comedies in general. Before, they just couldn’t imagine a wide-reaching audience for black shows and now they have less of a reason to shun them.” The BBC are clearly looking across the Atlantic for inspiration, particularly from Key & Peele. For five innovative, hilarious and hugely popular series, Jordan Peele and Keegan-Michael Key remade the sketch show in their own bizarre image while playing with ideas of race. The show ended in 2016; Peele went on to win an Oscar for Get Out, the twisted horror-satire he wrote and directed. “When you look at the huge success of something like Key & Peele, it works both as a half hour show and as individual sketches,” says Allen. “The BBC is sticking with the sketch show as a format but the hits like Little Britain, Catherine Tate or The Fast Show are cyclical and we’re due another one.” There’s a sense, though, that Famalam’s creators don’t see themselves in the same way as the Real McCoy generation. For one thing, they are highly aware that these days comedy needs to work online. Tom Moutchi came to the attention of Ndifornyen and Marshall via the now defunct Vine; his skits on the six-second video social media platform are guerilla comedy with quick-fire punchlines that speak directly to a black audience. (When Vine announced it would close in 2016 the New York Times lamented its decision, saying: “Vine was never that deep: it wasn’t designed to spark a national conversation on race, culture, appropriation, ownership and identity.” But it did, giving black comics like Moutchi a platform to experiment and grow.) “We knew we had to raise our game because that’s what we were competing against,” says Marshall of the Instagram and Vine comics. “It’s great to make Instagram bits and get that stuff out quickly, but there’s so much time that goes into the show. So when we’re doing homages everything is right on the money. There’s something about these sketches which will live on longer than those immediate hits.” There’s stuff in Famalam that relates to black culture – 100%. But there’s other stuff which is just funny The Famalam team aim to mix carefully crafted comedy with shareable snippets. “We think of it like a rap mixtape,” says Marshall. “My absolute dream now is to be on Instagram one day just looking around and I see one of our sketches. I want it to travel in that way.” “It’s an album format,” adds Ndifornyen. “You can watch it as a whole piece or you can just a la carte it.” The influences that Ndifornyen and Marshall throw around are from all over the comedy map. As well as Bo Selecta, they cite the sharp US juggernaut 30 Rock, the British mainstay Alan Partridge, and the new pretender Rick & Morty. They even like none-more-mainstream 80s ITV comics Hale and Pace. But there’s one show in particular the pair admire. “I want it to be like Key and Peele,” says Marshall. “I don’t see Key & Peele as a black sketch show. I see it as an amazing sketch show.” Ultimately, the pair say they wanted to make something that would appeal to both Ndifornyen’s friends in east London and Marshall’s in his hometown of Middlesbrough. Something that would happily fit in alongside their comic heroes, rather than being siloed off into a racialised sub-genre of comedy. “From the get-go I wanted to make a show with an all-black cast that I would watch when I was younger, but made me feel no different than when I watched Bo Selecta or The Fast Show, which were just allowed to be free and didn’t anchor their humour to one cultural purview,” adds Ndifornyen. In Famalam, “there’s stuff that related to black culture – 100%. But there’s other stuff which is just funny.” • Famalam is available on BBC Three from 9 April and on BBC Two at 10pm on 15 April.