South Africa’s opener Dean Elgar dropped anchor to help steer his team to 134 for three at the close of the third day of the fourth and final Test against Australia, giving them a daunting lead of 401 runs. Elgar had scored 39 from 158 balls in their second innings as the home side look to build an unassailable lead with two full days remaining at the Wanderers. Australia need victory to avoid a first series defeat in South Africa since 1970, but have been rocked by the ball-tampering scandal in which Steve Smith, David Warner and Cameron Bancroft were sent home and given hefty bans after the third Test in Cape Town. Elgar will resume with his captain, Faf du Plessis, on 34, as the pair look to increase the lead towards 500 runs. With so much time left in the Test, a declaration at that point would make South Africa as good as safe. The wicket is beginning to misbehave with variable bounce and there is sideways movement to assist the bowlers, which has brought Australia some success. Pat Cummins removed the in-form Aiden Markram when he edged to Peter Handscomb at second slip, but not before the opener, playing just his 18th Test innings, went past 1,000 runs in the five-day game – the second fastest player to reach that mark for South Africa after Graeme Smith. Hashim Amla was caught at backward short leg by Mitchell March off a Nathan Lyon delivery while AB de Villiers gloved a rising Cummins ball to the wicketkeeper Tim Paine. South Africa had earlier bowled out Australia for 221 in their first innings with a rush of wickets after lunch, having been frustrated in the morning session by Paine and Cummins (50), who put on 99 for the seventh wicket. Paine, the new captain, batted bravely with a stress fracture on his thumb to score a valuable half-century, his fourth in Test cricket, but was the last man out as Elgar took a brilliant running catch at deep mid-off from a delivery by Kagiso Rabada. Cummins was the only wicket to fall in the morning session when he was trapped leg-before by the spinner Keshav Maharaj, but South Africa ran through the tail after lunch. The home side é Morkel, playing in his final Test before retirement from international cricket, was forced from the field with a muscle strain, though he did return to the pitch after the interval.