The former US senator who successfully chaired talks leading to the Good Friday agreement has said that London and Dublin should put aside their disagreements over Brexit to protect the deal. However, George Mitchell added that he also believed the agreement, which turns 20 years old this week, would survive any post-Brexit turbulence. The retired senator and diplomat said Anglo-Irish governmental cooperation had been the “critical first factor” in the process leading to the Good Friday peace deal, and that Northern Ireland now needed the same strong unity between the two governments to defend the gains of the agreement as well as restoring power sharing to the region. Speaking before the 20th anniversary of the agreement on Tuesday, Mitchell said: “I have said many times that the factor that led to the talks was the decision by the governments of the UK and Ireland to cooperate, to try to establish a basis for those negotiations. This was indisputably the critical first factor and but for that I don’t think there would have been any talks or any agreement. You can draw from that time in history that this governmental cooperation must continue.” He said he believed the agreement could survive the dangers posed by the UK pulling out of the EU and creating a land border betweenNorthern Ireland and the Republic, but added: “It depends on what you mean by Brexit and how it is applied.” He continued: “The government of the UK and the EU have both publicly committed that any Brexit agreement they reach will not include the restoration of a hard border. “Now saying that and doing that are two different things. My view is that I feel that Brexit is a mistake for the UK but it was a democratically taken decision and must therefore be respected. The question now is what kind of agreement is going to be negotiated between the EU and the UK.” He added: “A hard border is essential to avoid and I note that … the UK government and the EU, have publicly committed themselves to avoiding that. So we have to support and encourage the final outcome of Brexit where there is no hard border. Because a hard border would lead to the conditions that created demonisation and stereotyping between Britain and Ireland in the past but I do think both the British government and the EU are genuine in their wish to avoid a hard border and so I believe the agreement will survive.” Mitchell, who also worked on peace accords in the Middle East and Bosnia, said that despite the protectionism and Trump administration’s America First policies, Washington politicians would still back US investment in Northern Ireland. “Doing that is one of the most important things we can achieve for the people of Northern Ireland 20 years on from the Good Friday agreement,” Mitchell said. On Monday, the three main loyalist paramilitary organisations recommitted to the Good Friday agreement. In a press conference at Linen Hall library in Belfast, the Ulster Volunteer Force, the Red Hand Commando and the Ulster Defence Association issued their first joint statement since the loyalist ceasefire of 1994. Reaffirming support for the agreement, the groups said they wanted “to play a constructive role” in Northern Ireland. “For too long we have been berated for our past and not able to imagine a better future. We must challenge that outlook by no longer being apologists for conflict but advocates for change and working to create a society that is at ease with itself in its diversity and difference,” they said. In response to repeated statements from the Police Service of Northern Ireland that some loyalists were still heavily involved in crime, the three organisations said any members involved in criminal activities would be expelled. The statement came about after a series of lengthy discussions between the organisations and three former leading figures in the Protestant churches in Northern Ireland. On Tuesday, the former US president Bill Clinton will visit Belfast where he will an address at Queen’s University.