It was meant to be her best “war” voice, but Theresa May sounded more like a nervous, newly ordained curate leading prayers for the first time as she made her statement to the Commons on the Syrian airstrikes. Piety can be a hard-won virtue and sometimes a prime minister has to fake it to make it. Especially when she’s not entirely certain she’s done the right thing. May began more in sorrow than anger. She hadn’t wanted to get involved but the Syrian regime’s use of chemical weapons on its own people had left her no option. So far so good. It was when she got on to the reasons why she hadn’t recalled parliament to sanction her military intervention that she struggled to maintain good faith. Think of it this way, she said. It was only a teeny-weeny airstrike. One that had been carefully calibrated as a token gesture to make everyone feel as if Britain was doing the right thing, while guaranteeing that the Russians did nothing beastly to us in return. So under the circumstances, she had decided not to disturb MPs while they were on their hols. She knew how exhausted they all were and she didn’t want to bother their pretty little heads about something so trivial. And, besides, there was always a chance they might make her look stupid by voting against her. Jeremy Corbyn remained unconvinced. He started by pointing out you can get lawyers to say almost anything – he had found one who agreed with him that the airstrikes were legally questionable – and wondered why the prime minister was limiting her humanitarian efforts to Syria when there were so many other flashpoints around the world equally deserving of her attention. The Labour leader was heckled loudly by the Tories throughout, while the opposition benches sat glumly in silence. The problem wasn’t so much what Corbyn was saying as what he wasn’t. Most Labour MPs believe there is nothing that could persuade their leader to take military action of any kind. Especially when the Russians are involved. Thereafter the Tories queued up to praise May. Ken Clarke declared she had behaved like a “real prime minister” by taking decisive action without consulting parliament only to then say it would have been better if she had first consulted parliament. No one picked him up on this bizarre contradiction, but then it wasn’t that kind of day. Rather it was a day for being tough, sounding tough and hanging tough. On these occasions there is no room for nuance. The moral high ground is to be found in acting first and thinking later. Anyone who dared suggest the prime minister had put a foot wrong was a traitor. Tories Andrew Percy and Steve Double took this to extremes. They sobbed their gratitude to Theresa for saving them the hassle of making decisions they were too stupid to make for themselves. Labour was more divided. Hilary Benn and Yvette Cooper made it clear that while they backed the prime minister’s actions in principle, she would have been better advised to have consulted parliament. Part of living in a democracy was trusting its elected representatives to make the right decisions. And accepting the possibility that – just as the executive might occasionally get it wrong – so might MPs. Others were less guarded. Chris Leslie openly attacked Corbyn by saying that inaction had its own consequences and those that advocated doing nothing should be held to account. Ben Bradshaw went further, demanding the prime minister do some more bombing if the Syrians relapsed on chemical weapons and though he’d rather she consulted parliament first he would find it in his heart to forgive her if she didn’t. Bomb. Bomb, bombety, bomb. Among all this self-righteousness and self-congratulation, the fate of the Syrian people and what successful military action might look like rather got overlooked. Only Stella Creasy raised the possibility of taking more refugees, an idea instantly dismissed by the prime minister on the grounds that the Syrians would hate the British weather and were much happier where they were. No one really demurred. But then the three-hour statement had never really been about Syria. It had been about making parliament feel better about itself. Big. Important. Caring. And in that it had been time well spent.