What were you hoping for? A fun and entertaining evening with a stranger… and that’s what I got! First impressions? Nervous, well-presented, with a kind face. What did you talk about? A brief life history of Angus and Alice (we both had a lot to say for ourselves), all things Spanish, and our lack of regional accents. Any awkward moments? We both wanted the last scallop. Good table manners? He nailed the chopsticks, let me choose the sushi and drink most of the wine. Best thing about Angus? There’s more to him than meets the eye. He is interesting and interested. Would you introduce him to your friends? We made friends on the date with a guy who was walking his dog. Does that count? Describe Angus in three words Genuine, funny, great name. What do you think he made of you? Open, friendly, likes her food. Did you go on somewhere? We did. Angus had done his pre-date research and found a bar for us to go to if we didn’t hate each other. And… did you kiss? No. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be? My awkward handshake at the beginning. Marks out of 10? 8. Would you meet again? He asked for my number, so who knows? What were you hoping for?Something different and some good grub. First impressions?Chatty, confident and very pretty. What did you talk about?Strange friends, odd Tinder dates and her favourite nostalgic box sets. Any awkward moments?We had a debate about whether Friends is funny or not. I don’t think it is. Good table manners?Impeccable. Although I didn’t set a high standard with my chopstick skills. Best thing about Alice?Her disarming smile. Would you introduce her to your friends?For sure, I reckon they’d get on. Describe Alice in three wordsCreative, funny, outgoing. What do you think she made of you?Hopefully good company – if a little young. Did you go on somewhere?To a bar around the corner for a G&T. And… did you kiss?Steady on. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Not a thing, Alice is lovely. Marks out of 10?7. Would you meet again? She gave me her number, so we’ll see what happens. • Alice and Angus ate at Cubé, London W1.Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com