Prep 3 minServes 2 230g frozen berries50ml Greek yoghurt1 tsp honey Put the ingredients in a food processor or blender and blitz. Serve immediately – the frozen fruit sets the yoghurt – or you can store it in the freezer until needed. Alternatives• Change the berries for frozen banana or mango• Swap the yoghurt for shop-bought custard Prep 3 minServes 2 4 meringue nests (look out for the discounted broken ones – there’s always a pack) 300ml thick-set double cream1 punnet (about 150g) raspberries Crumble the meringue nests into a large bowl, then add the cream. Gently fold in half the raspberries, then scatter the rest on top to serve. Alternatives• Substitute the raspberries for blueberries or strawberries – or all of the above• Use good-quality jam, fruit curd or coulis instead of the fresh fruit Prep 5 minFreeze 2 hrServes 4 2 tsp vodka500ml shop-bought ready-made custard8 Oreos Put the vodka and custard in a bowl and stir to combine. Blitz five cookies in a food processor until crumb-like, and break the other three into chunks. Distribute the biscuit chunks between four ramekins, cover with the custard and top with a layer of cookie crumb. Put in the freezer until the custard has set to your liking – one to two hours should do the trick. Alternatives• Swap the Oreos for chocolate-chip cookies or your favourite biscuit• Add one tablespoon of fresh fruit, such as pomegranate, blueberries or blackberries … Prep 7 minServes 2 200g chocolate350g firm tofu2 tbsp coconut oil2 tbsp maple syrup3 tbsp Kahlua1 tbsp vanilla extract Put the chocolate in a glass bowl set above (but not touching) a pan of simmering water, and let it melt slowly without stirring. Meanwhile, put the tofu, coconut oil, maple syrup, Kahlua and vanilla in a food processor and blend until smooth. Add the chocolate and blitz, then transfer the mixture to serving glasses. Alternatives• Swap the tofu for three very ripe avocados • Change the Kahlua for Baileys or other creamy liqueur Prep 10 minRest 40 minCook 40 minServes 4 500ml shop-bought ready-made custard175ml milk25g butter12 slices of bread 25g granulated brown sugar 3 tsp cinnamon70g sultanasNutmeg, to taste Mix the custard and milk together in a bowl. Butter the bread and grease an ovenproof dish or baking tray. Cover the base of the dish with a layer of the bread, sprinkle with the sugar, cinnamon and sultanas, then pour over a little of the custard mixture. Repeat the layering with the rest of the bread. Top with the remaining custard mixture, grate with nutmeg and allow to sit for at least 30-40 minutes. Bake in the oven at 180C/350F/gas 4 for 30–40 minutes. Alternatives• Add a handful of chocolate buttons in between the layers• Substitute the sultanas with other dried fruit, and the nutmeg with one teaspoon of almond essence Prep 5 minServes 2 60ml strong coffee4 scoops vanilla ice-cream1 Crunchie/honeycomb toffee/sponge toffee bar Brew the coffee. Leaving the chocolate bar unopened, tap it on the side of a work surface or with a rolling pin to break it up. Add two scoops of ice-cream to each bowl, divide the coffee between the bowls and sprinkle with the crushed chocolate bar pieces. Alternatives• Substitute the Crunchie bar for a Daim/Heath/Skor or other honeycomb chocolate bar • Substitute the honeycomb chocolate bar with toasted hazelnuts and almonds