Prince Harry and Meghan Markle are to break with tradition for their wedding, with UK and foreign politicians not on the official guest list. Donald Trump, the US president, and his predecessor, Barack Obama, have not been invited to the 19 May ceremony, and Theresa May and other UK political leaders are not expected to attend in any official capacity, it is understood. A Kensington Palace spokesman said: “It has been decided that an official list of political leaders – both UK and international – is not required for Prince Harry and Ms Markle’s wedding. Her Majesty’s government was consulted on this decision, which was taken by the royal household.” The couple’s 600 guests are expected to be people with whom the bride and groom have a direct relationship, which is considered appropriate for the wedding of the prince and Markle. By contrast, the wedding of the Duke of Cambridge was attended by leading UK figures and foreign heads of state or their representatives. Though Prince Harry is friendly with the Obamas, it is thought he and his bride will meet them in the near future, possibly during an official overseas visit once they are married. Kensington Palace has named some of the members of the public who have been chosen to join the crowds inside the grounds of Windsor Castle on the couple’s wedding day. Amelia Thompson, 12, who was caught up in the Manchester Arena bombing last year, is on the list. She plans to take Sharon Goodman, who lost her 15-year-old granddaughter, Olivia Campbell-Hardy, in the attack. She also hopes a ticket can be found for Harriet Taylor, one of the daughters of Jane Tweddle, who also died at the arena. Pamela Anomneze, who works at the Studio 306 Collective helping people with mental health problems, said she felt excited and overwhelmed to be one of the chosen guests. She said: “I got an email informing me, and I thought it was an April Fools’ Day prank.” Anomneze described the invite as truly unbelievable, saying the pair were the world’s most beautiful couple. The Londoner will take her 15-year-old son, Jude, as her plus one. Kensington Palace announced in March that 1,200 members of the public would be among the crowds allowed into the grounds of Windsor Castle during the 19 May wedding at St George’s Chapel. The group were nominated by regional lord lieutenant offices. The couple had asked for attendees to come from a range of backgrounds and ages, including young people who have shown strong leadership, and those who have served their communities. Others invited include a primary school teacher, David Gregory, from Blyth, Northumberland, who is taking his wife, Hannah. The couple will celebrate their first wedding anniversary the same weekend. On Monday, the couple appealed for donations to charity, rather than wedding gifts, from well-wishers. They nominated seven good causes. Reuben Litherland, 14, who is deaf and has set up a lunchtime sign language club at his school in Derby, will attend the wedding with his mother.