Essex won 10 of their 14 Division One matches last year and six of 16 in their promotion season (2016), so it shouldn’t be a surprise to see them win again after the last week’s Headingley bogout. But, at 94-7 just after lunch against fancied Lancashire, the Chelmsford faithful must have been wondering. A winning mentality can be as infectious as a losing one and, even by the end of that first day, the champions were probably favourites. There were handy contributions from Simon Harmer and James Foster, but Jamie Porter’s nine wickets got the home side back into the match and then finished off the visitors’ resistance, as the fourth-innings target loomed closer and closer. Porter fits the description of a late developer and, were he a spin bowler, he would probably be ascribed plenty of nous, though, for seamers, that usually just means “lost his nip”. One thing is for sure – Porter knows how to win cricket matches – and England could do with a bit of that kind of knowledge just now. There are few places where winning cricket matches matters more to the locals than Yorkshire, so there’ll be smiles around Headingley as the Tykes red-ball players took their leave of HQ until late August. Quite a contrast with a week ago when not a ball was bowled and supporters were miffed about Liam Plunkett and David Willey jumping ship at the last minute for the ocean of cash that is the IPL. But, no matter, Ben “Betsy” Coad backed up 2017’s breakthrough season by snaring 10 wickets as Nottinghamshire were swept aside by a possibly unexpectedly comfortable 164 runs. Competition is fierce for places in the White Rose attack, with Josh Shaw (at 22, a couple of years younger than Coad) having a run in this match and perhaps the most promising of them all, 20-year-old Matthew Fisher, still awaiting his chance. As might Plunkett and Willey once home again. After Ollie Pope had scored the second century of his nascent career (both against Hampshire), Amar Virdi, still a teenager, faced the classic challenge for a spinner: could he lead the attack in their objective of taking 10 fourth-innings wickets with all the time in the world and 400+ runs in the bank? He must have slept well after dismissing James Vince and Hashim Amla late on Day Three and he completed a quartet of international victims with Rilee Rossouw and Kyle Abbott in his impressive bag of 33-7-79-4. Credit too to Sam Northeast, who showed all too rare concentration to bat nearly six hours, only falling after tea, last man out for 129 as the match went the distance. For about 20 overs in Somerset’s second innings, the Taunton faithful watched Marcus Trescothick bat with James Hildreth as they have done for some 14 years – not many sports offer that kind of continuity to a club’s supporters for all the 100 balls balls hogging the headlines. Hildreth’s 40th first-class century for his county (only Viv Richards, Harold Gimblett and Tres are ahead of him on that list) was not merely for old times’ sake, as it set up a win inside three days over Worcestershire, for whom Ed Barnard made 95 runs for once out and took 11 wickets to boot. One down, 13 to go, but if those two old warhorses can lead Somerset to the holy grail of a first Championship, there won’t be a dry eye in the house. And I’m not just talking about the West Country. Derbyshire win at home for the first time since 2014! Some might view that statement with a jaundiced eye, pointing to the fact that overseas guns for hire, Ravi Rampaul, Hardus Viljoen and Duanne Olivier bowled 111.4 of 168.4 overs, taking 14 Middlesex wickets. That said, openers Chesterfield-born Ben Slater and Lancashire Academy product Luis Reece put on 219 before they were separated in the second innings, the lead then an already commanding 317. Reece was once highly rated at Old Trafford and, at 27, still has enough time to realise his considerable potential. PG Wodehouse may have remarked that there is nothing so useless as the second son of an Earl, but he hadn’t chance to consider the role of back-up ‘keeper on a 21st-century tour. Ben Foakes was England’s Freddie Threepwood last winter, when he made it to the crease six times in nearly six months spent in Australia, Jamaica and New Zealand. Back home, he shook off the cobwebs to make 46 and 81 in Surrey’s hard-fought win over Hampshire and kept wicket with his usual aplomb, including pouching a one-handed blinder to wrap up the victory. Though Foakes seems to have been around for ages, he’s still only 25 – or nearly two years younger than Alec Stewart when he played the first of his 133 Tests, should you prefer. If Ed Smith wants to burnish his credentials as an innovative thinker, he’ll pick Foakes as keeper and number seven and bat Jonny Bairstow at five. Or, if Smith really fancies making his mark, he could ask YJB to open the innings – Sehwagishly. • This article appeared first on The 99.4 Cricket Blog• Follow Gary Naylor on Twitter