Alexandre Lacazette believes that winning the Europa League will “save” Arsenal’s season and could lead to Arsène Wenger staying on for another year. Arsenal survived a scare to come from two goals down to draw 2-2 against CSKA Moscow on Thursday night, going through 6-3 on aggregate, to set up their first European semi-final in nine years. They will find out who their opponents will be in the last four later on Friday, with Atlético Madrid the team to avoid when the draw is made in Switzerland. The Europa League remains Arsenal’s salvation this season, partly because the competition represents their only chance of winning silverware but also due to the fact that it is their only realistic opportunity of qualifying for the Champions League given their poor domestic form. Arsenal are currently sixth in the Premier League, 13 points behind fourth-placed Tottenham Hotspur. Asked about the significance of the Europa League and Wenger’s own future, which appears to be intrinsically linked with the competition, Lacazette replied: “It will save our season because in the Premier League we are not doing well. Winning a cup would be good. It can be the way to keep the manager because he did so much good for the club.” With the Europa League final taking place in Lyon, where Lacazette made 275 appearances for his hometown club before joining Arsenal for £46.5m in the summer, the Frenchman has extra motivation to get through the semi-finals. “I really want to be in the final to play in front of my family and friends,” the Arsenal striker said. “But it’s not only that – I came to Arsenal because I want to win trophies.” Petr Cech, who endured a difficult night against CSKA, admitted that Arsenal are under pressure to deliver Europa League success because of the prize that is on offer. “You can feel it,” Cech said. “There is a big responsibility for everyone because we know with the position we are in the league, it is difficult. “Someone would have to have a big meltdown in the last seven games to give us a chance to sneak into the top four through the league. We know this is our chance to book our Champions League spot but not only that, you play a European competition for a cup and for a cup the club has never won. This is another opportunity to add a great trophy to the cabinet.”