As the cherry blossom fades in Kyoto, attention turns to a visual spectacle of a different kind: the annual Kyotographie photo festival. Showing the work of 15 leading international photographers in unique locations, this year’s theme, Up, centres on a subtle call to action. The festival’s directors, Lucille Reyboz and Yusuke Nakanishi, say participants were asked to illustrate how social change can be encouraged through self-awareness, action and creation. The use of unusual architectural spaces, from a disused printing works to the sanctuary of a temple, gives the festival a distinct flavour and adds another atmospheric dimension to each photographer’s work. The South African-born photographer’s installation, presented in a former ice factory and anchored by a series of portraits and video exploration of devastated living spaces, seeks to connect people affected by flooding and the catastrophic impact of industrial and environmental change. The Tidelines series is a collection of water-damaged photographs that provide a moving testament to the memories of family life before the floods. Exhibited in the depths of the disused ice factory is the astonishingly personal work by Alberto Garcia-Alix. Renowned for his raw, hedonistic portraiture, the maverick Spanish photographer’s early images focus on some of the people in his life. The photos set the scene for a dreamlike, retrospective film that is woven together with video, still images and his poetic narration, detailing a life led against the grain of convention and the lost aspirations of youth. If yesterday I photographed silences, today I photograph my own voice Regarded as one of the most radical and influential photographers of his generation, the Fukase retrospective is a festival highlight. The extensive exhibition features the acclaimed series Ravens, which explores the artist’s battle with depression, as well as his vivid photographs showing the wild side of his beloved cat, Sasuke. The jewel in the crown is his early colour work, which was previously published but never exhibited. Viewed in its entirety, the Fukase display gives a deeper understanding of the variety and complexity of the photographer’s work. Izumi Miyazaki, one of the rising stars of the festival, is also the star of her work. Reminiscent of Magritte, at first glance her vivid use of colour and character seems whimsical, but her intent is a serious exploration of surrealism that leaves the viewer charmed and unsettled in equal measure. Miyazaki draws inspiration from her daily life, including what she has eaten. When she goes in front of the camera, she becomes a surreal character, lost in a world she has imagined The Kyoto central wholesale market is the inspired venue for K-Narf’s tribute to the proud work ethic that is respected in Japanese culture. On the opening day of the festival, the photographer’s almost lifesize portraits of market traders caused a stir of excitement as members of the local community recognised their friends and colleagues. The project is centred on the local people and preserving their respect for the next generation, K-Narf says. We always see the beauty of what we have lost when it is too late The Kyotographie international photography festival runs until 13 May.