Something of a line in the sand has been drawn in the ball-tampering scandal after David Warner followed the lead of Steve Smith and Cameron Bancroft by accepting the punishments meted out by Cricket Australia for his part in the incident in South Africa. “I have today let Cricket Australia know that I fully accept the sanctions imposed on me,” the former vice-captain wrote. “I am truly sorry for my actions and will now do everything I can to be a better person, team-mate and role model.” Twenty-four hours previously, former Test captain Smith and Bancroft issued their own statements to the same effect, but there remained uncertainty over how Warner would respond to his 12-month ban and the prospect of never again holding a leadership role within the national side. The opener had indicated in the immediate aftermath of an emotional press conference on Saturday that he would seek legal advice before deciding on the option of an appeal. Retirement was also an option for the 31-year-old, but his decision not to challenge the punishments handed to him for bringing the game into disrepute – a path that had potential to drag the saga out even further – brings a degree of closure to the affair. Warner, who was identified as the ring leader of the plot to doctor the ball during the third Test in Cape Town, will now sit out playing cricket in Australia until March 2019. He will also be expected to carry out 100 hours of voluntary work within the cricket community, but remaining active in terms of playing during the suspension will be high on his list of priorities over the next 12 months. Warner, Smith and Bancroft have the option of returning to grade cricket next summer while county cricket in England also remains a possibility if they can get the green light from the English authorities. “The events of Cape Town have severely affected the game,” Cricket Australia CEO James Sutherland said. “It has also been humbling to be reminded of the passion all Australians have for our great game. “These are significant penalties for professional cricketers. They were not imposed lightly. We know the players will return to playing the game they love, and in doing so, we hope they rebuild their careers and regain the trust of fans.”