Neil Young has criticised the promoters of a forthcoming London show for selecting the “fossil fuel funding entity” Barclays as a sponsor. Young is scheduled to perform alongside Bob Dylan at Hyde Park on 12 July 2019 as part of a series of one-day festivals promoted by British Summer Time. Writing on his website, Neil Young Archives, Young said that the choice of sponsor “doesn’t work for me. I believe in science. I worry about the climate crisis and am deeply concerned about its massive global ramifications and my beautiful grandchildren’s future … There’s no doubt about it. It’s been a massive fuck up!” Many of the world’s top banks lend tens of billions for extracting the most carbon-intensive fossil fuels, according to a 2017 report on top lenders. Barclays scored above average for good practice on coal mining, but was rated D and below for unconventional oil and liquefied natural gas exports. Young claimed that BST “jumped the gun” on the announcement before he was happy with the artwork on the poster and the details of the show. “The tickets were put on sale and the announcement was made, all without my knowledge.” BST events are billed as being presented by Barclaycard. Heineken, Chandon and Bacardi also sponsor the concerts. The Guardian has contacted BST for a comment. Young said he was trying to rectify the situation and that he was in discussions about finding a different sponsor. He apologised to fans, describing the incident as “an anomaly” and cited the lyrics to his 1988 song This Note’s for You: “I ain’t singing for Pepsi / Don’t sing for Coke / I won’t sing for nobody / Makes me look like a joke.” Young’s manager Elliott Roberts also apologised to fans for not offering pre-sale tickets. “To say we fell short of our obligations on the announcement and pre-sales for the Hyde Park show is an understatement and we disappointed a lot of people,” he wrote. “I personally really must apologize for this lapse because working as the custodian of Neil Young Archives is very serious to me. Neil’s life’s work has been mine as well.” A noted environmentalist, Young recently criticised Donald Trump for his reluctance to act on climate change after California wildfires destroyed the songwriter’s home. In a post on his website, Young said: “California is vulnerable – not because of poor forest management as DT (our so-called president) would have us think. We are vulnerable because of climate change; the extreme weather events and our extended drought is part of it.”