So the curiously flavoured chalice passes to stadium-filling, movie-starring, controversy-provoking comedian Kevin Hart, the star of Jumanji and many other films and specials, who has confirmed that he will be hosting the 2019 Oscar ceremony. In some ways, it is a surprise that he hasn’t done this gig before now. Hart’s is one of the most dizzying rises to the top in modern showbusiness history; so spectacular that fellow comedian Dave Chappelle has a pretty mordant bit about how he feels about this staggeringly upward career. Hart has claimed on his Instagram feed that this job has been “a goal on my list for a long time”, and of course it is a sign that you have arrived. But Hart must be aware that Oscar hosts present themselves as non-Oscar-winners almost by definition, and that the host is dangerously exposed as never before, over a long evening, fronting a telecast with declining ratings and disrespectful social media coverage. A slip, a fluff, a miscalculated gag, a cutaway to someone frowning in the audience, will metastasise into a gif. The chances are high that he is going to be thought to have done the job badly, unfunnily or offensively. The touchstone of awfulness is Seth MacFarlane in 2013 with his We Saw Your Boobs number, whose ironic context was not considered sufficient to explain an abysmally toe-curling routine. Hart’s status as a comedian and an African American is what is at issue. As a black man, his presence is of course part of the Academy’s ongoing attempt to answer the racial diversity problem. But there are newer problems with sexual politics, the Weinstein scandal and #MeToo. Hart has himself got into seriously hot water with his perceived homophobia. In a 2011 standup skit he says: “One of my biggest fears is my son growing up and being gay. That’s a fear. Keep in mind, I’m not homophobic […] Be happy. Do what you want to do.” He later explained that this was an essentially comic dramatisation of his own anxieties and insecurities – a self-satire. Many were not entirely happy with that gloss. Yet the point is that unlike, say, former host Jimmy Kimmel, who comes from the more emollient background of talk-show host, Hart is a comedian: his job is to hilariously overstep his bounds and tread on toes for laughs. It is a minefield. Perhaps no one has ever done the job better than Tina Fey and Amy Poehler hosting the Golden Globes, especially in 2015, when they launched fearlessly into material about Bill Cosby sexually assaulting young women. Only they could have got away with it, at that point in time, and at the Globes, with those awards’ notably more relaxed – and enjoyable – atmosphere. As for Hart, he is, or can be, a very funny comic. The Oscars will not get the best out of him: they never do. My personal choice would have been Michelle Wolf, the standup who got into trouble for her speech at White House Correspondents’ Dinner. Maybe next year. 