It is now possible to move on. To the relief of those in charge of the England cricket teams – Trevor Bayliss, Ed Smith, Joe Root and Eoin Morgan – Ben Stokes and the man who became the doosra in all this, Alex Hales, are eligible for selection for all forthcoming matches. There will be no complications for the national selector when he announces the tour parties for the West Indies on Monday. So there is no real tarnish to the feelgood factor that has surrounded the England team for the past six months. No doubt Stokes and Hales are mightily relieved, too. Both pleaded guilty to the charges and have expressed more contrition for their part in the incident in Bristol than has been heard before. Of course they had brought the game into disrepute. They have publicly recognised this and have apologised to one and all. They are a few pounds poorer, by their standards, but they can now concentrate on their England careers ahead of a momentous year. By the same token those at the ECB are content that some sort of justice has been seen to be done. It was convenient for it that Stokes, in particular, had already missed enough matches to serve a punishment. Meanwhile the Professional Cricketers’ Association is happy as well after what its chief executive, David Leatherdale, described as “a fair hearing”. It may all seem a bit cosy but it is time to crack on. Throughout this entire saga Stokes has appeared to be the only man visibly unmoved by the affair whether in court – just about everyone except him was in tears after he had been found not guilty – or on the field. He does not like to suggest frailty in any sphere of his life. But on Friday he acknowledged that “this incident has been a huge burden for the last 15 months”, which is something he has hidden well. Yet for those watching Stokes prepare and perform for England recently it has become increasingly apparent that this episode has changed him; it has enhanced his determination to do everything he can to improve as a cricketer. He is now an incredibly driven man. Stokes trains furiously to such an extent that England’s management may be as concerned about him driving himself too hard before he gets on to the field of play as about what he gets up to after play. Coaches and captain generally quite like that sort of problem, however. So finally this saga has come to an end. It has haunted the England setup just as the Cape Town ball-tampering incident has preoccupied the Australians recently. The approach of the two boards to these unwanted issues could not have been more different. Australia, triggered by initial public outrage, dived in and promptly imposed year-long bans on David Warner and Steve Smith after the episode in March. It may now regret the haste. For the ECB the situation was complicated by an impending court case. Even so it took the alternative course, often the one of least resistance, and bided its time. Eventually it is all over. Most people just want to look forward now. The summer of 2019 will soon be here. It is the most appetising imaginable before the English game embarks on its self-inflicted journey to the edge of a cliff in 2020. There is the World Cup and the Ashes and crowds will want to see Warner and Smith and Stokes – and possibly Hales – doing what they do best on a cricket field.