Chelsea’s reputation took another withering blow on Thursday night, with the club condemning their own supporters after they were heard singing an antisemitic chant in Hungary, just days after four fans were suspended for allegedly abusing Raheem Sterling. Minutes into Chelsea’s first match since Saturday’s Premier League encounter with Manchester City was overshadowed by the alleged racist abuse directed at City’s Sterling, a group of the 1,273 travelling supporters were heard singing a derogatory chant about Tottenham fans, featuring antisemitic language. Chelsea were attempting to put the Sterling story behind them as they took on Vidi in Budapest but the club were once again facing another discrimination storm after this 2-2 Europa League draw. A Chelsea spokesman said: “Antisemitism and any other kind of race-related or religious hatred is abhorrent to this club and the overwhelming majority of our fans. It has no place at Chelsea or in any of our communities. We have stated this loud and clear on many occasions from the owner, the board, coaches and players. “Any individuals that can’t summon the brainpower to comprehend this simple message and are found to have shamed the club by using antisemitic or racist words or actions will face the strongest possible action from the club.” On the pitch, Olivier Giroud saved Chelsea from defeat but they left Budapest counting the cost of a knee injury to Álvaro Morata. Willian’s free-kick after 30 minutes was cancelled out immediately by an Ethan Ampadu own goal and Loïc Nego struck a sumptuous volley after 56 minutes to give Vidi the lead. But Giroud’s free-kick 15 minutes from time earned a draw for Chelsea, who had already qualified for the last 32 as Group L winners. Vidi finished third, as Bate Borisov joined Chelsea in the knockout stages. Chelsea made 10 changes, with Willian the only player to retain his starting place following the 2-0 win over City. The 18-year-olds Callum Hudson-Odoi and Ampadu were among the starters. It took 30 minutes for the first real moment of quality to come at the Groupama Arena, when Willian injected some pace and was brought down by Szabolcs Huszti 25 yards out. The Brazil playmaker curled in the resulting free-kick. Vidi’s reply was immediate and also came from a set piece. They forced a corner, taken by Huszti, and Marko Scepovic’s header deflected in off the unfortunate Ampadu. Hudson-Odoi showed glimpses of his potential. He did well to cross to Morata at the near post, but Adam Kovacsik saved from the striker. Nego next forced Willy Caballero into a strong save. Chelsea did not heed the warning as the Vidi forward beat the goalkeeper 11 minutes into the second half with a superbly-struck volley. Georgi Milanov’s lofted pass found Nego in the right side of Chelsea’s area and he fired into the near top corner of Caballero’s net. Emerson Palmieri crossed for Giroud but the striker, who had replaced Morata at half-time, could only divert the ball wide at the near post. Chelsea equalised after a Paulo Vinicius foul on Cesc Fàbregas, 20 yards out. With Willian already substituted, it was Giroud who stepped up. His curling strike beat a defender on the line to go in off the underside of the bar. It was the France international’s fourth goal in three Europa League games and preserved the club’s unbeaten record in the competition. Chelsea will find out their last 32 opponents on Monday but, you suspect, the spotlight will still be on the club for all the wrong reasons. The  draw for the last 32 of the Europa League will take place on Monday from midday. Seeded teams will consist of the Europa League group winners along with the four best third placed teams dropping in from the Champions League. These teams are then drawn against the unseeded sides. Seeded teams: Bayer Leverkusen,  Red Bull Salzburg, Zenit St Petersburg, Dinamo Zagreb, Arsenal, Real Betis, Villarreal, Eintracht Frankfurt, Genk Sevilla Dynamo Kiev, Chelsea, Napoli*, Valencia*, Inter Milan*, Benfica* Unseeded teams:  Zurich, Celtic, Slavia Prague, Fenerbahce, Sporting Lisbon, Olympiacos, Rapid Vienna, Lazio, Malmo, Krasnodar, Rennes, BATE, Viktoria Plzen*, Club Bruges*, Shakhtar Donetsk*, Galatasaray* *Qualified via the Champions League