Exotic animals including small birds, fish and frogs were killed in a devastating fire at Chester zoo. The zoo confirmed the loss of life as an appeal raised more than £50,000 in donations barely 24 hours after the blaze on Saturday. Jamie Christon, the zoo’s chief operating officer, said keepers had been “completely overwhelmed” by the generosity. The zoo said no staff or visitors were harmed and that all mammals – including critically endangered orangutans, gibbons, crocodiles, turtles and exotic birds – were rescued. However, it added that it was unable to save some insects, frogs, fish and small birds near the outbreak of the fire in the monsoon forest area, billed as Britain’s biggest indoor habitat. Christon said on Sunday: “It’s absolutely heartbreaking to lose any animal, especially when conservationists have worked so hard to breed these wonderful species. “New homes have been found within the zoo for all of the animals that were led to safety and our teams are working around the clock to relocate them as soon as possible.” The zoo, which reopened on Sunday, said the cause of the fire was unknown and that it was assisting an investigation by the fire service. Hundreds of people donated more than £50,000 to the zoo after it launched a fundraising drive to pay for repairs to the monsoon forest enclosure. Christon added: “The strength and support from the public has been incredibly overwhelming and the messages of goodwill have been of great comfort to our teams. “We will support each other in rebuilding this part of the zoo and continue our mission of preventing extinction.” The zoo said it had been inundated with messages from people asking how they could help. “We remain committed to our mission to prevent extinction and for those who are asking how they can help, we would welcome a donation to our continuing conservation work,” the zoo said. The Cheshire fire and rescue service declared a major incident after it was called to the zoo shortly before 11.30am. Witnesses described how visitors to the attraction were rushed to safety as the blaze spread rapidly through the roof. Zoo staff led the animals housed in the structure to safety as firefighters arrived on the scene. Armed police officers were reportedly sent to the zoo in case any dangerous animals escaped and became a threat to the public. One person was treated for smoke inhalation as a result of the fire, according to the North West ambulance service. One witness, David Clough, 50, who lives across the road from the zoo, said high winds fanned the flames in the roof of the building. He added: “We were very worried for the people and animals that would have been in the building. “Orangutans and gibbons are our nearest neighbours there, but there are many other animals, including free-flying birds.” A visitor, who declined to be named, told the Press Association: “We were in the monsoon enclosure when it happened and were rushed out due to an electrical fire. It spread very quickly. “The staff ensured all the members of the public were safe. Many staff [were] running towards the fire, [I’m] assuming to help with evacuating animals.” Chester zoo is home to about 21,000 animals including tigers, lions and elephants. The monsoon forest is kept in a subtropical climate of 26.6C and mimics the sights, smells and sounds of a rainforest.