Regardless of your political leanings, the people of the UK have every right to expect that government will, as a minimum, be competent and rational in their management of the country. Instead, we now seem to have a spectacle somewhat similar to chickens with their heads cut off running round the farmyard. Clearly, this was the deal May told the EU she wanted. We now face further national humiliation while the EU simply humour her. It is difficult to imagine how it could get worse, but I am sure if anyone can make it worse, Theresa May will. Escapee99 So the PM is going round the EU trying to get more “concessions”, when she hasn’t even defined what Brexit is, what it’s supposed to achieve, or what needs to change in order to make the deal we have more acceptable. And still in denial of the fact that the problems with the deal are of her own making – the EU has given her the only deal they can that’s consistent with their own laws and her demands. If she wants a different deal, it’s her demands that have to change. Lapsedastronomer I am 100% a remainer but I fear the result of a cancelled Brexit more than almost anything. Fascism is growing in our country and cancelling Brexit would give it a huge boost. The negotiations should be handed to Labour. By allowing the continuation of freedom of movement – or something close to it – in our position all sorts of Brexit deals that are closed to the racist Tories can be managed. They are not as good as remaining but they can come close. I do think that all those who post here saying get rid of Brexit are asking for something dangerous and are clearly not democrats. And those who demand a hard Brexit on the back of a deeply flawed referendum that resulted in a very small majority for one position are also clearly not democrats (and I include May’s cabinet in that). GorseBush Labour’s stance is now critical if the country is to be saved from the catastrophe of a hard Brexit. The key issue is time. Corbyn says that he want’s to force a general election but as May will not bring anything to Parliament to be voted down and will just keep pushing back decision day, the clock is ticking in favour of Rees-Mogg’s agenda unless Labour take the initiative. They need to put a time limit on when they will call a no-confidence vote regardless of what May does. If they are unsuccessful in forcing an election the no confidence vote deadline needs to allow enough time for parliament to block a hard Brexit and call a new referendum where remaining in the EU is an option. franglosaxon To any non-Tory who thinks that the priority is to destroy the Tories right now... I think job already done. Half the Cabinet will fight to keep us in the EU if the alternative is no deal. The other half literally cannot see beyond the next leadership context. The pilot is barricaded in the cockpit with the door locked and on a crash course. The local parties have shrunk, giving disproportionate power to the “no deal, no problem” brigade. Even if the party is still together in 2022, enough ordinary Tory voters across key constituencies will be desperate for somewhere else to go. In this context, Labour may lose some votes in leave voting constituencies by swinging unambiguously behind remain, but the long term electoral prize is so much greater. Omnisceptic The most frustrating thing right now is that just one person – May – has halted the process of doing something about this whole mess by calling off the withdrawal agreement debate and vote, and just one other person – Corbyn – is preventing the opposition from making the most of her despicable behaviour. If I was the Speaker, I’d be looking into whether it’s permissable to go to the Queen and dissolve parliament myself! smogo With some regret, I think it might be better for the EU if the UK leaves. Some short term pain maybe. The reason: politics in the EU is now significantly healthier than when the UK was there. These are the murmurs in the echoes of the EU parliament. The prospect of the UK cancelling article 50 by a referendum, or parliamentary vote, or general election is beginning to fill me with dread. The prospect of the UK delegation limping back to Brussels arguing with themselves and everyone else around does not fill me with delight. Not least because they would get to rejoin on exactly the same terms with all these advantages and special deals they negotiated. This seems to contradict natural justice. I’m not certain, in these uncertain times. Maybe it’s best if they cancel article fifty and remain. Maybe not. What’s certain is I won’t be devastated if they slam the door. I suspect this opinion is common in the EU now. JamesValencia One angle (among many) that has not been adequately considered in the Brexit debate is that “no-deal” cannot be a policy position. The stance held by some ultras from day one is that we walk away with no deal. That gets parroted by the ignorant keyboard warriors that you get on the BBC (“‘bring it on,” they say). Advocating a no deal would result in the UK defaulting on hundreds of treaties overnight, the gravest one being the Good Friday agreement, which was achieved after years of progress to end violence. To want to tear up an agreement and risk a return to the days when thousands of fellow citizens, and citizens of other countries, including children, were murdered using bombs and guns is morally offensive and repugnant. The sheer immorality of this stance does not get anything like the airtime it deserves. These tub-thumping bigots need to be called out on it. ZT Follow the discussion and add your contribution