Patty Vengeance is really into Mary, Queen of Scots: “She’s seen as this feminist icon. For me, though, it’s more that she’s relatable – as a strong woman and a survivor.” The 29-year-old writer and musician, who fronts the riot grrrl band Fistymuffs, is standing by the edge of the water in Leith, where, according to a plaque set into the quayside, Mary arrived from France in the haar-veiled early morning of 19 August 1561. The widowed teenager – tall, red-haired, an unearthly beauty – was the anointed ruler of Scotland, and she had come home. “She was a tragic figure,” says Patty, who lives in this increasingly hipsterish district of Edinburgh. “But she was determined and resilient. I admire her very much.” How extraordinary that the life and death of this 16th-century queen continues to speak to us, perhaps to women in particular, in the 21st century. A forthcoming film, Mary Queen of Scots, stars Saoirse Ronan as Mary and Margot Robbie as Queen Elizabeth, who in 1587 ordered the execution of her cousin and rival for the English throne. The film is likely to reignite interest in the many castles and other locations associated with her dramatic reign, and has prompted Historic Environment Scotland to revamp its Mary, Queen of Scots trail. A fine opportunity, then, to follow in her footsteps, retracing her extraordinary journey through Scotland. Edinburgh is the place to start. Mary feels very present in Scotland’s capital. On display in the Scottish National Portrait Gallery is perhaps her most famous portrait – ravenishly regal in a black gown, right hand pale on a blood-red cloth – as well as oils of the many powerful men who worked against her interests to advance their own. The National Museum of Scotland (Saoirse Ronan visited in preparation for the role) has a number of objects associated with Mary, including a silver and ebony crucifix that might, just might, have been hers. Many of the queen’s possessions were destroyed or dispersed following her death, lest they become relics – and the focus of Catholic rebellion; those that remain throb with haunted glamour. The presence of Mary can be felt most palpably at the Palace of Holyroodhouse. The official residence of the present queen sits at the foot of the Royal Mile; the private apartments once inhabited by Mary are open to visitors. They are furnished as they would have been in the 16th century, and a walk within these rooms brings to vivid life a notorious episode: the murder of her private secretary and favourite, David Rizzio, on 9 March 1566. In a small room off her bedroom, Mary and supper guests were disturbed by her second husband, Lord Darnley, and a number of armed nobles. They demanded Rizzio, accusing him of having an affair with the queen. Clutching at Mary’s skirts, he was dragged away and stabbed 56 times. The supper room is tiny: stretch out your arms and you can almost touch both walls. It is easy to imagine the chaos and horror of the scene, the stink of blood and sweat, candlewax and spilt wine. Mary, six months pregnant, is said to have had a pistol aimed at her belly. A brass plaque in the outer chamber marks the spot where Rizzio’s body was dumped. His portrait, hung perhaps as a form of restitution, peers out from the supper-room wall. Scotland’s history often strains to become something deeper and stranger – myth, and Mary exemplifies this. For children of my generation, and perhaps still, she was more like a figure from a fairytale than a real person you might learn about at school. We told her death with dandelions: holding tight to the top of the stem, you would chant, “Mary Queen of Scots got her head chopped off like … this!” On the final word you’d flick forward your thumb and decapitate the golden flower. That little game gave a title to the poet and dramatist Liz Lochhead, whose 1987 play Mary Queen of Scots Got Her Head Chopped Off is a Scottish classic. I meet her in Glasgow, the scene of the Battle of Langside, which Mary fought and lost against her half-brother, the Earl of Moray. The site is marked by a grand memorial column next to Queen’s Park, one of the Dear Green Place’s dearest green spaces; from this vantage point Mary is said to have watched the defeat. “She wanted to do an impossible thing,” Lochhead says. “To live the life of a woman, with love and children, as well as being a person of great power. The drama, for me, is about these two queens in one green island – that accident of history where you’ve got two women in power, Mary and Elizabeth, dealing with it very differently.” Mary had fought at Langside after escaping imprisonment in Lochleven Castle, a brutish medieval tower on a small island near Kinross (the short crossing is included in the price of your ticket the castle). On a misty day, Loch Leven is leaden, and Benarty Hill – known as The Sleeping Giant – a dark ogreish hump. This feels an appropriately melancholy time in which to visit. Mary spent one autumn here, during almost a year of captivity. She would have seen the leaves turn and fall. The summer had been a season of withering loss. Pregnant with twins, she miscarried; a few days later, exhausted and heartsick, she was forced – on pain of death – to abdicate in favour of her infant son James. Perhaps Mary’s faith kept her going. Her prison is a ruin, but it is still possible to get a sense of daily ritual. High in the tower house is the area where she had her private chapel; there is a window, a stone basin for the cleansing of the altar vessels after mass, and a cupboard for their storage. Did Mary feel close to God here? One would not blame her if she felt forsaken. Her pregnancy had been the result of abduction and rape by the Earl of Bothwell, a sexual assault carried out in order to force her to marry him, argues the historian Kate Williams in her new book, Rival Queens. Mary is, for her, a #MeToo monarch: “She could be deprived of her power just by taking her body. She was treated in a way that they would never treat a king.” My last stop in the queen’s footsteps is Dundrennan Abbey, a beautiful ruin in a peaceful valley in Galloway, its gothic arches bright with early sun. Mary fled here from Langside. In this hallowed place, it is said, she spent her last hours on Scottish soil – and made the fateful decision to throw herself at the mercy of Queen Elizabeth, expecting the English ruler would help restore her to the Scottish throne. Elizabeth’s betrayal, as it is sometimes seen, can provoke strong feelings among the admirers of Mary – pilgrims, really – who make the journey to Dundrennan. The abbey’s steward remembers one sweet little old lady provoked by the mere mention of Elizabeth’s name to observe, “Bastard by birth, bitch by nature!” I am visiting with someone who takes a more temperate view. Liz Manson is president of the Marie Stuart Society, an organisation dedicated to promoting understanding of the life of Mary. They laid the plaque in Leith and arranged for a statue to be erected at Linlithgow Palace, the queen’s birthplace. Liz suggests we move on from Dundrennan, as she has a special place she’d like me to see. We drive a couple of miles down a single track (ask at the abbey for directions). Part of a military firing range, this route is sometimes closed; look out for a roadside sign telling you whether or not to proceed. The path ends at a rocky beach, a stream flowing into the water. This is Abbey Burnfoot. From this shore – at around 3pm on 16 May 1568 – Mary set sail for England. The Solway Firth, on the morning I visit, is the colour of tarnished silver and cold as vanished dreams. The Marie Stuart Society conducted a ceremony of remembrance earlier this year, marking the 450th anniversary of her departure, laying a red rose in the water for Mary, and 16 white roses for those who went with her. Liz used to feel this was a sorrowful spot, but takes comfort that Mary was leaving in full expectation of a triumphant return. It would be nice to think, she says, that the sun shone on her departure: “It might have made her feel that bit more hopeful.” The queen did not know what lay ahead, could not have imagined laying her long white neck on the axeman’s block 18½ years later. That was both a mercy and a fatal lack of foresight. Mary left Scotland in pride and – given all she had suffered – a strange sort of innocence. She held her head high. • Mary Queen of Scots opens in the UK on 18 January