The Christmas lights may be twinkling, but there was little festive goodwill towards Theresa May at the card and decorations stall in Peterborough’s city market. “We’ve given her a chance and she hasn’t made a very good job of it,” said Bruce Johnson while attaching gold foil and tinsel to the front of the stall he has run for 51 years. “I think she should resign. Let somebody else have a go. Let’s just come out, walk away and start again.” Johnson, who voted leave in the EU referendum, sounded frustrated. As many others were finding, Brexit fatigue was setting in. “I switch the telly off now when I see it,” he said. Peterborough, once known as Brexit Central, was split 60/40 in favour of leave in 2016. It had seen its population swell by 11,000 to 196,000 in the five years to 2016, a significant number of the incomers having cone from newly signed-up EU member states. Newspaper headlines spoke of pressure on school places and local housing, undoubted factors in the decisive leave vote in this ancient cathedral city in the east of England. For some, May, who had supported the remain campaign, was never the right choice to lead the nation’s exit. “Brexit means Brexit and I think all parties have sold us out completely,” said Richard Holdich, who has had the market’s footwear store for 25 years. As for the prime minister, she had never been sympathetic to the leave cause, he said. “It needed a Brexiter to handle it better. I quite like her. But she’s tried her best and it’s not good enough. She’s been too weak with the EU, and I think we’re a laughing stock.” He said he was for a hard Brexit, crashing out of the union unless a better deal were struck. “I would prefer to have a deal, if she could get a better deal, but I’ve not got much confidence,” he said. Two years on from the referendum, and the city’s market is quieter than ever, even in the run-up to Christmas. Hussain Walji, who has run his electrical and phone accessories stall for 37 years, believed most stallholders were struggling. “I’m not making money, half the market is closed and it’s Christmas time,” he said. It was not just the market suffering. “Even in the Queensgate shopping centre, the shop assistants are twiddling their thumbs,” he said. He blamed internet retail outlets such as Amazon and he did not think it was going to get better after Brexit. Brisk business was being done at the Market Cobbler stall, by Ian Hillard, who said he had run the pitch for more than 30 years. He was sympathetic towards May. A leave voter, he saw the prime minister as stuck between a rock and a hard place. “She’s in an unfortunate situation. I don’t think you are ever going to achieve what everyone wants. It’s just not possible,” he said. He viewed the Westminster events with scepticism – “I don’t think it’s ever going to happen, nobody has got the um … mahoneys, shall we say” – and blamed politicians who were indifferent to the problems in the area. The city today had one Ukip elected councillor. Hillard thought that immigration was, for many, an issue, but he had voted leave just to “shake the government up”. He could not see anyone “doing a better job” than May. “If she resigns where does that leave us? In a bigger mess. Boris Johnson? He doesn’t have the decorum. He might as well be Trump.” Hillard’s friend and customer Cliff Walker, a retired civil servant and former magistrate, was part of the Windrush generation who came from the Caribbean 60 years ago. He had voted remain. He believed that May had no option but to take the route she had taken over the postponement of the “meaningful vote” in parliament. East European immigration had been key in Peterborough, he said. “If the eastern Europeans moved now, Peterborough hospital would come to a standstill. People don’t understand how much we are interdependent on each other in Europe.” But he thought May had had no choice but to honour the referendum result. He was shocked by the standard of political debate though. “When Dennis Skinner, who was against everything Margaret Thatcher stood for, actually quoted her and called Theresa May Frit, I lost respect for politicians,” he said. Helen Griffiths, a former PA, shopping in the Queensgate centre,said May had done her absolute best. “I feel really sorry for her. She’s trying to bring it home and her own party has stabbed her in the back.” Griffiths, mother to two daughters, aged two years and six months, voted leave. She said she knew [the exit] would take time but “I do feel we need to get on with it”. There was sympathy for May too, from Leigh Rowell, a remain voter, who has run a hardware stall in the market for 30 years. “She’s focused. She’s considering everything. She can’t just do what she wants. It’s about balance and compromise. I can’t see anybody else doing it that has got her ability to be honest,” he said.