Don’t be fooled by those painted-on smiles. If the rumours are to be believed, there isn’t much for clowns to feel happy about right now. The former dominance of these red-nosed, pale-faced, fright-wigged characters at children’s parties has withered away: it’s all pirates and princesses now. And the clown’s rise as a figure of fear rather than fun was exacerbated in 2016 after a spate of attacks by people dressed as clowns, and wasn’t helped by last year’s film adaptation of It, Stephen King’s clown-horror novel. Even McDonald’s has taken the drastic step of benching Ronald McDonald, its clown mascot since the early 1960s, in response to the burgeoning mood of coulrophobia, to give the fear of clowns its technical name. As one veteran performer, Mattie Faint, recently put it: “There aren’t so many clowns around these days.” But if the clown is dead or dying, then who is holding the smoking gun – or the one with the little “Bang!” flag sticking out of it? Some of the blame seems initially attributable to those clown attacks that began in Greenville, South Carolina, in August 2016 with a nine-year-old boy reporting to his mother that a pair of clowns had attempted to lure him into some woods. Within two months, people across the US and Canada were reporting sightings of clowns brandishing knives, golf clubs, even chainsaws. It almost made one pine for the handheld honking car-horn or the plastic flower that squirts water. Europe was next. The Sun did its bit to stoke panic by printing a map of the UK with clown faces slapped on areas that had been most severely hit. From Dundee to Plymouth, the nation appeared to be under siege from clusters of grotesquely gurning Bozos. By the end of 2016, Stephen King felt the need to call for calm. “Hey, guys, time to cool the clown hysteria,” he tweeted. “Most of ’em are good, cheer up the kiddies, make people laugh.” To find out how all this has contributed to the demise of the clown, I call Bibbledy Bob, AKA Rob Bowker, the spokesperson for Clowns International. So how’s business? “Couldn’t be better,” he says cheerily. “On Saturday, I was at this pub in Tamworth that had just won an award, so they hired me to entertain all the children in the beer garden. Yesterday, I did a christening for some posh people. There were 70 children – it was mayhem!” Hmm. So what about this downturn? “Oh, that,” he laughs. “This TV producer rang me to talk about that while I was in Nuneaton. The council had booked me for this big event in the town centre. I’m standing there with all these children running up to me shouting, ‘Mr Clown, Mr Clown!’ while she’s on the phone trying to tell me it’s all over.” But he must surely have experienced the It effect? “Yeah, I did – business went through the roof! Loads of people were asking me to do interviews. I’ve got pictures of me on This Morning with Phil and Holly wearing red noses. You can’t beat publicity like that. Me and another clown have a running joke. He’ll be off to a gig and he’ll send me a picture of himself dressed up with ‘No work for clowns this year’ written underneath. And I’ll send one back of me in makeup going, ‘I know, I’m gonna jack it all in.’” Perhaps it’s time to turn that painted-on frown upside down. Holly Stoddart, who teaches clown workshops as Holly Stoppit and was recently appointed clown-in-residence at Bristol Museum, also thinks reports of the death of the clown have been greatly exaggerated. “I’m in a boom at the moment,” she says. “I can’t keep up with the demand of all these people who want to train as clowns. Some people seem to want me to say, ‘Oh, the poor old clown is a dying breed.’ “But in my experience it’s just not the case. The perception of the clown is outdated. Yes, there are party clowns who turn up at parties and do balloon modelling or whatever. But the ones I’m dealing with on a daily basis appear in theatre or on TV or at refugee camps. I’ve worked with quite a few companies that do clowning for people in need, and there are clowns known as ‘giggle doctors’ working in hospitals. Clowns are everywhere.” People turn to clowns in times of transition. I've got a bunch of retirees at the moment who are wondering: what next? That does not seem to be an exaggeration. Clowns Without Borders has been going into crisis situations and areas of conflict since 1993, while World Wide Smiles, which helps communities hit by extreme poverty and natural or manmade disasters, has visited locations including Kosovo, Romania and Kenya. Even at the commercial end of the industry, it would be wrong to extrapolate from the demise of the party clown any sort of falling-off in general clowning. For Stoddart’s clients, clowning meets a variety of different needs, many therapeutic. “People find me when they’re in times of transition. I’ve got a group of retirees who came to the ends of their careers and sort of wondered, ‘What next?’ And I get young people who’ve come out of university and are feeling a bit lost.” Stoddart is sometimes hired to do workshops in offices. “Obviously, these people have to see one another in the corridor the next day so I can’t take them too far. It tends to be just some gentle play, getting them to open up to slightly more ridiculous possibilities. I trained as a drama therapist so a lot of what I do involves thinking about mental health. It’s a big thing in clowning to embrace your vulnerability. You might fail at any second but, rather than going into stasis or panic, the clown thrives on the edge of the flop. That’s the place of the clown: getting out all the odd, quirky things you usually try to hide.” Rhubarb the Clown – for 40 years the alter ego of Martin Solity – has also noticed the benefits of clowning. Like Justin Fletcher, AKA Mr Tumble from the CBeebies staple Something Special, Solity often works with children who have learning differences. “They love to be able to tell me what to do,” he says. “Normally they’re the ones who feel they don’t know how to do something, but as Rhubarb I can’t do some of the things that they can do – for instance, putting on my trousers properly. I may show superior skill when I juggle but they show it when they tell me how to get dressed.” Solity cites the theories of Jacques Lecoq, the physical theatre guru who died in 1999. “Lecoq said that while the jester comes from outside society and points out our contradictions, the clown is essentially an insider who is struggling to cope and keeps messing up. I think they’ll always be with us in one form or another, as long as we have that fear of getting things wrong.” One of Lecoq’s students, Philippe Gaulier, is now the world’s leading clown teacher. His former pupils include Sacha Baron Cohen, Emma Thompson and Simon McBurney, as well as the standup Elf Lyons. Gaulier favours the “via negativa” approach – encouraging his students to find their own path by receiving negative criticism – but Stoddart prefers to accentuate the positive. “Gaulier beats you down until you’re funny,” she shudders. “I’ve trained with some of his students and that technique never worked for me. My method is only about positive feedback and dealing with the inner critic, so that even if what you did was terrible, someone will pick out the one moment that worked. You’re only given treats and treasures.” It is the red nose, she says, that can facilitate a fulfilling clowning experience. “You put that on and it’s a ticket to anarchy. It gives you permission to make your clown choices rather than your rational ones. Something about that little bit of red plastic makes you think, ‘Yes, I’m going to hide under that rug’ or ‘I’m going to climb that wall’. Your red nose gives you permission. Having taught people with bipolar disorder, the clown state is very similar to that manic high, so it can be useful to have that distinction – sort of, ‘This is me with the red nose on and this is the other me without it.’ It’s very powerful.” But there is still an essential creepiness to clowns: an eerie disparity between the painted-on smile and the person underneath; an identity crisis dressed up as entertainment. “That fixed mask can be terrifying because you can’t see what’s going on behind it,” says Stoddart. “We’re empathetic beings. We want to see what someone is feeling and the clown face is a bit like Botox –it doesn’t let you read the signals and that can be scary. But I don’t use face paint. I’ve got no interest in hiding.” Nor does she seem unduly affected by the “clown attacks” as they came to be called. “Those weren’t clowns, they were idiots in clown costumes,” she says. Solity agrees: “That wasn’t clowning. That’s not what I do. I’ve never wanted to scare people. I just want to entertain them.” 