Although I love Christmas, with its twinkly lights, warm mince pies and arguments over that last extra-crisp roast potato, the seemingly endless present-buying can leave me feeling drained. This year I’ve decided to save my money (and sanity) by making presents, so this trio of chutneys will be working their way to friends and family. You could use these as condiments for Christmas lunch or, as I’ll be doing, to balance out an evening spent gorging on cheese and mulled wine. Although I’ve given approximate cook times here – the best way to test they’re done is to use the frozen plate test spoon a little of the cooked chutney on a plate that has been in the freezer for an hour. Give the cooled chutney a little prod: if it wrinkles slightly then you know it’s set. If still liquid, then cook another minute or two before trying again. All recipesPrep 5 minCook 10-12 minMakes 1 large jar 3 “easy-peeler” clementines 100g cider½ granny smith apple, peeled and chopped into small chunks75g jam sugar2 x 10cm sprigs rosemary Remove the peel from one of the clementines and finely chop it. Put this in a small saucepan, along with the juice of all three clementines. Add the cider, chopped apple, sugar and rosemary and simmer, covered, for 10 minutes, until the peel softens. Remove the lid and boil for 10 minutes, until substantially reduced and thickened. Remove and discard the sprigs of rosemary, then transfer the chutney to a sterilised jar and seal. 125g fresh or frozen cranberries50g balsamic vinegar85g jam sugar3 star anise¼ tsp chilli powder Put all the ingredients in a small saucepan. Simmer over a low-medium heat for about 10 minutes, until the cranberries are falling apart and the liquid has reduced. Fish out the star anise, then transfer to a sterilised jar and seal. 2 tsp vegetable oil1 tsp mustard seeds7 dried figs, chopped into 1cm chunks165g red wine100g jam sugar10cm piece cinnamon1 pinch ground cloves In a small saucepan, heat the oil, then add the mustard seeds. Once they start to pop, cover with a lid to stop them flying everywhere. After a few seconds, add the figs, wine, sugar and cinnamon, and simmer for 10-12 minutes, until the liquid has reduced and thickened slightly. Remove the cinnamon, stir through the ground cloves, transfer to a sterilised jar and seal.