Ben Stokes and Alex Hales have been fined by the England and Wales Cricket Board for following an incident outside a Bristol nightclub but both have been cleared to play. All-rounder Stokes received a £30,000 fine and an eight-match ban but as he has already missed the sufficient amount of games he is still eligible to be selected. Hales was overall given a £17,500 fine, with £10,000 suspended and a six-match ban, with four suspended. Stokes pleaded guilty to both charges against him, one of bringing the game into disrepute in relation to the altercation in Bristol and a second one for an inappropriate video, in which he performed an impression of Katie Price’s son, Harvey. The Durham player released a statement after the announcement in which he apologised to fans. “The criminal charges and, subsequently, the disciplinary charges have made it difficult to make public comment about the issues,” Stokes said. “I have already apologised to my teammates, coaches and support staff for the consequences of my actions in Bristol. I regret that the incident ever happened and I apologise to England supporters and to the public for bringing the game into disrepute. I want to say thank you to everyone who has supported me through this process.” Stokes was found not guilty of affray in a criminal trial which took place earlier this year. Stokes missed part of India’s tour to England due to being on trial in Bristol at the time. “Cricket and family are my life. This incident has been a huge burden for the last 15 months. I am relieved to get back to playing the game that I love without this hanging over me. Although the disciplinary process is now over, I have learned lessons that will stay with me for much longer.” Nottinghamshire batsman Hales also admitted both charges. The secondary charge related to inappropriate images, of which he was also found guilty. As part of his sanctions, he must undertake “appropriate training” at his own cost within 12 months. “There is no doubt I fell below the high standards of an international sportsman and that was the reason for my decision to admit the charges,” Hales said in a statement.