In the old German defence ministry in the Bendlerstrasse, Berlin, a whole floor has been restored to the way it was at the time of the 20 July 1944 bomb plot against Hitler. It was there that Claus von Stauffenberg and his fellow conspirators managed their doomed enterprise: he and three others were shot in the courtyard below at the end of that dramatic day. Another floor is devoted to the trade unions, political parties and churches who did what they could to stop the man who was bringing shame and disaster to their country. It is a moving place. The resisters were not only military men, Prussian aristocrats and veteran civilian politicians such as the former mayor of Leipzig, Carl Goerdeler. A younger group around Helmuth von Moltke’s Kreisau Circle planned to fashion a Germany that was democratic, antiracist, and internationalist: Paddy Ashdown, in his new book on the German resistance, calls them “the flower of the Germany of their day”. There was much bravery from “ordinary” people: Georg Elser, a carpenter, nearly succeeded in blowing Hitler to pieces. Others protested peacefully, such as the devoutly Christian students Sophie Scholl and her brother Hans from Munich; or Otto and Elise Hempel, the couple at the heart of the bestselling novel by Hans Fallada (and subsequent film with Emma Thompson) Alone in Berlin. They and many others were killed horribly by Hitler’s butchers. And yet the idea still persists that those who opposed him were pathetically few in number, and that most were rabid nationalists with whom we could never have done business. That is inaccurate and unjust. Ashdown’s book is suffused with a moral sense, a fellow-feeling for the courageous men and women who made gut-wrenching moral choices in the most appalling circumstances. The story has been written before, but Ashdown contributes riveting new detail, especially about the Europe-wide network of agents through which Admiral Canaris, the wily head of the German foreign intelligence organisation, contrived to pass information to Hitler’s enemies. The book is pacey, fluent, and fascinating. But Ashdown aims above all to give these people the honour that is their due. Some argue that the resistance only started when Germans began to realise that their country was losing the war. In fact civilian opposition to Hitler was active, though ineffective, well before that. The first military plot was put together in 1938 under the leadership of the chief of staff, Ludwig Beck: it was aborted because Britain and France were unwilling to show support while they still hoped to reach an accommodation with the Führer. The first attempt to assassinate Hitler was in 1934. More than 20 followed. They failed less because they were incompetently executed than because Hitler had the devil’s own luck. In Berlin the 20 July plot nearly succeeded. Parallel coups in Paris, Vienna and Prague got close. All was frustrated when Hitler broadcast the news that he had, by a mere fluke, survived the bomb planted by Stauffenberg in his military headquarters. In the aftermath the Gestapo arrested 7,000 people: nearly 5,000 were executed. It is remarkable that so many were able to escape detection by the Gestapo until after the event. Many of the plotters were indeed old-fashioned German patriots. But they were no more “rabid” than that imperial patriot Winston Churchill. Stauffenberg himself combined a deep sense of military honour with an increasingly left-inclined political radicalism. These people were well aware of the risks. It was not only that they might be caught, tortured and killed by the Gestapo. It was also that they might be regarded by their fellow countrymen as traitors for trying to overthrow the government in time of war. As Stauffenberg put it: “the man who has the courage to do something must do it in the knowledge that he will go down in German history as a traitor. If he does not do it, however, he will be a traitor to his own conscience.” At first many Germans did indeed disapprove. Opinion only began to shift after the 10th anniversary of the plot, when the first postwar German president, Theodor Heuss, praised Stauffenberg and his colleagues for trying to preserve German honour at a terrible time. Most Germans now share his view. The plotters hoped for support from the western allies. Before 20 July they offered a deal: the Germans would drop their defence in the west and turn to fighting the Russians in the east with the west’s backing. But by then it was much too late; what might have been possible in 1938 was no longer politically feasible. The plotters resigned themselves to going ahead on their own. What would have happened if they had nevertheless succeeded? By then the Russians had launched the overwhelming offensive which by early August had swept them hundreds of kilometres to the edge of Warsaw. They would have had little incentive to stop there. The Wehrmacht might have mounted a defence even with Germany in disarray. But without Hitler it might have been less fanatical – and less effective. The allies, even the Russians, would have been at a loss to know what to do next. Perhaps the fighting would have ended in 1944, and many more people would have remained alive. Ashdown quotes the final report written by Nevile Henderson, the British ambassador in Berlin, on returning to London as war began: “It would be idle to deny the great achievements of the man who restored to the German nation its self respect and its disciplined orderliness … Many of Herr Hitler’s social reforms, in spite of their complete disregard of personal liberty of thought, word or deed, were on highly advanced democratic lines.” Hitler’s “labour camps”, Henderson thought, showed how “a benevolent dictatorship” works. At least the Germans who resisted Hitler did not share that grotesque misjudgment. • Nein! by Paddy Ashdown (William Collins, £25). To order a copy for £22, go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £15, online orders only. Phone orders min. p&p of £1.99.