Gorillaz frontman Damon Albarn and former Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams are among prominent public figures calling for a citizens’ assembly to break the deadlock on Brexit. With MPs bitterly divided on the best way forward, the pair are among signatories to a letter to the Guardian demanding a new approach that would see 500 members of the public debate the issue and decide on a solution. Theresa May cancelled a parliamentary vote on her painstakingly negotiated Brexit deal last week after a heavy defeat appeared inevitable. “We cannot see how a majority can be found for any proposition in parliament: some want to remain, some want no deal, some want Norway, some want to vote again. The same rifts exist across the UK,” the letter says. “Anger and resentment are growing, splitting families, communities and our country. Without a new intervention, the toxic culture which has infected public life will irrevocably damage democracy and the future for us all.” Other signatories include Bishop of Leeds Nick Baines, Labour peer Ruth Lister, novelists Jonathan Coe and Ian McEwan, and Alexandra Runswick, from pressure group Unlock Democracy. Citizens’ assemblies, which have been deployed around the world, see ordinary members of the public confront social or political challenges politicians have been unable to resolve. Facilitated by experts, and combining small-group discussions with large-scale debates and a series of votes, they are aimed at removing the conflicts of interest and tribal loyalties that can hamper politicians in reaching a conclusion. The letter says: “A forum led by the public, not by politicians. People talking and listening to each other, not shouting and arguing on or offline, to find common ground.” Advocates of the approach point to the highly contentious issue of abortion in Ireland, where a panel of 99 voters, convened in a Dublin hotel over a series of weekends, helped to break the impasse that led to the historic referendum earlier this year. Neal Lawson, of campaign group Compass – which is advocating the idea of a citizens’ assembly – and who also signed the letter, said: “Parliament is fast reaching an impasse. It is time to hand the decision over to a deliberative panel of citizens to decide the best way forward for the country.” He said the government could choose to set up such a panel, or it could be done by parliament, perhaps through the chairs of cross-party select committees. Labour MP Stella Creasy said an assembly could be a way to end the impasse at Westminster. “We’re in a deadlock: our democracy is struggling and the public is despairing. “A second referendum might be our best bet, but the prime minister is stalling for time and Brexiteers and remainers are at loggerheads on all sides. Without an intervention, we could be stuck in this limbo and crash out of Europe by default.” She added: “Given the consequences of this stalemate, if there was ever a time to be willing to do things differently, it is now.” Prof Graham Smith, of the Centre for the Study of Democracy at the University of Westminster, an expert on citizens’ assemblies, said the approach can be useful “where there are divisions about how we should go forward, and some kind of deadlock needs to be broken”. A small-scale citizens’ assembly on Brexit was held in the aftermath of the referendum, and concluded that the negotiations should seek close trading ties with the EU27 through a customs union – but not full single market membership. If such a bespoke deal was not available, however, participants preferred full single market and customs union membership to leaving without a deal. With the prime minister’s deal apparently unable to secure the backing of parliament, and just three months to go before Brexit day, the campaigners suggest a new panel should look at alternatives, including a second referendum. Two select committees in parliament – the health and social care and local government committees – convened a citizens’ assembly to help inform a report on the future funding of adult social care earlier this year.