Last Wednesday Nicolas Chauvin was killed after he was injured playing rugby. Chauvin was 18, a student at the Paris Descartes University, and a flanker in the academy at Stade Français. He was playing for their under-21 team against UBB when he was caught in a two-man tackle that broke his neck, caused a cardiac arrest, and cut off the oxygen supply to his brain. Chauvin had signed with the club only in June but had made such a strong impression that he’d already been training with the senior squad. His family said the last six months were the happiest of his life. At Stade they call their young players Espoirs. Hopefuls. Now Chauvin will stay that way, always. They held a minute’s silence for him before Saturday’s matches, a brief interregnum in a national conversation about the state the sport is in. World Rugby’s CEO, Brett Gosper, appeared on French TV last Thursday. He spoke about his shock, said how rare these deaths are. It was the wrong time to be talking that way. Chauvin’s was the third death linked to rugby in France in the last seven months. In May, 17-year-old Adrien Descrulhes was found dead in his bed the morning after he’d suffered a concussion playing in an under-18s match for Billom. The preliminary autopsy report confirmed he had been killed by a brain haemorrhage caused by a blow to the head. In August, 21-year-old Louis Fajfrowski died in the changing room after he suffered a heart attack while he was playing in a friendly match for Aurillac. Fajfrowski collapsed after being hit in a tackle. The autopsy was inconclusive, but a later investigation found he was killed by commotio cordis. His heart stopped because he was hit in the chest at a vulnerable moment in the cardiac cycle. There was, and still is, some confusion about exactly what happened, and whether or not he had an underlying heart condition. So “we do not know if rugby kills,” said the France international Kevin Gourdon afterwards, “or if it’s an accident.” After Chauvin’s death, L’Équipe answered Gourdon’s question for him in an urgent editorial. “From now on, we know. And no one can pretend there is still any doubt. Rugby kills.” In each of the three cases, L’Équipe explained, it was a tackle that did it. “Rugby kills because with professionalisation a rough game has become a violent game. Rugby kills because it believed that preparation protected everything, that the players’ bodies could take more tackles, could take harder, higher, tackles, often made by two defenders simultaneously. Rugby kills because we did not want to see that it could kill.” There are others. In May, 18-year-old Canadian schoolboy Brodie McCarthy died after a collision while he was playing for Montague High School in Prince Edward Island. In September, 31-year-old Kyle Barnes died after he suffered a head injury in a club match between Goodwood and Strand United in South Africa. He’d been stooping to gather the ball when a tackle caught him in the neck. That is five deaths in seven months. A lot has changed in the years since the Guardian reported on the death of the schoolboy Ben Robinson. World Rugby has improved its education programmes, increased awareness about concussion, strengthened the penalties for dangerous play, is trialling new tackle laws, which will lower the legal height of the tackle to below the nipple. But the hard truth is that all this may not be enough for a game where the players have grown so big, so strong, the collisions so fierce and so frequent, and the commercial imperatives so pressing. The French sports minister, Roxana Maracineanu, has called for an urgent meeting with Bernard Laporte, the head of the French Rugby Federation. “It’s the third young man who’s died and that’s too much,” Maracineanu said. “I think there are questions to be asked about the refereeing, the evolution of the game, and the way of playing.” They might talk, too, about the way in which the neurosurgeon Jean Chazal claims he was dismissed from the league’s medical advisory board last June because he was so outspoken about the risks. “They told me: you have to be quiet,” Chazal told Midi-Olympique. “I speak too much, but speak truth, even if what I say disturbs people.” Chazal, who works as a club doctor at Clermont-Ferrand, now believes that “the way it is structured right now, rugby is not suitable for a kid of 15 years” because it “presents too many dangers” for bodies that aren’t yet fully developed. He argues that youth rugby needs to be separated into weight categories. He says the FFR don’t like the way he talks because what he has to say “worries moms and dads whose children want to play rugby”. Chazal says that when he tried to raise these issues with Laporte, he was ignored. “He does not even bother to answer. Maybe the president of the federation does not read his emails.” Laporte does. He published an open letter arguing that he took the issue personally, and pointing out that, among other measures, the FFR has brought in “blue cards” and increased the number of available substitutes to allow for the permanent replacement of any player with a suspected concussion. These are hard conversations, and they’re not ones that people who love the game want to have. As Gosper says, “there are risks of getting hit in a sport like rugby, but it socialises, it teaches life lessons, it develops the character of the players. The benefits are well beyond the risks taken.” Not everyone is so sure. “My wife is pregnant,” the former England full-back Nick Abendanon told L’Équipe after Fajfrowski died. “We are going to have a boy and I do not think I will push him to play rugby when he gets older.”