You can’t spell ‘magic’ without MCG. I’m not sure that’s significant in any way, but it’s nice. In some ways, India’s Test win this week at the Melbourne Cricket Ground was magical. The last time India won there, none of the current players from either team were born. Nor were any of the Guardian’s OBO commentators for the match. Most of the television commentators were children, except for Allan Border, who sprang from the womb with a moustache and a first-class batting average. It hasn’t been a pretty history for India in Melbourne. They got smashed there twice in a month in 1948 when Bradman was at his most ruthless and Test venues were in short supply. They lost five in a row from 1991 to 2011, then drew on a lifeless pitch in 2014 while trailing 2-0. So this result meant a lot to the players, confirmed by the celebrations that came audibly through the wall from their change room while Australian captain Tim Paine gave his press conference next door. The fast bowlers posed with souvenir stumps, the crowds stayed for photographs, and batsman Mayank Agarwal posted on Twitter: “Firsts are always special. In Australia, against Australia. On Boxing Day. The debut couldn’t have been any sweeter.” It was. And also, in a way, it doesn’t matter at all. Because Virat Kohli is here to lead his team to a series win, and 2-1 with one to play doesn’t lock that in. Winning away from home has become the holy grail for Test teams trying to prove their true objective worth. A No1 ranking doesn’t tell you much when it swaps between whichever side has most recently hosted a long season at the right time in a four-year cycle. For Asian teams, wins outside their continent are as rare as wins in Asia for visitors. Kohli has eight wins outside Asia in his career: two came in this series, and four this year. Sachin Tendulkar, for all his matches played and achievements recorded, won nine. Rahul Dravid and VVS Laxman lead the list for India with 13. So as sweet as the Melbourne win will have been, it’s worth nothing to the Indian captain if Australia win in Sydney to square the ledger. A Melbourne draw would have left things in almost the same position: with the visitors needing to dominate the fourth Test to ensure that series win. It was instructive that in the celebrations after Nathan Lyon’s wicket on the fifth day, retaining the Border-Gavaskar trophy seemed almost incidental. India hold it, having won as they should have done at home in 2017. The contrast is with England, who played out almost the identical series as Ashes holders in 2010-11. A big win in Adelaide was followed by Australia leveling things in Perth, then England retaining the trophy with a big win in Melbourne. At that point, England’s players pulled out their notoriously naff sprinkler dance and celebrated like the job was done. With the Ashes kept in hand away from home for the first time since 1987, the series win in Sydney was a cheerful afterthought. But for Kohli and company it means a whole lot more. Indian teams have won series in New Zealand, South Africa and England only five times, and never in Australia. In 2018, Kohli looked at his three upcoming trips and set a target of winning them all. In South Africa last January his team came close on some vicious pitches but just missed out 2-1. In England mid-year he and his bowlers were supreme, but lacked support from the batsmen around him. The eventual 4-1 result could so easily have been 2-3 or even 1-4 the other way. Close calls don’t make the stats columns: Australia is the last chance to take a touring prize, and a historically weak and scattered Australian team is one that this well-drilled Indian outfit should take advantage of. What happened in Melbourne was merely that disparity made manifest. From the outset, anything less than a series win would have been a disappointment. From this point, having led twice, a draw would feel as good as a loss. For Australia, the SCG Test is important as a chance to claw back some pride, showing the fight that was evident in Adelaide and Perth. For India though, it’s a lot more momentous. As Kohli walked down the race beneath the MCG after that win, he was still roaring and revving his players. Don’t expect any less ferocity from the moment he walks on in Sydney. By completing the job, this would be a side forever remembered as the first Indians to do it. As Agarwal said, firsts are always special.