“If you want to do the headline, ‘Klopp says you need 105 points to be champions’, do it,” insisted Liverpool’s manager after Friday’s victory over Wolves. “What is really different, because everybody asks me about the situation, first in the table and all that stuff, somebody said that the last four times the team that was first in the table at Christmas won the league, but was it ever such a tight race?” Well, yes, actually Jürgen. But perhaps not quite as potentially gripping as this one. After Manchester City’s surprise defeat to Crystal Palace on Saturday left Liverpool four points clear at the top of the Premier League, Tottenham’s 6-2 thrashing of Everton the next day ensured three teams reached the 40-point mark before any presents have been opened for only the second time in top-flight history. Had Chelsea managed to find a way past Leicester’s stubborn defence it would have been four in what is becoming the most absorbing battle for many years. The top three combined have accumulated more points at this stage of the season than ever before. Liverpool’s tally of 48 points has been bettered only once – by City last season before they went on to win the title with a record 100 points – so it is no wonder Klopp is making such bold predictions as he looks nervously over his shoulder. Yet while much has been made of Liverpool’s inability to turn Christmas supremacy into titles, having failed to do so on the past four occasions they have topped the table on 25 December (1990, 1996, 2008 and 2013), some older supporters will point to the 10 occasions on which they have gone on to become champions – starting in 1905. The most recent of those was more than 30 years ago in 1987, when John Barnes inspired Kenny Dalglish’s side to their 17th league title as they finished nine points clear of Manchester United. On only one of the previous six occasions had they failed to win the title – in 1980-81 when they faded badly and Aston Villa were champions – although being top at Christmas did lead to disappointment in 1968 too. In fact, and whisper it to the red half of Merseyside, Liverpool have a far more successful strike rate when they have gone into the post-Christmas programme in second spot, winning the title on six of those occasions out of eight. But after seven successive Premier League wins, and with home fixtures against Newcastle and Arsenal to come before they visit the Etihad Stadium on 3 January, they should feel confident the title is there for the taking. Maintaining Mohamed Salah’s and Virgil van Dijk’s outstanding form at opposite ends will be crucial to their chances, as will Klopp’s rotation of a midfield that offers great variety depending on the opponents. Fabinho’s emergence in recent weeks following his slow start has added an extra dimension, although the manager will hope there is more to come from another summer signing, Naby Keïta. Yet even though Liverpool’s lead is larger than that enjoyed by eight of the previous 10 sides to have topped the table at Christmas, City will feel they can force their way back into contention. Pep Guardiola’s side were 11 points clear at this stage last season and although they showed signs of vulnerability in the defeat by Palace, the return of Kevin De Bruyne could not have been more timely as they attempt to become the first club to retain the title for a decade. As well as that mouthwatering showdown in the first fixture of the new year City must also entertain Tottenham, Chelsea and Arsenal, with Manchester United the only side in the top six they have yet to face away. They can also take inspiration from the 2013-14 season when Liverpool were ahead of Arsenal on goal difference at Christmas but eventually missed out to City by two points after the famous 3-3 draw against Palace at Selhurst Park. Roy Hodgson’s side will have more of a say in this title race when they visit Anfield on 19 January and when City travel to Selhurst Park in mid-April, by which time the current top three will hope to have secured a place in the Champions League semi-finals. The first legs of those do not take place until the end of April, with the second leg early the following month, meaning any club involved in the latter stages of the competition must balance that with the last three rounds of Premier League matches, culminating on 12 May. Tottenham, due to face Liverpool at Anfield on 30 March, travel to the Etihad on 20 April and will fancy their chances of going all the way should they find themselves in contention by that stage. The evisceration of an Everton side expensively assembled by a number of managers over the past four seasons was the latest example of how Spurs have significantly overachieved in comparison with the rest of the top six. Emerging as the surprise winners of this blockbuster title race would be further confirmation of their manager’s considerable ability that has certainly not gone unnoticed.