Ole Gunnar Solskjær has admitted he would like to become permanent Manchester United manager when his interim period ends at the close of the season. The 45-year-old was appointed as José Mourinho’s temporary replacement on Wednesday, with the club stating they will take between now and the summer to find a permanent incumbent. Asked whether he would like this to be him, Solskjær said: “There are so many managers who would love to be manager of Manchester United – I’m one of them but it’s not something we’ve talked about; they’ll do a process for the next six months. When you get a job like this and they ask you to sign for six months you say: ‘Yeah, I’m happy to help out’ and my job is to do as well as I can.” Mourinho lost his position partly because of his difficult relationships with some players, with his and Paul Pogba’s relationship particularly fractious. On whether he could restore the Frenchman’s morale, Solskjær said: “It’s about getting every player to the best, speaking to them, on the training ground, about out philosophy, principles, how we want to play. “It does not matter what team you’re coaching – they all want to have a picture of how you want to play. We have quality players so it will be easier to get players expressing themselves. You have to play with courage, go out there and express your skills.” Solskjær referred to the influence of Sir Alex Ferguson, who signed him in 1996 before his 11-year spell as a player at the club. The Norwegian was then reserve team manager under the Scot until 2010. “The last game he [Ferguson] had as a manager was 5-5 [against West Brom]. That was almost the perfect end to him as a manager and I want the players to be similar, be the kids that love to play football and go out in front of the best fans in the world.” United are 11 points from a Champions League berth. Solskjær did not rule out being able to bridge the gap in his 21 matches in charge. “I think first thing is the first game – I have to think about getting my principles into the boys, get the players to understand how I want them to play and let’s take the results later on. “Let’s see how many points we can gather but this club has made up many points before but I’m not going to set that target now.”