There can come a point in cricket matches when people start believing the impossible. When the ones in offices who don’t care about sport find themselves drawn into the spectacle. When their colleagues who were covertly following the game abandon all pretence. When the last couple of batsmen in a team need 150 runs to win, no one pays attention. But when that target dips under 100, then 90, then 80, bystanders get interested by pure osmosis. The arithmetic of the target ticking down is something the most casual observer can understand. There is also no greater pathos than tail-end batsman being left to achieve run-scoring feats of great import. Other sports do not make demands that athletes are intrinsically unsuited to perform. Cricket hauls out players who can’t do something and makes them do it anyway. It’s unfair, but miraculous when it works. Imagine a football final where a random member of the crowd is thrown into goal for the penalty shootout. Imagine the response if they made a save. Such was the charisma of Australia’s run chase against India at Adelaide Oval. A chase that was doomed, until the defensive care of Patrick Cummins began to fill hours rather than minutes, and the attacking shots of Mitchell Starc were played judiciously. The two bowlers surviving other bowlers, until one of Starc’s drives didn’t adequately connect, and Cummins’ 121-ball occupation came to an end. Then it was Nathan Lyon’s flair and creativity that kept the dream alive, and Josh Hazlewood’s sturdiness. When the latter fell at last he left the third-smallest margin that has ever stood between these teams. But really, had Australia made 31 more runs and completed the miracle, it would have been an injustice. It would have handed a group of specialist batsmen a reprieve they hadn’t earned. Usman Khawaja, knowing hopes rested on him, then trying to punt a premier spinner over long-off. Peter Handscomb camping on the back foot to the detriment of his drives but still unable to nail the pull. Marcus Harris trying a carnival shot when church might have been the choice. Compare all that to Cheteshwar Pujara, who gave the lesson twice. Unfashionable defensive batting, as his team slumped in the first innings. Building partnerships all the way down, building speed as his partners diminished in skill, until he was last man out for 123. The same in his second innings when his job was to build a target, making another 71, the match steaming inexorably away from the Australians like a ship from men overboard. Some of them tried to mimic Pujara in their first innings, managing the slow starts but not the later crescendo. Others did the opposite, like Aaron Finch trying to turn a cricket ball into a satellite, or Shaun Marsh essaying a slap that collapsed the wrath of the internet onto his head. In Australia’s second innings most of the roles inverted, with other brains fading while Marsh clicked with the suddenness unique to him. He can go from clueless to imperious as abruptly as Derek Zoolander deciding to kill a head of state, and apparently with as little choice or control. Once it happens, Marsh can whisper a ball to the boundary so smoothly it leaves a trail of butter behind it. He was on, and it took a masterful passage of bowling from Jasprit Bumrah to switch him off. From there, it was left to Australia’s bowlers again. At one point on ABC Grandstand, commentators discussed their records since Australia’s last Test win. Only Cummins had good numbers: the other three had modest wicket tallies with outsize averages. But in those matches they’ve barely got to rest. They come back to bowl two sessions after they stop, and spend half the interim batting themselves. They come out to bowl hundreds of runs behind the game. In Abu Dhabi in October, then again in Adelaide, the bowlers set up a Test on the first day by cheaply dismissing opponents on batting tracks. Both times, their teammates surrendered the advantage with a meagre display. That’s what needs to change. But in home conditions, it should and can. Don’t fret, Australians. India needed to win this to set up the series. Had Australia taken the first Test, a bouncy pitch in Perth would have finished things off. Instead Australia have a great chance to go to Melbourne level. For once, the Boxing Day and New Year matches could both be live contests that define a series result. We’re set for a classic. Remember how we used to lament uncompetitive series, as home batsmen racked up centuries before batting sides were shocked out for not much more than a hundred themselves? Instead we’re going to see a scrap; the best this Australian team can do at the moment. They’re short on purebreds and making do with mongrels. That doesn’t mean barking like the dogs of old. It means getting into the fight like Lyon did, and Cummins, and Starc. If the rest can match them, everyone in the office might gather round the TV again.