I don’t really have set Christmas traditions. My mum is Chinese, and Christmas isn’t really a big deal for her, so after my parents separated, we didn’t celebrate it much. Then, in the years when I was a care assistant, or a support worker in a hospital, I have had to work. The only things I do every year are a secret Santa with my friends – and baking. One year, I went on a baking marathon. I got it into my head that I wanted to make loads of things and photograph them all in one picture. I baked mince pies, and camembert with bread around the edge. My partner, Nabil, wanted to eat it straight away, but I had to take it outside and hold it over a hedge to photograph it. I also made little cupcakes with my own Santa Claus toppers. I love baking anything with the flavours of cinnamon, cardamom and gingerbread – such as the bauble biscuits and cake. I really associate those warming spices with Christmas. Even though I didn’t grow up with them, they feel emotionally resonant without being tied to any specific memory. I have an image in mind of sitting at home with a spiced drink. Christmas now means spending quality time with Nabil. That is what I am looking forward to this year. As well as the recipes I am sharing here, I am planning to make little meringue snowmen with different characters, telling a story. I would love to do an edible snowy scene. And do the camembert bake again – but this time with little cats embedded in the dough. Christmas cats, in Christmas hats ... I am looking forward to hanging out at home, having a relaxing time and eating. Mostly the eating. Not only do these cute snowmen truffles melt in the mouth (there will be no frostbite here), they are also fun to decorate and kids will love getting involved. They make a charming gift for friends and family – just package them in a box and make sure the lucky recipient eats them straight away They can be stored in the fridge for up to a week. Serves: 10-12 Prep time: 2hr 30mins (including 2hr of chilling time) For the truffles: 300g good quality white chocolate25g butter140g double cream 1 tbsp orange liqueur and orange flavour extract (optional) For the marzipan: (alternatively use shop-bought marzipan, or shop-bought sugar paste, but homemade marzipan is the tastiest) 125g icing sugar125g very finely ground almonds40g egg white¼ tsp almond extract¾ tsp armagnac Plus: 200g fine dessicated coconut, edible pearl sprinkles, dyed marzipan or sugar paste colours: orange, blue, pink (or any other colours you prefer to use). Chop the chocolate and butter into small pieces and place in a heatproof bowl. Heat the cream in a pan until it just starts to bubble, then pour over the chocolate and butter. Leave for two minutes, then stir until smooth. Cover with clingfilm (touching the surface of the ganache), and put in the fridge to chill for an hour. When the ganache is cool, transfer to the bowl of a stand mixer with the whisk attachment fitted. If using the orange liqueur and flavour extract, add (to taste) at this point. Whisk until fluffy and lighter in colour. Transfer to a shallow tray, cover with cling film, and transfer to the freezer to chill for about an hour again. The ganache should now be very firm, such that you can mould it into balls. Shape 10 larger truffles between your palms, and roll in fine dessicated coconut. Then shape a further 10 smaller truffles in the same way. Stack the smaller truffles on top of the larger, so that it is starting to look like a snowman. Leave in the fridge to firm up again. If making your own marzipan, combine the icing sugar and ground almonds. Then add the rest of the ingredients. Mix and form into a ball. Use food dye to colour the marzipan as desired. Shape fondant or marzipan to create colourful hats and scarves for the snowmen. Give them carrot noses made of fondant/marzipan. Use edible pearl sprinkles for buttons, and use small black sprinkles for their eyes (or poppy seeds, if you have them, but this is a little fiddly). Leave to chill in the fridge until just before you are ready to serve. It takes times to get the hang of piping with royal icing, but once you have it, these Christmas baubles are very relaxing to make. They are also very rewarding, because you can hang them on your Christmas tree and show them off to friends and family. Who needs to buy decorations when you can make delicious edible ones? Yes, I hear you, after all your hard work decorating, you may find these too santa-mental to eat ... but they taste so good, you might just end up eating them AND your words. When you get more confident, play about with patterns and colours to create your own designs. There are endless combinations you can try. Makes: about 20 small Christmas baubles as pictured, or 12 larger ones Prep: 15 minutes Baking time: 10-12 minutes Decorating time: depends on how many biscuits you are decorating and to what level of detail. For the biscuits:150g salted butter (or use unsalted and add salt to taste) 100g dark muscovado sugar 25g liquid molasses2 tbsp beaten egg1 tbsp ground ginger¾ tbsp ground cinnamon ¼ tsp ground cloves 225g plain flour, plus extra to dust and roll out For the royal icing:400g icing sugar2 medium egg whites (you can use 70g pasteurised egg whites from a carton if you are concerned about using raw egg whites)Red, blue and green food dyesGold and silver edible paint(Plus extra icing sugar and/or egg white)Red and green gel or powder food dyes Preheat oven to 200C/180C fan/gas mark 6. Add the butter, sugar and molasses to the bowl of a stand mixer. Whisk on high speed, until smooth and creamy. You can, of course, do this by hand. Add the beaten egg and ground spices. Mix until just combined. Add the flour and combine using your hands until the mixture forms a ball. Turn out on to a well-floured surface, and roll out to the thickness of a pound coin. Use christmas bauble cutters to stamp out desired biscuit shapes, then transfer these on to a baking tray lined with baking paper or a silicon mat. Alternatively, make your own bauble templates out of card, place the card on top of the biscuit dough as a guide to cut out the shape using a small, sharp knife (the biscuits pictured were made using cardboard templates as a guide). Use a toothpick or similar item to make holes at the top of each biscuit bauble. Chill the biscuits for 10 minutes, then bake for 10-12 minutes, or until they just start colouring at the edges. Leave to cool on wire rack. Meanwhile, make the royal icing. Add the icing sugar and egg white to the bowl of a stand mixer, then mix using the whisk or paddle attachment, until smooth and glossy. The consistency you are aiming for is one that returns to a smooth surface about 15-20 seconds after running a knife through it. You can use additional icing sugar and egg white to adjust the consistency accordingly. Divide the royal icing between three bowls. Leave one white, and dye the icing in the remaining two bowls. You can use any colours you like, but red and green are ideal for Christmas. Divide the white icing between two disposable piping bags. Repeat with the red and the green. You will now have six piping bags, two of each colour. For each colour, snip a very small opening in one piping bag (this will be for outlining), and a slightly larger opening in the other (this will be for flooding). When the biscuits are cool, they are ready to decorate. Outline four biscuits with white icing, four with red and four with green. Make sure to define an outline for the gold/silver attachment at the top of the bauble (see main picture). To achieve neat lines, try to lift and guide the icing into place rather than dragging the piping bag along the biscuit. Now that the edges are outlined, you can flood the biscuits with their corresponding colour without the icing dripping over the edges. Flood using the piping bag with the larger cut tip, and use a toothpick or similar item to even out the icing and get rid of any air bubbles. If you have the correct consistency, your icing should smooth itself out. Leave for at least an hour for the surface of the icing to harden, before adding the details and painting with silver and gold. It will take four-five hours to completely harden, so make sure you are careful so as not to crack the surface. Use the fine tipped piping bags to add the details, using the examples here as a guide. When the icing has hardened, paint details gold and silver. Tie the baubles with nice ribbon or string, and hang on your tree. This lighter fruit cake is perfect for guests who aren’t so keen on heavier varieties. It is still delightfully indulgent and has Christmas written all over it. I find that guests love the playful penguins and enjoy identifying which one is most like them, and then inventing stories around them. This cake should keep for at least a week, but not as long as a heavy Christmas cake would do. But could you really wait much longer to eat this? Serves: 25 Prep time: The cake with full decoration will take two days, as the marzipan and icing trees need time to harden. The penguins also take some time to make. Baking time: 90 mins For the cake: 250g salted butter250g light brown muscovado250g eggs (about 4 large eggs) 250g self raising flourGrated rind of 1 orange and 1 lemon2½ tbsp ground cinnamon1½ tbsp ground ginger¼ tsp cloves480g mixed dried fruit For the whisky syrup:90g caster sugar20g hot water50g whisky For the marzipan: (or buy a 500g packet of marzipan, you will have some leftover)250g very finely ground almonds250g icing sugar80g egg whites⅓ tsp almond extract1½ tsp armagnac For the royal icing: 700g icing sugar2 egg whites1 tsp of glycerin (optional)Plus: green food dye; sprinkles; black, white, orange and blue sugarpaste. To make the cake: Preheat the oven to 160C/140C fan/gas mark 3. Grease an 18cm and a 15cm cake tin. Line the bases with greaseproof paper. Add the butter and sugar to the bowl of a stand mixer, with either whisk or paddle attachment, then cream together until fluffy and lightened in colour. This can be done by hand. In a separate bowl, use a fork to lightly whisk the eggs. Slowly add a tablespoon at a time to the sugar/butter mixture, mixing well after each addition. Sift in the self raising flour and ground spices. Add the grated rind. Whisk until just combined. Add the mixed fruit, using a spatula to gently fold in. Divide the mixture between the two pre-prepared cake tins. Bake for about 90 minutes, or until a knife inserted into the centre comes out clean. Leave the cakes to cool in their tins for 10 minutes. Meanwhile, make the whisky syrup. Add the sugar and water to a pan and heat until all the sugar has dissolved. Add the whisky and mix. After the cakes have cooled in their tins for 10 minutes, run a knife around the edges of the cake to loosen and flip on to a cooling rack and remove the baking paper from the bottom. Use a skewer, chopstick or similar tool to poke holes all over the surface of the cakes. Soak with 1/3 of the whisky syrup. Turn the cakes over and repeat with the other side. Reserve the rest of the whisky syrup for soaking the cakes later. Leave the cakes to completely cool before assembling. To make the marzipan Mix the icing sugar and ground almonds in a large bowl. Add the egg white, almond extract and armagnac and mix to form a ball. Wrap in clingfilm and place in the fridge until ready to use. To make the royal icing Add the icing sugar, egg white and glycerin (optional – this prevents the royal icing setting rock hard) to the bowl of a stand mixer. Whisk until combined and smooth. The royal icing should be glossy and thick enough to hold peaks, but not so thick that you can’t spread it easily. If not using immediately, cover with clingfilm (making sure the clingfilm touches the surface of the icing). To make the trees Add a small amount of egg white to the royal icing so that it is still stiff but pipeable. Add green food dye and mix to create a rich dark green colour. Transfer to a piping bag and snip a medium/large tip. Spread out a few toothpicks on a sheet of greaseproof paper. Pipe zig zags on top of each toothpick, to resemble a tree. Leave to dry overnight. Then pipe zig zags on top once again and decorate with sprinkles. Leave for a few hours to set, before lifting from the paper and using on the cake. If you are in a rush, you can make trees using green Candy Melts, as they will set a lot quicker. To make the penguins: Roll one larger black ball of sugar paste to form the torso, and then a smaller black ball to form the head. Roll out white sugar paste and trim to create the detailing for the torso and head. Roll out black sugar paste and use a pizza wheel to create the penguins arms. Roll out blue sugar paste and use the pizza wheel again to craft a scarf or hat for the penguins. Use orange sugar paste for their noses, and the black sugar paste for the eyes. A toothpick is useful to help you to secure the eyes and nose. Use sprinkles to add areas of interest, eg as baubles on top of their hats. Try to create penguins of various sizes with different personalities to tell a story. To assemble the cake: When the cake is fully cooled, stack the smaller cake centre-back on top of the larger cake. Place the cakes on top of a large cake board. Then carve a dip in the cakes where the slide for the penguins will be. Soak the exposed cake again with the remaining whisky syrup. Dust your work surface with icing sugar and roll out the marzipan to just less than the thickness of a pound coin. Lift and drape the marzipan to cover the entire cake. Trim the bottom edges. It doesn’t matter if this is somewhat messy as you will cover it with royal icing later. Leave the marzipan for eight hours or overnight until it has hardened. While you are waiting for the marzipan to harden, you can create the royal icing trees and then make the sugar paste penguins (see instructions for both above). Use a tablespoon to spread the royal icing over the marzipan, creating peaks of snow for effect. Use a few drops of water and a finger to smooth the icing where the slide will be. Arrange sugar-paste penguins and trees as desired. Finish by sieving over a dusting of icing sugar. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.