With little over a week to go until parliament votes on Theresa May’s Brexit deal, one issue is taking up a disproportionate amount of time among Westminster’s political advisers and the nation’s broadcasters: arguing over the format of a proposed hour-long televised debate between the prime minister and Jeremy Corbyn. While the real business of selling the deal to MPs continues in parliament, the political and media class are locked in debate over the debate format. This has now splintered into various strands of subsidiary debates, each of which plays to different issues and insecurities among the political class and the general public that have emerged during the Brexit process. There’s the debate over whether the BBC is too close to the government and is too willing to work with the Conservatives to refine its format and secure the broadcast. There’s the debate over whether supporters of a hard Brexit or a second referendum should be represented during the broadcast or whether it should simply feature the two main party leaders. And, perhaps most importantly, there’s the debate over whether broadcasters can justify ripping up a Sunday night TV schedule filled with popular light entertainment shows for a dry debate about politics. This has led advisers at the top of the two largest political parties to ponder questions that are usually beyond their remit: would they be popular with the British public if the debate replaced an episode of David Attenborough’s Dynasties or a celebrity edition of The Chase? “These debates are elaborate displacement activity because they’re not actually dealing with the people who are voting,” said Craig Oliver, who as David Cameron’s director of communications led the painfully lengthy negotiations over debate formats during the 2015 general election. “I think Downing Street are trying to call Jeremy Corbyn’s bluff and show they have a position, while saying Corbyn doesn’t have a position.” The starting gun was fired on Sunday night when May’s aides briefed the Daily Telegraph that she would challenge Corbyn to a live television debate. Perhaps unexpectedly, Labour swiftly accepted the challenge in principle, prompting a swiftly arranged beauty contest in which the BBC, ITV and Sky News took turns to pitch to both major parties. Sky, aware of its relative size, offered to host a straightforward debate, presenting itself as a neutral host who would offer the footage to other bigger broadcasters. ITV promised a head-to-head on Sunday night with all the questions posed by Julie Etchingham and no studio audience. The BBC, knowing the threat posed by complaints about partiality, said its debate would be hosted in Birmingham and would include 10 prominent supporters of May’s deal and 10 opponents who would have the chance to ask questions, a format which Labour felt was “messy and confusing” – while also giving May the chance to paint her opponents as squabbling among themselves. On Tuesday night Labour let it be known it wanted the ITV option. But the following morning the BBC and Downing Street confirmed they had agreed terms, with both challenging Labour to participate in the event on the public broadcaster. Absolutely no one was happy, with Labour feeling the BBC was attempting to bounce it into accepting a format which played to May’s strengths. “The format with the most integrity is the ITV one,” said Oliver. “The BBC one is an overly elaborate mechanism that will be unlikely to have anything other than heat in it, it will just be a vehicle for soundbites.” Claims of skulduggery abound. Labour and the rival broadcasters all claim that Downing Street had been in discussions with the BBC for several weeks before they publicly proposed holding the televised head-to-head. They base this on a leaked media planning grid published at the start of the November which shows the party had planned a one-on-one interview with David Dimbleby for the prime minister. Under this theory, May’s challenge to Corbyn was a quick media headline which accidentally spiralled into something bigger when Labour accepted. Rival broadcasters also mutter over the influence of May’s head of communications, Robbie Gibb, who until last year was the BBC’s head of political programming and was responsible for organising the corporation’s election debates – which May chose to skip. As things stand, there is still no agreement for a programme pencilled in for Sunday 9 December. “The ball is in Labour’s court,” said a Downing Street source. The expectation is that Corbyn’s team will eventually have to cave in and accept the BBC proposal – perhaps aided by the corporation’s head of current affairs, Fran Unsworth, making further concessions on the number of people on the panel – or look as though they are running scared. The only thing that both the Conservatives and Labour can agree on is that they want to exclude smaller political parties from the stage, prompting furious complaints from the SNP and the People’s Vote campaign. Meanwhile, Channel 4 could be tempted into producing a cheeky spoiler programme featuring other sides of the debate. Oliver insists that no one in the UK has yet found the best format for a discussion between political leaders: “What we realised about the television debate format is that they are not debates, they are vehicles to deliver messages. Basically you just get up there with a whole series of points and work out how you’re going to land them.” He said this was especially pronounced when ITV ended up hosting a discussion featuring seven leaders during the 2015 election: “David Cameron went down the line and said ‘you want to raise taxes, you want to raise taxes’. We had planned it and he did it. It becomes a basic method of message delivery rather than a real debate.”