Jesse Lingard believes Ole Gunnar Solskjær has ensured a bright new year for Manchester United by restoring Paul Pogba to the dynamic midfielder for whom the club paid £89m. “I can definitely, definitely, see the Paul I used to know,” said Lingard as he reflected on United’s three games and three wins – featuring four goals from Pogba – since the Norwegian took temporary charge at Old Trafford in the wake of José Mourinho’s sacking. “I have seen him playing through the ranks and he is back to that player, the player we know.” Lingard is convinced Pogba can help overcome Newcastle United at St James’ Park on Wednesday. “Paul’s enjoying his football,” he said. “He’s playing in the role he likes to play in just inside, off the left. He has the freedom to make things happen. He has always got forward in that position and scored goals.” It is no secret that the France World Cup winner and Mourinho did not exactly see eye to eye – to put it mildly – and, according to Lingard, Solskjær’s more holistic approach is bringing out the best in Pogba. “Ole has helped him 100%. He has given him the confidence and licence to be free, to play his game and do what we know he can.” Granted the former Cardiff City manager has enjoyed a relatively kind reintroduction to the Premier League and United will face tougher opponents than the club he formerly managed, Huddersfield and Bournemouth but United have scored 12 goals in three games and exude an air of liberation. As an attacking midfielder, Lingard is clearly relishing the change in philosophy. “When we score one goal we want more,” he said. “We want to play with a lot of energy and attacking football. Early goals are important because then the confidence flows and we have the mentality to go on and beat teams four- or five-nil.” Then there is Solskjær’s man-management. “Ole’s great one-on-one with players,” Lingard said. “It’s great man-management. He will always speak to you and tell you what to do. “He knows what kind of a player I am. When I am on the right wing he likes me to come inside and make things happen. He gives me licence and freedom to do that. He’s very special. He knows where Man United has to be and that is at the very top.” United are a little way off the Premier League summit but victory at Newcastle would rekindle their hopes of a top-four finish in May. “If we go into the game like we have done the first three matches we’ll win,” said Lingard. “We’ve had the right mentality, killing teams. That mentality is very important. Ole has told us to start quickly, press teams and make sure we’re on the front foot and make sure that the first 15-20 minutes can decide the game.”