The Long Song Small Island author Andrea Levy reached further back into history for her fifth novel, set on a 19th-century, Jamaican plantation. Tamara Lawrance and Hayley Atwell co-star as slave and mistress, competing for the attention of a charming new arrival. He says he wants to improve life, but for whom? Tuesday 19 December, 9pm, BBC One Watership Down Top vegan viewing to accompany your Tofurky dinner: a new, big-budget, animated adaptation of the kids’ classic. John Boyega, Daniel Kaluuya, Ben Kingsley, Olivia Colman and Rosamund Pike all lend their voices, while James McAvoy and Nicholas Hoult are rabbits on the run, Hazel and Fiver. Saturday 22nd December, 7pm, BBC One The Dead RoomPerhaps Mark Gatiss was consciously or unconsciously competing with his old League of Gentleman chums when he wrote this one-off drama? There is something Inside No 9-like about this Simon Callow-starring ghost story, set and filmed at the BBC’s Maida Vale studios. And that’s no bad thing at all. Christmas Eve, 10pm, BBC Four Festive soapsAs usual, Christmas will bring melodrama in soapland. Coronation Street seeded a number of plotlines throughout the year with this period in mind so expect curveballs aplenty. Over in Emmerdale, we are promised wedding bells and plenty of lively Dingle action. Down in Albert Square, the EastEnders writers will be under pressure to match last year’s drama, so expect a returning character and the culmination of a feud. And finally, in accordance with the law, there will be snow. Apart from in Ramsay Street; this year, Neighbours boasts its first ever Christmas Day special.Emmerdale, Christmas Day, 7.15pm, ITV; Coronation Street, Christmas Day, 8.15pm, ITV; EastEnders, Christmas Day, 9.15pm, BBC One; Neighbours, Christmas Day, 6.05pm, Channel 5 Torvill & Dean The much-loved ice-dance duo get the biopic treatment, from their first early-70s team-up to their historic 1984 Olympic Gold. Fellow Nottingham native William Ivory wrote the script based on extensive interviews, so expect Nottinghamshire nostalgia, plus repressed romance hot enough to melt the National Ice Centre. Christmas Day, 9.15pm, ITV The Midnight Gang Adaptations of David Walliams’s children’s books have become a festive TV staple in recent years. This time, we get his story of five kids spending Christmas on a hospital ward. It might not sound like a particularly promising situation, but, despite the scary hospital porter and fearsome matron, there is still an adventure to be had. Boxing Day, 7.30pm, BBC1 The ABC Murders It’s 1933, and a train-spotting torturer is travelling cross-country, leaving a copy of the ABC railway guide at each murder scene. Christie at Christmas is almost as traditional as the Queen’s Speech, but John Malkovich as Hercule Poirot? That feels dangerously radical. Boxing Day, 9pm, BBC One You Gaslighting, emotional abuse and toxic masculinity are all trending topics, but has anyone thought to explore the stalker’s point of view? This schlocky new series goes there, and stars Gossip Girl’s Penn Badgley as the would-be boyfriend and Elizabeth Lail as his romantic obsession. Be careful what you put on Facebook! From Boxing Day, Netflix Les Misérables No dreams will be dreamed in this mercifully song-free adaptation of Victor Hugo’s 1862 classic. Instead, we’re getting an affecting, six-part portrait of redemption in revolutionary France. Andrew Davies, of 2016’s luminous War and Peace adaptation, has written the script, while Dominic West stars as ex-convict Valjean. Sunday 30 December, 9pm, BBC One Doctor Who There is no Christmas Day episode this year – it’s a New Year’s one instead – but what better occasion for a soul-searching, time-travelling adventure? The gang find themselves back on Earth to tackle an ancient evil, and it’s scarf weather, apparently, with the Doctor paying sartorial tribute to a previous incarnation. New Year’s Day, 7pm, BBC One Luther He is now a bona fide movie star, but Idris Elba can’t seem to stay away from Luther. He’s back again, three years after the last episode aired, with a new series, a new case and a new sidekick played by Wunmi Mosaku. Some faces seem more familiar. Alice? Is that you? New Year’s Day, 9pm, BBC One Death on the Tyne After last year’s Murder on the Blackpool Express you would have thought that tour operators Terry (Johnny Vegas) and Gemma (Sian Gibson) were due a nice, quiet Christmas at home. Alas, that is not to be. They have ditched their coach and are leading a cruise from Newcastle upon Tyne to Amsterdam in this cosy, comedy whodunnit. Saturday 15 December, 9pm, Gold People Just Do Nothing Prepare yourself for sad times in this final ever episode of the pirate radio mock-doc hit, as Grindah prepares for his big move to Essex and Beats organises a farewell tour of Brentford’s most meaningful blazin’ spots. Meanwhile, Chabuddy G is launching his 29th dodgy business out of Steves’s nan’s flat. Kurupt FM is officially over. Until the movie, anyway. Monday 17 December, 10pm, BBC Two Ellen DeGeneres: Relatable Yes, in between shooting her talkshow and taking record-breaking Oscar-night selfies, Ellen still does the odd bit of standup. In this, her first gig for 15 years, she riffs on that ever-so “relatable” lifestyle (you’d better believe her good pals Barack’n’Bono will be watching). From Tuesday 18 December, Netflix The “Christmas” Misadventures of Romesh RanganathanIt’s Christmas, but instead of being safely ensconced at home, comic and reluctant traveller Ranganathan has been sent to shiver and grumble in the Canadian Arctic. There he’ll learn to hunt (he’s a vegan) under the tutelage of Inuit guide and heartthrob Johnny Isaaluk. Thursday 20 December, 9pm, BBC Two Big Narstie’s ChristmasAfter a series that featured a rapping Thandie Newton and a body-swapping Ed Sheeran, Big Narstie and Mo Gilligan have been revealed as grime’s answer to Graham Norton. But can they fill Santa’s boots? What they lack in polish, they make up for with invention. Friday 21 December, 10pm, Channel 4 Goodness Gracious Me: 20 Years Innit! To celebrate two decades of the British-Asian sketch show, BBC Two will unveil GGM’s Top 10 moments, as voted for by fans. There’ll be “Mr Everything Comes from India” and the now-classic “Going for an English”, plus plenty of invitations to “kiss my chuddies”; under the mistletoe, we assume. Saturday 22 December, 10.15pm, BBC Two King GaryThis sitcom pilot from Tom Davis of Murder in Successville fame is in a rich British comedy tradition –it’s a suburban comedy of class, social status and modern manners. Davis stars as Gary, a cheerful lummox whose attempts to get ahead inevitably founder due to his own unerring capacity for self-sabotage.Sunday 23 December, 9.30pm, BBC One The Queen and IThis might be the perfect antidote to another year of royal-watching: an adaptation of Sue Townsend’s 1992 book, which imagined the Windsors’ struggle to settle into ordinary life on a council estate after Britain is declared a republic. David Walliams plays man-of-the-people PM, Jack Barker. Christmas Eve, 6pm, Sky1 Click and CollectMissing Chabuddy G already? The People Just Do Nothing star (government name: Asim Chaudhry) is back, playing the irritating neighbour of desperate dad Andrew (Stephen Merchant). They are stuck together on a cross-country road trip, in search of “Sparklehoof”, the one toy that will make Andrew’s daughter’s Christmas dreams come true. Christmas Eve, 9pm, BBC One Upstart Crow: A Crow Christmas CarolMore Shakespearean wassailing courtesy of David Mitchell and co. This time, a Shakespeare-Dickens mash-up as the episode takes its cue from the Dickens yarn of the title. Look out for cameos from Kenneth Branagh and the excellent Mark Heap who, inevitably, plays a cheerless Christmas miser. Christmas Day, 8.35pm, BBC Two Morecambe & Wise in America After some 40 years of Christmas reruns, is it possible that any unseen footage of the olden-days Ant & Dec exists? Indeed it is! More than an hour of the stuff is featured in this three-part, Jonathan Ross-presented documentary about the duo’s mid-1960s attempt to crack the US. Thursday 27 December, 8pm, Gold Frankie Boyle’s New World Order 2018Presumably Frankie will find it hard to know where to start as he takes a hatchet to the year’s news. Certainly, what with one thing and another, 2018 has been an open goal for satirists, so expect the sardonic Scotsman to engage with its absurdities with his customary brutal relish. Thursday 27 December, 10pm, BBC Two Billy Connolly: Made in ScotlandWith The Big Yin having recently announced his retirement from live performance, this two-part doc celebrates his remarkable and sometimes controversial career. The great man himself is interviewed as he returns to Scotland and visits the people and places who shaped him. Friday 28 December, 9pm, BBC Two The Inbetweeners: Fwends ReuintedAll benders, fwends and briefcase wankers are cordially invited to this bumper anniversary celebration of comedy genius at its most juvenile. The Inbetweeners stars themselves – Simon Bird, James Buckley, Joe Thomas and Blake Harrison – share their behind-the-scenes anecdotes with celebrity fans and surprise guests. Guaranteed to make you feel old. New Year’s Day, 9pm, Channel 4 Gogglesprogs Christmas SpecialNewspaper TV previews are all very well, but if what you really want is an excitable nine-year-old’s view on all the best Christmas telly, this Gogglebox spin-off has you covered. It has been off air for 18 months but rest assured: it’s unlikely to have matured one bit. Tuesday 18 December, 8pm, Channel 4 Christmas QuizzesIt might be Christmas but that doesn’t mean Jeremy Paxman will let up on either the tough questions or his glowering disdain for incorrect answers. As tradition dictates, the festive season will see famous alumni from various universities compete, culminating in a grand final. Elsewhere, Richard Osman will be teaming up with Scarlett Moffatt to test celebrities’ knowledge of the past year in Re-Play 2018 With Richard, and Jimmy Carr will be doing a similar, albeit more sardonic version of the same thing on Boxing Day with Big Fat Quiz of the Year 2018.University Challenge Christmas 2018, Christmas Eve, 8.30pm, BBC Two; The Big Fat Quiz of 2018, Boxing Day, 9pm, Channel 4; Re-Play With Richard Osman, Friday 28 December, 9pm, ITV Gogglebox 2018The Goggleboxers famously struggled to get their heads around the 2018 John Lewis Christmas advert. But what have they made of the year’s TV highlights? Were they disarmed by Bodyguard? Horrified by The Handmaid’s Tale? Slayed by Killing Eve? All will be revealed. Christmas Eve, 9pm, Channel 4 Top of the Pops Christmas SpecialJoin Radio 1’s Clara Amfo and Fearne Cotton for an hour-long review of the year in pop. Live performances from the big names (George Ezra? Rudimental? Tom Walker?) will culminate in a reveal of the final No 1 of 2018. The smart money is on Ariana Grande. Christmas Day, 12.30pm, BBC One Strictly Come Dancing Christmas SpecialThat Glitterball trophy would look nice atop someone’s tree and, after the final’s excitement, there is a second chance to nab one in this Christmas special. Previous contestants Caroline Flack, Aston Merrygold and Ann Widdecombe are among the competitors, dancing on a theme of “fairytales and making dreams come true.” Christmas Day, 5.30pm, BBC One The Great Christmas Bake Off How many different ways can you mess up a mince pie? Four merry bakers from Bake Offs past are about to find out. They will be joining hosts Sandi Toksvig and Noel Fielding in the (hopefully heated) tent, while judges Paul Hollywood and Prue Leith are also back to judge their efforts. Christmas Day, 8pm, Channel 4 First Dates at ChristmasMeddlesome maître d’ Fred Sirieix will be donning the Santa suit as some new couples hope to hit it off under the First Dates mistletoe. More interesting, though, are the updates on couples from the series just past. Has Big Brother’s Aisleyne finally found her happily ever after with Darren? Christmas Day, 9.15pm, Channel 4 Alan Carr’s Christmas CrackerAlan Carr’s series Chatty Man might have been axed, but that doesn’t mean he can’t return to hosting duties for a festive special. Expect the usual fluid format as drinks are quaffed, double-entendres are traded and special guests are revealed. Christmas Day, 10.15pm, Channel 4 Taylor Swift Reputation Stadium Tour Pop’s very own Regina George brings her sold-out Reputation world tour – complete with retina-burning pyro, fireworks, multiple stages, a guest spot from Charli XCX and a 63ft cobra named Karyn – to Netflix. Expect bangers, bitterness, redemption and no direct mentions of Kanye West.Netflix, from New Year’s Eve New Year’s Eve TVThis year’s NYE TV lineup feels strikingly familiar. Graham Norton will be doing his avuncular, sofa-bound thing. There is the inevitable Jools’ Annual Hootenanny featuring Michael Bublé, Nile Rodgers and Jess Glynne. Channel 4 will be striking an irreverent note with The Last Leg of the Year, but the pick of the bunch is an appearance from ageless cockney scamps Madness, who will be dodging the fireworks to bust out their ska-pop back catalogue. The Graham Norton Show: New Year’s Eve Show, 10.40pm, BBC One; Madness Rocks Big Ben Live, 12.10am, BBC One; Jools Annual Hootenanny, 11.15pm, BBC Two; The Last Leg of the Year, Channel 4, 9pm The Undiscovered Here’s a bonanza for fans of 1960s British comedy: three new documentaries showcasing the lives and works of Peter Sellers, Kenneth Williams and Tony Hancock. Victor Lewis-Smith (himself something of a cult TV legend) is the producer behind all three, rifling through diaries and interviewing old friends. From Tuesday 18 December, 10pm, Sky Arts Mark Kermode’s Secrets of Christmas CinemaWhen is a Christmas movie not a Christmas movie? When it’s Die Hard, of course. This and other surprisingly fraught festive controversies will be explored by the nation’s favourite film critic as he gets to grips with this most unusual genre, all while trying to capture what makes festive magic. Thursday 20 December, 9pm, BBC Four Dreaming of a Jewish ChristmasWhite Christmas by Irving Berlin; Rudolph, the Red-Nosed Reindeer by Johnny Marks; The Christmas Song (Chestnuts Roasting on an Open Fire) by Bill Wells and Mel Tormé … It’s a little-known fact that the soundtrack to Christianity’s biggest holiday was written by a group of Jewish songwriters. This musical doc tells their story. Saturday 22 December, 11.35pm, BBC Four Bros: After the Screaming StopsBefore Jedward, One Direction and Take That, there was Bros. In the 1980s, twins Matt and Luke Goss had hit after hit, becoming the youngest ever band to play Wembley, but an acrimonious split meant success was short-lived. Can they put the past behind them? Sunday 23 December, 10pm, BBC Four Spy in the Snow Snowscapes look pretty on a Christmas card, but just think of the poor creatures who live in them. In this wildlife doc, cutting-edge hidden cameras get up close to parrots in New Zealand, wallabies in Tasmania and emperor penguins in Antarctica – all without us needing to leave the fireside. Sunday 30 December, 7pm, BBC One Main Composite image: BBC/Rumpus Media; Henrik Knudson/BBC; BBC/Leigh Keilly; BBC; BBC/Des Willie; BBC/Lookout Point/Mitch Jenkins