The chairman of HS2 has said he expects to be sacked in the coming days, less than five months after he took over the role. Speaking on the early evening news programme on BBC Radio 4, Sir Terry Morgan said there was disappointment at Westminster about the delays affecting Crossrail, which he has chaired since 2009. Morgan’s comments followed the publication of claims that he is also set to be removed as the chairman of Crossrail, a high-profile project linking east and west London, which he has been involved in for the past decade. HS2 is the government’s £55.7bn high-speed rail network currently under construction, which will directly connect London, Birmingham, Manchester, Leeds and the east Midlands. Morgan was appointed to the role in July, when he was described by Chris Grayling, the secretary of state for transport, as “world-class”. On Friday, the Financial Times reported that Theresa May was expected to move against Morgan because of fears that costs were spiralling out of control. A source added that Morgan was expected to leave both the posts within weeks. It is believed that both Grayling and the chancellor, Philip Hammond, had declared they had no confidence in Morgan’s chairmanship and urged May to remove him. A government official, close to HS2, is quoted in the FT as saying: “They told the prime minister they have no confidence in him and she agrees. It is only a question of finding the right moment to announce it.” Phase one, between London and Birmingham, is due to open in December 2026, while links to Manchester and Leeds will open by 2032-33. In the summer, Grayling praised Morgan’s “wealth of experience and expertise”, as well as his “respected reputation and enthusiasm”. Previously, Morgan had worked on several infrastructure projects, including upgrading a number of London Underground lines and working at BAE Systems. A DfT spokesperson said: “We do not comment on personnel matters. However, we can confirm that the Crossrail Board took the decision to delay the opening on Wednesday 29 August and informed the secretary of state of that decision on 30 August.”