I’ve seen this Christmas drink mentioned loads of times in the Home Alone movies, but never knew what it actually was until a few years ago … OK, I admit it – maybe last year. It’s basically a sweet, creamy drink with festive spices and a hit of bourbon or rum. It’s super-Christmassy, so to have that flavour in a cheesecake? 100% a crowd-pleaser. The caramelised top is best done with a blowtorch, but you can finish it under a grill. Prep 10 minCook 3 hr 20 minChill OvernightMakes 1 cheesecake For the biscuit base200g ginger biscuits100g unsalted butter, softened and diced For the filling900g full-fat cream cheese100g caster sugar, plus extra for sprinkling 100g light brown sugar 3 tbsp plain flour ¼ freshly grated nutmeg½ vanilla bean paste200ml eggnog3 large eggs, plus 1 egg yolk Heat the oven to 190C (180C fan)/380F/gas 6. Line the base and sides of a 23cm springform tin with baking parchment. To make the base, use a food processor to blitz the ginger biscuits into a crumb (or double up two freezer bags, put in the biscuits and smash them up with a rolling pin). Mix the butter with the biscuits, then press into the base of the tin and bake for 12 minutes. Remove from the oven, set aside, then drop the temperature to 150C (130C fan/300F)/gas 2. Make the filling: beat the cream cheese with an electric mixer in a large bowl, or with a stand mixer, until creamy. Tip in the sugars and mix again to combine. Add the flour, nutmeg, vanilla, eggnog, and lastly the eggs and extra yolk, mixing them in slowly so the surface of the cheesecake doesn’t crack later. Pour the cheesecake filling on top of the biscuit base and bake for an hour. When done, there should still be some wobble in the middle. Switch off the oven, but keep the door ajar to cool slowly for an hour, then remove from the oven to cool at room temperature for a further hour. Pop the cheesecake in the fridge to chill overnight. The next day, carefully remove the cheesecake from its tin, then peel the parchment from around the edge. Sprinkle a generous amount of caster sugar on the surface of the cheesecake, then, using a blowtorch (or put it under a grill for five minutes), brown the top until the sugar has caramelised. Allow the sugar to cool and firm up, then serve. Liam Bakes is on Channel 4, Mondays at 8pm