Imagine a life inside an open-topped glass box. You could see what was around you, what your friends and neighbours and colleagues were doing. You could probably hear what was happening. In many and varied ways, you would be connected to your surroundings and have expectations to match. But just reach out to touch something, to connect, to truly become part of the life you see, and the fact of the box asserts itself. You can’t. You are close to what’s outside – the glass may be quite thin – but what separates you, as opaque as it may be, determines your life. Think of that scenario, and you might get close to some of what we have learned from a week of reporting in the Guardian’s Bias in Britain project. How life in that glass box means that for all the jobs certain people might see and reasonably aspire to, they never quite seem able to match their aspiration. How, for all the property ads that hold out the promise of a place to buy or rent, people in the box fail, in ways and by margins that seem inexplicable, to land the home they thought they could get. Why their friends, unencumbered by invisible impediment, have a different experience when they walk the high street, or go shopping, or go clubbing. Life is not always awful, but it always falls short. It’s like chasing a £5 note in the breeze. It forever seems reachable but, by fingertips’ length, it isn’t. For so long now we have been told that the so-called scourge of political correctness has irreparably tipped the scales towards minorities. If this project does nothing else, it exposes that lie. It has been easy, while reading the reports of how unconscious prejudice affects millions of lives, to point an angry finger; but that’s too easy because so many of us are complicit. Some of us have biases consciously held and enacted: prejudices that sit in the front stalls of the mind’s auditorium. Others sit deep in the subconscious, in the circle at the back. The priority after a week of depressing revelations is not to argue about whether these biases exist, for that way lies rancour and madness. If we are serious about a society in which everyone can at least have the chance to thrive, the priority must be to concentrate on how we recognise those biases, how we understand their significance and how, as a minimum position of decency, we act to hold them in check. We have laws against discrimination. We have an equalities commission – its voice is barely ever raised above a whimper It’s about the need to reach another level of thinking. Most decent folk recognise by now the inherent horror of racist attacks and hate crimes. Even in the toxicity of Britain after the bitterly divisive Brexit vote, those who raise a racist voice in public are shouted down. Sometimes they are prosecuted. Indeed, the only viable escape route for the racist in the mainstream realm is to insist, however incredibly, that they are not in fact racist. It is no small thing that they feel required for reasons of self-preservation to do that. In a way, it denotes progress. But what we struggle to recognise, much less to address, is of a different character. There is no definable drama to what afflicts the people in the box. It’s just a process of battery-draining mundanity. It is the sum of thousands of evaluations and micro-decisions quietly made each day. What do I know about this person? What can I see or hear or discern? All is directed by the memory and psychological baggage I bring to the encounter. I may know nothing of a person and form no strong immediate view of them, but that man I see with the blue tracksuit may remind me of another man in a grey tracksuit who was rude to me on the bus. Therefore my micro-decision may be to steer clear of the man in blue. It’s not fair and I know it’s not right but I may do it anyway, reassured that there is no cost to me from my micro-decision. But what we’ve seen this week from the exposure of bias in real life is the consequence of those micro‑decisions. It means people outside the box get the benefit of the doubt, and those inside it have to look harder for that flat and that job. It means that, from a judgment in the blink of an eye, those inside the box stand a higher chance of being arrested rather than reprimanded; of failing a driving test; of paying a bit more for their insurance. They might be followed a bit more closely by store staff while shopping. I’m well used to catching the eye of staff who train a beady eye on me from the other end of the aisle. Something about me activates their antenna. Do they even know why? For the people in the box, it’s the everyday enemy you can’t see, can’t explain and can’t engage with that corrodes the soul. And there is a societal cost to this. When we discriminate enough, eventually we marginalise, and the extreme consequence of that is to discourage full engagement with mainstream society. Each day now we see what happens in modern Britain when a cluster of hopelessly marginalised young people drift into the parallel societies often fuelled by crime. Bias and its repercussions may well be reaping a whirlwind we have yet to understand. The challenge, with this new awareness and body of knowledge, is to act. We have laws against discrimination. Ministers should make clear that, irrespective of current illiberalism in the public sphere and on social media, those laws will be enforced because they play their part in the harmonious running of society. We have an equalities commission responsible for “the promotion and enforcement of equality and non-discrimination laws”. Its voice is barely ever raised above a whimper. It needs to look at this week’s proactive reporting, listen to people’s experiences and start doing its job. But let’s recognise, too, there is only so much that journalists and law officers and ministers and regulators can do to police the fairness of unseen micro‑decisions. There are some things informed and decent citizens have to reflect upon and do for themselves. • Hugh Muir is a senior assistant editor at the Guardian