Names under consideration to replace Jim Mattis as US defense secretary are “not all military”, a leading Trump ally said, as the president pushed the respected retired marine general out of the White House door. Mattis resigned this week but Trump brought forward his departure from the end of February to 1 January, piqued by a resignation letter which was strongly if implicitly critical of the president and which attracted favourable media coverage. Deputy defense secretary Patrick Shanahan will take over as acting secretary. Mattis’s removal came amid a government shutdown and as the Washington Post and New York Times published long reports on a White House in apparent meltdown. In the Times, Trump was depicted calling close advisers “fucking idiots” and complaining that so much of Washington and the media is against him, he faces “a war every day”. Trump now needs a new face to run America’s everyday wars. Mattis resigned after the president abruptly decided to withdraw 2,000 US troops from Syria, seemingly at the behest of Turkey, which is openly hostile to America’s Kurdish allies. The US envoy to the coalition fighting Islamic State, Brett McGurk, resigned on Friday in protest. News of a planned withdrawal of up to half the 14,000 US troops in Afghanistan followed the Syria call, leaving experts expressing concern over talks with the Taliban and the strength of local forces. In keeping with dismissals of senior advisers including secretary of state Rex Tillerson, Trump did not give Mattis the news in person. Secretary of state Mike Pompeo notified Mattis, an anonymous official told the Associated Press. The sudden change stripped Mattis of any chance to smooth relations with rattled allies while fomestically, White House staff sought to limit the damage. One official told the AP Trump simply decided to avoid a drawn-out transition. Trump’s acting chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney, told ABC the president had known for “quite some time” he and Mattis “did not share some of the same philosophies”. I’m just saddened for our country. I’m saddened for the broken relationships with countries that have been with us As usual, evidence for the claim was readily available among the president’s tweets and public pronouncements. In September, Trump told CBS Mattis was “sort of a Democrat”, adding: “But General Mattis is a good guy. We get along very well. He may leave. I mean, at some point, everybody leaves. Everybody. People leave. That’s Washington.” On Saturday night, the departure confirmed, Trump wrote: “When President Obama ingloriously fired Jim Mattis, I gave him a second chance. Some thought I shouldn’t, I thought I should. Interesting relationship – but I also gave all of the resources that he never really had.” Regarding Mattis’s criticism in his resignation letter, the president was unable to resist a parting shot: “Allies are very important – but not when they take advantage of US.” Mulvaney said the president and Mattis “just could never get on the same page” on Syria, and added that Trump had said since his campaign that “he wanted to get out”. The president, Mulvaney said, was “entitled to have a secretary of defense who is committed to that same end”. Mattis was seen as one of Trump’s last “adults in the room”, able to resist the president’s wilder impulses, behaviour reported by among others Bob Woodward in his book Fear. Mattis denied having said Trump had the understanding of a 10- or 11-year-old child or having blocked a mooted assassination of Syrian president Bashar al-Assad. The book remains a bestseller. Mulvaney said he had “encouraged [Trump] to find people who have some overlap with him but don’t see the world in lockstep with him.” Shanahan worked for more than three decades at Boeing and was a senior vice-president when he became Pentagon deputy in July 2017. A White House official said Trump wants to focus on streamlining purchases, on which Shanahan has been working. During a lunch with conservatives on Saturday convened to consider the shutdown, Trump discussed options for a replacement. They were “not all military,” said Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, a military veteran and foreign policy hawk whose name regularly crops up on lists of possible defense secretaries. Another hawkish senator and veteran, Tom Cotton of Arkansas, is also regularly mentioned. However, Trump’s Syria decision met with Republican opposition. Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell urged him to reconsider “a premature and costly mistake”. On Sunday Bob Corker, chair of the Senate foreign relations committee, told CNN he was “devastated” by the departure of Mattis. “I’m just saddened for our country,” he said. “I’m saddened for the broken relationships with countries that have been with us. I’m saddened for the many Kurds and others who will likely be killed and slaughtered by either the Syrians or the Turks. I’m saddened for our country in being so unreliable.” Trump answered on Monday with a tweet “to those few senators who think I don’t like or appreciate being allied with other countries”. “They are wrong,” he wrote. “I DO.” But he added: “We are substantially subsidizing the Militaries of many VERY rich countries all over the world, while at the same time these countries take total advantage of the US, and our TAXPAYERS, on Trade. General Mattis did not see this as a problem. I DO, and it is being fixed!” Senators asked Trump to withhold a final decision on Syria for 90 days. But on Monday the Pentagon confirmed that Mattis had signed the withdrawal order. No operational details were provided. On Sunday, Trump said he had had “a long and productive call” with the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan. Later, he tweeted: “President Erdoğan of Turkey has very strongly informed me that he will eradicate whatever is left of Isis in Syria … and he is a man who can do it plus, Turkey is right ‘next door’. Our troops are coming home!” In Syria, Turkish troops were reported to be concentrating near Manbij, a town held by Kurdish fighters.