The dilemma is easy to understand: how to convey the class divisions of 19th-century French society in an English-language adaptation of Les Misérables made for a modern British audience? Dominic West, who plays Valjean in the BBC’s starry new version, an apt choice of Christmas blockbuster that should play right into the current festive mood, opted for a Yorkshire accent to convey the character’s poor roots. “In Britain, there are class divisions that we perceive on the basis of accents,” explained director Tom Shankland. “So the simplest rule that we found was really to nod towards those rules that we have in our own divided society, but without ever leaning into them very heavily.” In a prickle of northern defensiveness, I first read this as, simply, “northern = peasant”, then recited my vows to say “bath” and “bus” and not “barth” and “bas” until my dying day, as I stroked my whippet. Not this cliche again, which ascribes salt-of-the-earth decency by way of flat vowels and assumes that everybody north of Peterborough eats only barm cakes smeared with dripping. Plenty of northerners in the public eye have spoken about how the way they talk pigeonholes them. Maxine Peake says she was asked how she could possibly play an educated barrister in Silk; presenter Steph McGovern has said she believed “posh” women were paid more than her; Vanity Fair’s Olivia Cooke, from Oldham, put it succinctly when she said that casting directors hear her and think: “If she sounds like that, make her Maid Number Two.” West has spoken about shedding his accent – he was born in Sheffield – first at Eton, then at drama school. “We all had to learn RP, because we were told we’d get more jobs, and it’s true,” he told the Guardian, in 2012, while promoting My Fair Lady, a class fable built on learning “proper English” to pass in high society. Naturally, then, I bristled, even though my accent has been softened by two decades of living in the south, much like my ability to go out at night between September and June without wearing a coat. Still, this is Les Misérables. It’s about rich people and poor people and the only northern accent I could spot in the trailer is Valjean’s, with plenty of southern saltiness, too. I wonder if this minor hoo-ha says more about our continuing lack of comfort when it comes to talking about class (and how it changes how we’re perceived) than it does about whether Valjean grew up going on Sunday drives to the Peak District or not. It’s the most wonderful time of the year for mulling in-depth interpretations of potentially creepy lyrical content, as the debate around whether Baby It’s Cold Outside is suitable for the airwaves has its annual airing (I like the argument that the woman is defying what’s expected of her, given the era’s social norms, by being coy about leaving). It is a strange moment, then, to feel a bit sorry for Robin Thicke, whose career was blown up by “I know you want it/ you’re a good girl” pick-up track and problematic banger Blurred Lines. A court has given its ruling on the copyright case against Blurred Lines, brought by the family of Marvin Gaye, who argued that it copied Gaye’s 1977 single Got to Give it up. Thicke and Pharrell Williams, who co-wrote and produced it, will pay Gaye’s family £3.9m and 50% of future royalties. I suspect Thicke and Williams will get by; the song has earned them $16.6m. But, during their appeal in March, in which the original verdict was upheld 2-1, dissenting judge Jacqueline Nguyen called it “a dangerous precedent that strikes a devastating blow to future musicians and composers everywhere”. Other legal experts have argued that due to the specific complexities of this case, it is unlikely to change much in a technical sense, but what it has introduced is an abundance of caution, which feels like something of a death knell. Every person I know who writes or makes or creates something is inspired by what went before them. To make that something to fear, rather than celebrate, is a bleak state of affairs. The BBC has announced its long list of new artists to watch out for in 2019, a quite amazing roster of established acts who are known enough to have hundreds of millions of Spotify plays, performed at American awards ceremonies and been on Jools Holland’s show. It is fitting that, in the spirit of looking for hot sounds that might actually break a fresh artist into the mainstream, it turns out that one of my most-played tracks of the last year was released in 1967. My finger is on the pulse. Or at least, a pulse. A very old one. I have played Nancy Wilson’s version of Bobbie Gentry’s Ode to Billie Joe until I think I’m sick of it and then played it some more. It is one of the best covers of all time. It takes the original exemplar of slender storytelling and turns it into a string-soaked soul masterpiece. I have loved Ode to Billie Joe since I very first heard it, but discovering Wilson’s astonishing cover led me to discovering Wilson herself. She died on Thursday, at the age of 81, having released more than 70 albums over the course of her lifetime. What a treat it is to have them all to work through. • Rebecca Nicholson is an Observer columnist