Who’d be a pop star, eh? If there’s one thing we’ve learned from cinema in 2018 – A Star is Born, Vox Lux, even the PG-rated neutering of Freddie Mercury’s legend in Bohemian Rhapsody – it’s that the gleaming lights of the music industry can emit a pretty harsh glow when you’re under them, that the warm embrace of a crowd can turn to a stranglehold in the blink of a heavily made-up eye. That fame comes at a price is, admittedly, not the hottest of takes: in the movies, it goes back at least as, well, 1932’s What Price Hollywood?, the film that directly bore one of this year’s grit-amid-the-glitter case studies. In Bradley Cooper’s fourth official iteration of A Star is Born, an earthy, working-class nightclub chanteuse played by Lady Gaga is made over, more or less, into Lady Gaga: the mononymous Ally, a metallically polished, millions-selling pop diva whose heart is broken and whose soul is compromised en route to true, unfettered artistry. By the time she croons, with a pained tremor in her Whitney-style pipes, the weepy ballad I’ll Never Love Again in the film’s finale – to a raptly sympathetic audience mindful of what she has lost along the way – the film aligns itself with the age-old view that great art is born of suffering, and that the best singers channel their life’s pain into their voices. That moral hinges on the film’s own rather conservative musical preferences: we’re invited to see I’ll Never Love Again, a supremely well-shaped slab of pop melodrama that any belter from Barbra Streisand to Celine Dion would have similarly nailed in decades past, as a richer, more satisfying artistic statement than any of the sassier R&B-inflected cuts that saw her scale the charts. (“Why’d you come around me with an ass like that?” she snaps on one, in a bumping, grinding Saturday Night Live performance intended to signal her lowest creative ebb.) Some have accused Cooper’s film of an anti-pop sensibility: not necessarily true, given the film’s own expert populist construction, but its view of emotional catharsis and artistic redemption – all tied up in a stripped-back love song – is romantically old-fashioned. The new A Star is Born takes place in a world where bluesy country rockers enthrall Coachella masses and drag-bar patrons alike, where strings-soaked power ballads relaunch careers, and where social media seems not to exist: it may prove the enduring emotional effectiveness of its oft-told story, but as a snapshot of pop culture in 2018, it feels about as lived-in as Gaga’s stick-on eyebrows. It’s a world that leaves Ally bruised but not broken, head held high at her final curtain call. Whether she would so stoically survive the contemporary music industry that engulfs Celeste, the prickly heroine of Brady Corbet’s Vox Lux, is another matter. Jaggedly cynical, stripped of any semblance of romance, and painted in tones of dull silver where A Star is Born favours California gold, Corbet’s film is effectively the wicked sister of Cooper’s: both portray a gifted young female singer wounded and jaded by the commercial demands of the pop machine, emerging as a different animal in the process. Yet where celebrity leaves Ally sadder but wiser, truer than before to her scarred heart, Celeste buries her pain in its sparkly privileges. Played as an adult by an astonishing Natalie Portman – hard-faced, high-haired and snappish as a Venus flytrap – she’s a human tabloid headline, all affected attitude and high-maintenance artifice. She speaks in cryptic soundbites to family members and magazine journalists alike; she seems loosest and least mannered when kite-high on drugs supplied by her loyal but toxic manager (a perfectly skeevy Jude Law). When we learn, in a grimly topical shock far from A Star is Born’s frame of reference, that one of her music videos has inspired a massacre by copycat-styled killers in eastern Europe, she seems less freaked out than her coterie of advisers: Celeste’s reality is already so foggily suspended that art-life boundaries count for little. Where celebrity creates Ally’s trauma, however, it exploits and exacerbates Celeste’s: she rises to fame in her teenage years as the sole survivor of a Columbine-style school shooting, as the earnest, moving song of mourning she writes and performs at a memorial service becomes a national anthem of healing. A record deal follows, but her minders know that tragedy doesn’t shifts units; the precocious victim is swiftly moulded into a slinky pop starlet, the inspirational empowerment sentiments of her songwriting sexed up with slick synthetic beats (Sia composed all Celeste’s originals) and feline choreography. Vox Lux doesn’t show the complete transformation: rather, it zooms nearly 20 years forward to the acid-spitting final product. 2018-edition Celeste is still topping the charts with upbeat dance-pop, performed with an impressively robotic proficiency that belies the jangle of nerves, neuroses and addictions this one-time America’s sweetheart has become. “I’m a private girl in a public world,” she sings in one of her samey-sounding hits, and it’s one of her few lyrics – otherwise awash with canned self-help mantras – she seems able to express with conviction. Vox Lux, like A Star is Born, climaxes with a comeback concert: a full, seamless, blaring half-hour set that Portman barks and dances through with jaw-dropping elan. There are no teary confessionals or admissions of lessons learned here, however: Celeste tumbles directly into it from a day of catastrophic PR blunders and substance abuse, her onstage composure an odd lapse of professional responsibility before, inevitable, she falls apart again once the lights are off. Both films, then, conclude that the show must go on, though the implications of that moral are far bleaker in Corbet’s film than in Cooper’s: Ally continues because she is bound to her art, Celeste because she is bound to her industry. Is either film an apt portrait of the modern pop machine? Maybe not, if we believe what is likely to be this year’s most enduring pop artefact: Ariana Grande’s video for Thank U, Next, an airily autobiographical earworm in which the pint-size powerhouse sings through past heartbreaks – and even the death of one former lover – with blithe, unsentimental acceptance, and one steely eye fixed on the future. A cheekily self-reflexive work made to be pored over and memed into oblivion by a celebrity-fixated internet, it demonstrates a sense of humour neither Ally nor Celeste can muster – an awareness that her post-celebrity life will never be quite her own, so she will lead with packaging it and satirising it for us. The pop industry may well be as taxing and as damaging as both A Star is Born and Vox Lux suggest, but perhaps Generation Grande, cannily reared on selfies and social media, has found savvier ways to survive it. That film has yet to be made. Vox Lux is released in the US on 7 December and in the UK in 2019