On Sunday and Monday opposition members of the Hungarian parliament decided to exercise their right to enter the public building that houses the state media headquarters in Budapest, and ask questions there. We were allowed to enter the building but nobody responsible wanted to talk to us. We wanted the answers to the following simple questions: 1. Why are the public media, financed by Hungarian taxpayers, acting as the propaganda arm of the ruling parties? 2. Why are opposition MPs excluded from state media programmes? 3. Why is the only way for us to appear on the state media via abusive, offensive and untruthful reports about us? We came from very different parties, with very different ideological backgrounds. Those who were irreconcilable rivals some months ago understood that being at the state media headquarters and representing the 2.5 million voters who support us was more important than our political differences. We planned to have our five-point petition – which included, among other demands, a call for independent state media – to be broadcast. But since nobody spoke to us, we decided to stay overnight. In the meantime, people who had earlier been demonstrating in the city came to the state media HQ. The crowd was dominated by young people. They weren’t just protesting against the “slavery law”, which imposes 400 hours of overtime on Hungarian workers. They were also demonstrating for a free and democratic Hungary. Many have asked: why has this come to a head now? The “slavery law” was the immediate cause, but it allowed lots of other grievances to surface. Over the past few years, the regime of the prime minister, Viktor Orbán, has gradually eroded Hungarian democracy, the rule of law and solidarity among citizens. Every institution that provides important checks and balances in Hungary, from the constitutional court to the national election board, has been taken over by members and friends of the ruling party. Oligarchs who have emerged from nowhere win state contracts without real competition. Hundreds of thousands of Hungarians have chosen to emigrate because they believe there is no hope for their children in at home. All the while we are subjected to hate-mongering government propaganda , paid for by taxpayers to target their fellow Hungarians. What makes these daily demonstrations unique is firstly the fact that many young people are involved. Secondly, opposition parties have for the first time in eight years understood that their unity will inspire support among voters, not only on the streets during demonstrations but in the long run as well. Thirdly, when we opposition MPs decided to exercise our rights we were met with violence, and the police didn’t do anything to stop civilian security guards assaulting some of us. Two MPs were literally thrown out of the building, one was dragged around by security guards, and one was taken to hospital. Violence from any side is unacceptable. The violence used against us will have consequences. But what is more important is what happens next. Opposition MPs will continue to coordinate and we will support the peaceful actions of trade unions, civil society and ordinary Hungarians who want to speak out loudly against the Orbán regime. The withdrawal of the “slavery law” will not end our resistance. It will continue on the streets and within parliament until the regime is gone. This regime is not only taking our fundamental rights but is also humiliating us, lying to us and forcing us out of our own homeland. We hope the international community will not only keep an eye on the events in Hungary but also act. Expelling Orbán from the European People’s party would be a good start. • Ágnes Vadai is vice-president of Hungary’s Democratic Coalition party.