Ruth Strauss, the wife of the former England cricket captain Andrew Strauss, has died aged 46 after suffering from a rare form of lung cancer. “It is with great sadness and immense grief that we have to announce that Ruth passed away today as a result of her rare lung cancer,” said Strauss in a statement released via the England and Wales Cricket Board on Saturday. “Sam, Luca and I will miss her terribly. “Anyone who has met Ruth will know how loving, caring and passionately protective she was of her family and it gives us huge comfort that she was in Australia, the land of her birth, surrounded by those who love her, in her final moments.” Following a period of compassionate leave, Strauss stepped down as the director of the England and Wales Cricket Board in October after three and a half years. He took indefinite leave from the role, saying he “looked forward to returning and grabbing the reins again but, at this period of time, my focus has to be on supporting Ruth and my family at a challenging time for us”. He had taken a break from day-to-day duties in the summer to help care for his wife, who was diagnosed with cancer during the Ashes in December 2017, prompting him to rush home during the second test of the series that saw the tourists comprehensively defeated. He said at the time he had been unable to focus fully on the national side as he continued to support his family. Strauss thanked everyone who treated Ruth and said his family planned to open a foundation to help fund research into the rare condition that led to her death. “We would like to send our heartfelt thanks to those that have helped with her treatment over the last 12 months, in particular the wonderful team at University College hospital in London,” the statement said. “Ruth desperately wanted to help those affected by this terrible disease and we will be launching a foundation in due course to raise much-needed funds to aid research and also to offer support to patients and their families.” The couple met at a bar in Sydney in 1998 while Strauss was playing Australian club cricket during the winter, and they married five years later. They had two children, now aged 10 and 13. “She was a little older than me, much more worldly and most of all great company,” Strauss wrote in his autobiography, Driving Ambition. “Being an actress, she had plenty of days when she wasn’t doing much. We explored Sydney, sunbathed constantly on beaches up and down the eastern suburbs, ate loads of ice-cream and watched movies and talked in the evenings.” After settling down together in England, Ruth continued to perform on the London theatre circuit under her maiden name for some time, but she gradually put her career to one side to focus on her prominent role in her husband’s support network. The entire Strauss family regularly attended matches at home and overseas, and Strauss, who won 100 caps for his country, credited Ruth for playing a major role in England’s 2009 Ashes success. They ran the London marathon in 2013 in aid of the Lord’s Taverners, a youth cricket and disability sports charity. The cricketing world united to pay tribute to Ruth. “I’m absolutely gutted for the Strauss family,” tweeted Kevin Pietersen. “Ruth was kind, generous & only thought about others. Jess & I been thinking about them all eve and all morning. So sorry, Straussy! It puts life into perspective in a BIG way!” The England cricket supporters club tweeted: “Our thoughts are with Andrew, his two sons Sam and Luca, and all the family at this time.” The BBC cricket correspondent Jonathan Agnew tweeted: “All our thoughts and prayers are with Andrew Strauss and his family. Rest in peace, Ruth.”