Chris Hughton marks four years in charge of Brighton on Monday and, while he has never been one to luxuriate too fondly in his successes, could be excused a note of satisfaction. Saturday’s 1-0 win over Everton ensured they will end 2018 as the Premier League’s 13th-placed team, a victory away from reaching the top half, and the contrast with the situation he inherited is stark. “If you said to me when I took the job that we’d be where we are now, I’m not sure I’d believe it,” Hughton said. Brighton were 21st in the Championship when he succeeded Sami Hyppia. They had won four times all season; Hughton, who had been harshly sacked by Norwich earlier in 2014, kept them up and then guided them to promotion two seasons later. It says everything for their progress that scalps like Everton raise few eyebrows now and Hughton believes his task is to manoeuvre Brighton steadily into a position from which they have minimal need to look over their shoulders. “I walked into a club where, from day one, I’ve had great support,” he said. “It’s impossible to do any kind of decent job without having that good support behind you. “It is certainly a good job done well by everyone but we are still trying to develop and, if we start thinking we are better than we are, there are too many good teams that can spoil it. But overall I have to be delighted. The ambition was to get into the Premier League and of course the ambition now is to stay there. At the moment we are doing OK.” Brighton sit 10 points clear of the relegation zone and this season is, so far, an improvement on a 2017-18 campaign in which they cleared the drop by seven. Yet Hughton remains circumspect and prefers to be mindful that clubs of their size tend to have a natural ceiling. “We’re at a level where we can’t really afford to look upwards,” he said. “It would be nice at some stage to be thinking differently but in our progression I still think we need to [look at it] that way. “You want to continue making progress but I am very, very conscious of how difficult it is and the level of club we are. For any club at a level like ours that has had a huge leap, at some stage they’ll level off and find it difficult. All I hope is that, as a club and a team, we can continue to make progress and see where that takes us.”