A childhood friendship between two women deepens into first love, passionate and consuming. But in a north London Orthodox Jewish community, it is illicit, an abomination, against the strict codes that govern their lives. Religious and sexual identities cannot be reconciled; a painful choice must be made. This, in essence, is the story of Disobedience, a film starring Rachel Weisz that has just had its UK release. It is based on the 2006 novel of the same name by Naomi Alderman, but is also, in essence, the true story of Emily Green*, who left an ultra-Orthodox community in 2012 with her five children after years of conflict and guilt. She now supports others who are considering a new life outside the insular world into which they were born. Disobedience is a “rare opportunity to see a movie about British Jewry”, said Raymond Simonson of the Jewish cultural centre JW3, which held a screening and panel discussion last Thursday. “Normally Jews on the small or big screen are two-dimensional; in this film, there is a complex, three-dimensional set of characters. But that doesn’t mean people will embrace the movie. I have no doubt it will divide Jewish audiences.” Green grew up in a Hasidic community – one of the strictest in Orthodox Judaism – and knew from an early age that she was expected to marry within her faith and have children. At school, though, she became close friends with another girl. “I think I was falling in love with her, but I didn’t know it,” she said. “It was confusing and overwhelming. I’d never even heard or read the words ‘gay’ or ‘lesbian’. I had no idea it was possible to love someone of the same sex. I didn’t understand what was happening, but knew we had to keep it hidden.” Slowly, a physical relationship evolved, but Green’s life was already mapped out. Two days after her parents introduced her to a potential husband, the pair were engaged; they married a few months later. “I wasn’t attracted to him. Our sex life was terrible, traumatic,” said Green. Her lover was also in an unhappy marriage. Their relationship continued clandestinely – “there was a lot of lying and hiding” – until the other woman moved to the US with her family in 2008. “It was devastating,” said Green. “Eventually I thought: I’ve got to stop life repeating itself with my own children. I was nearly 30, and pregnant with my fifth child. I felt I had to make my life my own.” She smuggled a router into her home, hid it in a cupboard and secretly went online to learn about the outside world. In 2010 she separated from her husband. “He was an important man in our community. My parents gave me hell on earth – they supported him, not me. My father made me feel ashamed of myself, disgusted with myself. I’ll never get over that.” Green was asked to leave her teaching job at a Jewish school, and told she would have to leave her children in the community. She went through an exhausting and stressful court case over custody. In 2012 the court ruled that the children should live with her, and that she could send them to schools of her choice. “I cut my ties with the community and started a new life. I had to find a new job and a new home, with no support from or contact with my family. My head was messed up.” Dalia Fleming of KeshetUK, a charity that works with LGBT+ Jews, says people in the Orthodox community faced “an impossible choice” between their sexual or gender identity and their religion. “There has been a shift,” she said. “There is much more information available now, but there definitely needs to be more support for people who are LGBT+ and want to stay in the Orthodox community.” In the past couple of years LGBT+ issues have come to the fore in Jewish circles. Last year a transgender woman who had left a strict Haredi community in Manchester lost a court case over access to her five children after the community threatened to ostracise the family. The case shone a spotlight on what the judge called “a collision between two unconnecting worlds”. A few months later an Orthodox rabbi was accused of heresy and corruption for saying that gay people should not be seen as “deviant and problematic”. There were “plenty of skeletons in everybody’s closet”, Rabbi Joseph Dweck had said. In September Ephraim Mirvis, the chief rabbi, issued unprecedented guidance for Orthodox Jewish schools on providing support for LGBT+ students. It said they had a religious duty to protect young people and their families, and called for a zero-tolerance approach to homophobic or transphobic bullying. The guidance was careful not to challenge Orthodox teaching. Earlier this month Geoffrey Alderman, a prominent member of the Orthodox community – and father of the Disobedience author – told the Department for Education that no Orthodox Jewish school “would countenance any educational initiative that incorporated approval in any sense whatsoever of lifestyles prohibited in the Hebrew Bible”. It took me a long time to accept that I'm still a good person despite what happened Elsewhere in the Jewish community Laura Janner-Klausner, a senior rabbi in the Reform Judaism movement, caused a stir when she spoke of her adult trans child on BBC Radio 4’s Thought for the Day in October. “I had an amazing reaction – so much love, and only a bit of abuse,” she told the Observer. The Jewish community was “a very fast-changing place”. According to Simonson, there was a period when “everywhere people were talking about that broadcast. LGBT+ is one of the three topics I hear about now wherever I go in the community.” The others were Jeremy Corbyn and antisemitism, and Israel . “Of course there are people who are vehemently against anything to do with LGBT+, and their minds won’t be changed by the film, or the chief rabbi’s report, or the Reform rabbi’s family. But over the past year the issue has got a higher profile.” JW3 found itself at the centre of such debate a year ago when 25 ultra-Orthodox rabbis called for a boycott of the cultural centre after it held a gay-themed week of events and provided a meeting space for gay Jewish parents. “We’re holding a 21st-century lens to Jewish life,” Simonson said at the time. Green went through years of conflict, guilt and identity crisis before she found the strength to start a new life outside ultra-Orthodox Judaism. “It took me a long time to accept that I’m still a good person despite what happened,” she said. Although the story of Disobedience has strong resonance with her, she points out that her Hasidic community was more extreme than the one portrayed in the book and film – and the consequences of her actions were greater. “It wasn’t just a conflict: I had a real fear of being found out. There was so much at stake.” Now she helps others in that position. GesherEU, the organisation she set up in 2012 after leaving her community, has supported about 100 people wrestling with whether to cut ties and start new lives. “It’s not straightforward. People don’t just decide to leave – it’s a process. Some people feel so trapped that they can’t stay; others say it’s too big a risk to walk away from their community and family. It’s a huge struggle.” *Emily Green is a pseudonym