Hello, Warren Murray here tapping the rich seam of Thursday’s news. BT has confirmed it is removing equipment supplied by Huawei from key areas of its 4G network after the head of MI6 raised concerns. Meanwhile Canada has arrested the Chinese company’s chief financial officer for sanctions violations. The CFO arrested in Canada is Meng Wanzhou, daughter of company founder Ren Zhengfei. US authorities are understood to have been investigating Huawei since 2016 for allegedly shipping US-origin products to Iran and other countries in violation of export restrictions. This week the head of MI6 suggested the UK needed to decide if it was “comfortable” with Chinese ownership of the technology being used. Governments in the US, New Zealand and Australia have moved to block the use of Huawei’s equipment as part of their 5G rollout. Zhengfei is a former officer in the People’s Liberation Army. A recent report to the US congress said the Chinese government could force suppliers and manufacturers to manipulate their products for “state or corporate espionage”. Huawei denies any improper links to the Chinese government. ‘Taking a hammering!’ – Efforts are under way to rescue a British solo yachtswoman who narrowly survived a violent storm in the Southern Ocean. Susie Goodall, 29, is the youngest competitor and only woman in the 30,000-mile Golden Globe round-the-world race. Her yacht, DHL Starlight, was rolled end over end and and lost its mast on Wednesday night UK time. “I was thrown across the cabin and knocked out for a while,” she told race HQ by satellite phone. “The boat is destroyed. I can’t make up a jury rig. The only thing left is the hull and deck which remain intact.” She was left “beaten up and badly bruised” with cuts and scratches and had a big bump on her head. Race organisers say they are working with other competitors and Chilean authorities have alerted shipping but reaching her position could take several days. Lock, backstop and PM over barrel – Theresa May has offered a “parliamentary lock” on the Brexit backstop after legal advice warned her proposed deal could leave the UK trapped in “protracted and repeated rounds of negotiations” for years to come. The lock would give MPs a vote before the backstop could be invoked. Hard Brexiters have dismissed the proposal. The Unite union leader, Len McCluskey, has privately told Labour MPs that trying to get another referendum could be seen as a betrayal by voters who want curbs on immigration and the use of immigrant labour. Amid continuing debate in the Commons, Sam Gyimah, who resigned as a junior education minister last week, explained why he could not support the deal with an analogy that fell at the final hurdle. “This is like shoes that have holes in the soles: this deal is fatally flawed.” Golden visa rules tightened – The foreign super-rich are to face new restrictions on buying their way into the UK as part of attempts to tackle money laundering and organised crime. From next year, applicants for the tier 1 “golden visa” scheme must show the money trail behind the £2m in investment funds that they are required to put up. They will no longer be able to invest in government bonds as part of the reforms, and must invest in active and trading UK companies. The scheme has been suspended until the new rules are put in place. Golden visas have been criticised for providing an easy route into the UK for individuals looking to launder stolen wealth. In the year ending September 2018 more than 1,000 such visas were granted. Gilets jaunes win fuel battle – Amid continued unrest in France, Emmanuel Macron has gone from postponing a fuel tax rise to scrapping it altogether. Macron is refusing, though, to reintroduce the wealth tax that he repealed in a move that led to his nickname, “president of the rich”. France’s main unions are planning a joint meeting today and there are threats of a weekend hauliers’ strike. Various gilets jaunes organisers have called for wider social reforms including a higher minimum wage and higher taxes on the likes of Google and Amazon. High school students are protesting against plans to toughen university entrance criteria. In the Assemblée National, government spokesman Benjamin Griveaux told MPs: “Emmanuel Macron asks all the political and union organisations as well as business leaders to issue a clear and explicit appeal for calm … What we are living through is no longer political opposition, but opposition to the republic.” ‘Holding Mom’s hand again’ – George HW Bush has been farewelled at a Washington state funeral where the former president was tearfully remembered as “the best father a son or daughter could have”, by the son who held the same office. In a separate eulogy, historian Jon Meacham, who wrote a definitive biography of Bush, described him as “America’s last great soldier-statesman” who “stood in the breach in Washington against unthinking partisanship.” He added: “An imperfect man, he left us a more perfect union.” There were weird vibes when Donald and Melania Trump arrived – the incumbent president exchanged greetings with the Obamas but not the Clintons. The state funeral’s 3,000 invited guests included Prince Charles and leaders of Germany, Jordan, Australia and Poland, along with a host of former world leaders, such as former British prime minister John Major, who was in office during Bush’s single 1989-1993 term. Bush’s remains later arrived at a Houston church, where he was to lie in repose overnight before further services and his final burial beside wife Barbara and their daughter Robin who died of leukemia in 1953 at age three. Stonehenge tunnel damage claim – Angry archaeologists have accused engineers of digging a three-metre-deep hole through a manmade platform of flint and animal bone near the Stonehenge site. The 6,000-year-old platform at Blick Mead preserves the hoof prints of aurochs – giant prehistoric cattle that are now extinct. “This is a travesty,” said Prof David Jacques from the University of Buckingham. “We believe hunters considered this area to be a sacred place even before Stonehenge. These monster cows – double the size of normal cattle – provided food for 300 people, so were revered … If the remains aren’t preserved we may never be able to understand why Stonehenge was built.” A Highways England spokesperson said it was not aware of any damage but would be meeting Jacques at the site on Thursday. Millions of Venezuelans are fleeing their country after a political crisis became a humanitarian one. Twenty years on from the election of Hugo Chavez, his legacy faces ruin. The Guardian’s Tom Phillips witnesses how the optimism of a once booming country has turned so sour. Plus: Mona Chalabi on the chronic lack of diversity in Britain’s police “Chronic pain, I am discovering, is tiring, draining, domineering: it absorbs all your energy and focus; it drives other thoughts from your head,” writes Maggie O’Farrell. “Three days ago, I leaned sideways to move a counter in a game I was playing with my children and I felt a crunch, followed by a rip, and then a horrible shifting sensation as something slid out of place in my lower back.” The cause: a previously undiagnosed broken sacrum, sustained in a fall on a marble floor, but soldiered through, during a working holiday in Italy. This “holy bone” connects the backbone to the hip bone. “It lies at our middle. If we are wheels, the sacrum is our hub. All roads lead to it; everything flows from it. Without it, that small, hand-sized bone, we can’t move … Some injuries are life-changing, the doctor said, and so I have duly changed my life. These days, a year or so on from my x-ray, my sacrum and I have reached an equilibrium of a very tentative and hesitant nature. Our relationship is unambiguously uneven: the sacrum is in charge and I am the willing, reverential supplicant.” José Mourinho insisted he was “not under siege” but was still left frustrated by Manchester United’s 2-2 draw with Arsenal at Old Trafford, saying his team had yet again been their own worst enemies. Meanwhile, James Milner sparked a Liverpool fightback at Burnley, Maurizio Sarri questioned the attitude of his Chelsea players after they suffered a chastening 2-1 defeat at Wolves and Harry Kane showed new Southampton manager Ralph Hasenhüttl the size of his job in a 3-1 win. Saracens are confident Maro Itoje will sign a new deal and disappoint other clubs keen to make him one of the best-paid rugby players in the country. British Cycling is to take its search for the next Geraint Thomas or Victoria Pendleton into people’s homes with the launch of a new virtual reality championship. Afghanistan’s attorney general’s office has announced an investigation into allegations of sexual abuse of female footballers at a training camp by staff from the country’s football federation including its president, Keramuddin Karim, following the Guardian’s reporting of the accusations. Asian shares slumped on news of the arrest in Canada of Huawei executive Meng Wanzhou, amid concerns that it will worsen trade relations between the US and China. Japan’s Nikkei was down nearly 2% while Hong Kong shares were off 2.7%. In London, the FTSE100 is expected to drop 1% at the open this morning with a 1.5% fall forecast in New York later. The pound is buying $1.271 and €1.121. The Guardian’s splash today is “Facebook discussed cashing in on user data, emails show” – here’s what that is about. The Mail has its own separate investigation into the way our data is used, with: “Is nothing private any more?” Brexit features on several front pages. The FT reports: “May moves to douse Brexiter fury as Irish ‘backstop’ fears reignited”, the Express says May is engaging in a “Last-ditch bid to salvage EU deal” and the Telegraph has “EU will offer May delay to Brexit”. The Times reports that cabinet ministers are calling on May to delay next week’s crucial vote, for fear of a catastrophic defeat: “May urged to call off Brexit vote”. The Sun leads with Liam Fox’s comments that MPs may attempt “to steal Brexit from the British people”, under the headline: “Wrecksit”. The Mirror carries a report on knife crime with a disturbing picture of a child holding a knife, which it suggests illustrates scenes at “School gates, 2018”. The i carries comments from the UK genomics chief that newborns should be tested for cancer risks: “DNA-test UK babies”. The Guardian Morning Briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com