When it comes to reading books, Donald Trump has protested: “I don’t have the time.” Nonetheless, the president has made at least a dozen personal recommendations on Twitter this year for a shelf full of books written by his supporters and polemicists of the right and far right that he has found to be “excellent”, “fantastic” or even “great”. Here are 10 of the president’s picks, and all of them have a common theme. This examination of the “spiritual journey” of the thrice-married, tax-evading billionaire takes 375 pages to build the hopeful argument that by surrounding himself with people of faith, Trump has become religious. Failing that, the authors write: “Clearly, God is using this man in ways millions of people could never imagine. But God knows and that’s good enough.” The reviews: “Holy crap!” Los Angeles Times “A very interesting read. Enjoy!”  Donald J Trump Huge tax cuts boost economic growth, claims Arthur Laffer, who memorably scribbled his Laffer curve on a napkin over cocktails with Dick Cheney and Donald Rumsfeld in 1974. It didn’t work out well for Kansas when they tried it and some of the optimism for the US economy is looking premature. The authors, Trump’s economic advisers in 2016 and both still members of his economic advisory council, write: “The NeverTrumpers were fantastically wrong … No, he hasn’t ‘destroyed the world’s economy’. No, the stock market hasn’t crashed. No, there is no recession.” The reviews: “Two very talented men have just completed an incredible book on my Economic Policies.” Donald J Trump Fox News legal analyst examines “Hillary Clinton’s deep state collaborators” who, he claims, include sacked FBI chief James Comey and special counsel Robert Mueller. The reviews: “In defending Trump, Jarrett makes a number of claims that raised our eyebrows.” Politifact “It is indeed a HOAX and WITCH HUNT, illegally started by people who have already been disgraced. Great book!” Donald J Trump Another Fox News presenter offers another takedown of “a conspiracy by the powerful and connected to overturn the will of the American people”. Perpetrators, she writes, include but are not limited to the FBI, NSA, Pentagon, Hollywood, “fake news media”, Democratic party, Fisa courts and some Republicans (in name only). The reviews: “Our great Judge Jeanine Pirro is out with a new book … which is fantastic. Go get it!” Donald J Trump The far-right former White House adviser and Breitbart writer is not only concerned about people ganging up on Trump but the threats to Judaeo-Christian civilisation posed by jihadists, communists, China or “tomorrow’s unknown threat”. The reviews: “A very talented man who I got to know well while he was working at the White House, has just written an excellent book … much will be learned from this very good read!” Donald J Trump Objectionable conservative historian and regular Fox contributor promises “the true story of how Donald Trump has become one of the most successful presidents in history – and why America needs him now more than ever”. He has claimed America suffers little overt racism from white people; he has also warned about the dangers of Spanish-speaking immigrants. Ta-Nehisi Coates accused him of “stupidity and racism”. The reviews: “He wrote a highly touted book called ‘The Second World Wars’ and a new book will soon be coming out called ‘The Case For Trump.’ Recommend both.” Donald J Trump Fox News commentator Sean Hannity writes the foreword to this book, whose author claims to have scientific evidence that Trump is “the most sound-minded person to ever occupy the White House”. Her claim to have a PhD in psychology has been questioned. The reviews: “Go out and get your copy today – a great read!” Donald J Trump Yet another Fox news commentator – with a shorter tome, but a wider set of foes in his sights, targeting a “selfish ruling class” that draws in Republican Senate leader Mitch McConnell, Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg and Jeff Bezos of Amazon. He suggests Trump is “vulgar and ignorant” (maybe the president didn’t finish this one) but was elected as the inevitable result of the elites ignoring conservative populist anger. White nationalists love him and Trump picks up talking points from his Fox diatribes. The reviews: “Congratulations to Tucker Carlson on the great success of his book, ‘Ship of Fools.’ It just went to NUMBER ONE!” Donald J Trump This one is actually a real book, with on-the-ground reporting and data analysis. The authors are a conservative reporter and a Republican campaign strategist, but they have gone deep to try to understand how Trump upset the odds. The reviews: “Does much to tell the story of our great Election victory. The Forgotten Men & Women are forgotten no longer!” Donald J Trump The former White House press secretary owns up to the reality of life in the White House with a president prone to outbursts and tweet storms, where backstabbing and leaks were commonplace. The reviews: “Sounds like a family member seeking to whitewash an abusive relationship.”  The Guardian “A story told with both heart and knowledge. Really good, go get it!” Donald J Trump