As a psychiatrist whose job is to preserve healthy minds, it feels a little unusual to be championing a mental health advocate who punches people in the head for a job. But that’s where I find myself with Tyson Fury. On Sunday, having set my alarm for silly o’clock in the morning, I got up, boiled the kettle and sat down to watch two grown men try to knock each other into states of unconsciousness; the kind I’d always been taught to avoid at medical school. I’m not really a fan of boxing. Besides the risk of chronic traumatic encephalopathy induced by a head injury (“punch-drunk syndrome”), I’ve never understood how bloody violence is permissible in society so long as it’s within a ring? I didn’t naturally warm to Fury either; the brash, outspoken fighter, who expressed archaic views on women and homosexuals and whose father was jailed in 2011 for gouging someone’s eye out. In 2015 Fury defeated Wladimir Klitschko to take three world heavyweight titles, fulfilling his lifelong dream. But feeling no subsequent sense of purpose he spiralled into madness – my area of expertise. “When you’ve won all the world title belts there’s nothing else after that,” he said. He fell into depression which was closely followed by its good friend, addiction. He looked for salvation in alcohol, drugs and grimy strip clubs. “I’ve been living like a rock star. But that ain’t a great thing.” He received a drugs ban, and suicidal thoughts led him to nearly drive his Ferrari off a bridge at 190mph. “I prayed for death on a daily basis,” Fury said. It’s a harmful misconception that the mentally ill don’t recover. To many fans, Fury joined previous sporting heroes in a spiral of addiction and attempted recovery. Athletes return from pulled hamstrings and fractured metatarsals but mental scars take longer to heal, if at all, they said. Yet 12 months later and Fury had shed 10 stone, along with his demons, and was taking on hard man heavyweight champion Deontay Wilder. Help had come in the form of a psychiatrist, a psychotherapist, family support, regular exercise, abstinence and renewed faith. Before the fight a BBC journalist asked: why did you shave the beard off? “New look, new day, new dawn, new me.” What would it mean to be the heavyweight champion of the world? “Not a great deal.” It’d be nice to go home with the belt though? Fury said yes but it’s no different from a nice jacket, watch or car. “I’m not going to make love to the belt, am I? The most important thing is going home to my family and enjoying Christmas.” This insight, that the carrots we often chase in life aren’t the ones that nourish us, is one we don’t often expect to hear from 6ft 9in man-mountains. Wisdom on the emptiness of materialism is usually left to philosophers – not boxers. As a smiling Fury danced around the ring in Los Angeles, a man no longer lost in a cloud of depression, I thought of the people who experience mental illness as a dark room with no door. The UK is neck-deep in a mental heath crisis. The mood is gloomy, but the Gypsy King embodied the recovery model in practice, to a global audience. This is what I’d woken up for. Then in the 12th round Fury was brutally floored with a Wilder hammer-blow. “Get up, get up!” I pleaded into my laptop, my cup of tea sloshing over the duvet. But he was out cold, eyes rolled back, the umpire counting him out: “3… 4… 5…” I could hear the pessimistic words strangers tell me at parties ringing in my ears: “People never really get better from mental illness.” But Fury peeled himself off the canvas, regained his feet, and saw out a dramatic draw. “I ain’t a special human being,” Fury said afterwards. “I’m just a normal man. But with the right help and the right guidance, anyone can turn their life around.” The judges controversially scored the bout as a draw thereby robbing Fury of one of the great sporting comebacks. Not that he seemed to care. Post-fight he pledged to donate his £8m fee to the homeless and declared: “For all the people out there with mental health problems, I did it for you guys.” Because as they say; it’s not the winning, it’s the taking partially acknowledged myths and rewriting them that counts. • Dr Benji Waterstones is a general adult psychiatrist based in London