Elliot Daly captains Wasps for their must-win encounter with Toulouse in Coventry on Saturday amid reports of his departure to Saracens over the summer. Dai Young is boosted by the returns of the wing Josh Bassett, the hooker Tom Cruse and the flanker Thomas Young as Wasps look to improve a run of one win in nine matches in all competitions against the four-times champions. Toulouse welcome back Jerome Kaino after he was suspended for the one-point victory over Leinster last time out in this competition. Bath are without Freddie Burns for their crunch match against the defending champions and with Rhys Priestland also out, James Wilson slots in at fly-half. Johnny Sexton returns to captain Leinster while Dan Leavy is also back after missing Ireland’s win over New Zealand with a neck injury. Bath v Leinster Sat 3.15pm (GMT) Wasps v Toulouse Sat 5.30pm Exeter recall three of their six internationals who were rested for their first Premiership defeat of the season at Harlequins last weekend. Henry Slade, Ben Moon and Sam Skinner slot into the starting XV. Tomas Francis and Alec Hepburn take their place on the bench as Exeter seek a first win of this season’s competition after a draw with Munster was followed by defeat by Castres. Gloucester, who lie third in the pool a point above the Chiefs, hand the South African hooker Jaco Visagie his first start as Matt Banahan, Tom Hudson and Henry Trinder come into the backline for the trip to Sandy Park. Munster welcome back CJ Stander and Joey Carbery, who lines up in red alongside Conor Murray for the first time, with the scrum-half making his first European appearance of the season as the pool leaders host Castres. Exeter v Gloucester Sat 1pm Munster v Castres Sun 1pm Mixed news for Saracens on the injury front: Mako Vunipola makes his first appearance for the club since suffering a calf injury in the ill-tempered Champions Cup win at Glasgow in October but Mark McCall is without Maro Itoje, who has a knee injury and is sidelined “for a number of weeks”. In his absence Nick Isiekwe and Will Skelton are paired together in the second row. Owen Farrell comes back into the side after sitting out against Wasps last week, meaning Alex Goode returns to full-back. Gareth Anscombe is at No 10 for Cardiff Blues, a move that sees Jarrod Evans shift out to inside-centre. Glasgow have recalled 11 players to their starting lineup, with Stuart Hogg and Tommy Seymour coming back into the back three to face Lyon, the only side in the competition without a match point to date. Lyon v Glasgow Sat 1pm Saracens v Cardiff Blues Sun 1pm Matt Toomua is back for Leicester’s trip to the U Arena to face last season’s runners-up Racing 92, taking the place of Kyle Eastmond who is suspended following his red card during the heavy defeat at Bristol. The Tigers kept their hopes of qualification alive with a thumping win over the Scarlets in the previous round but have lost both their visits to Racing in the last two editions of the tournament. Geordan Murphy has also dropped Ben Youngs to the bench, with Ben White starting at scrum-half as Leicester look to avoid a seventh straight defeat in all competitions. Racing have made six changes in total with Simon Zebo selected on the right wing and Virimi Vakatawa named at outside-centre. Finn Russell comes back into the side at fly-half, while Wenceslas Lauret, Bernard le Roux and Cedate Gomes Sa all return. Racing 92 v Leicester Sun 3.15pm The three-times winners Toulon find themselves bottom of the pool after defeats by Newcastle and Edinburgh before their double-header with French rivals Montpellier. The New Zealanders Malakai Fekitoa and Julian Savea line up in the centres, while Hugo Bonneval, JP Pietersen and Filipo Nakosi are in the back three for Toulon, who have won two of their last Top 14 matches but still lie 10th in the table. Montpellier, who prevailed 29-17 when these sides met in early October at the Altrad stadium, are also struggling and are ninth in the domestic table after a home defeat by Clermont last time out. Vern Cotter has selected Johan Goosen at fly-half in place of Aaron Cruden, while Yacouba Camara makes his first European appearance of the season after returning from a long spell on the sidelines last weekend. Toulon v Montpellier Sat 3.15pm