My son is nearly 20. He is bright but lazy. All he does is mess around on his computer and chat to online friends. He did well in his GCSEs, despite doing zero work, and started a diploma but dropped out because of depression. He had some time off, restarted the course and dropped out again. He’s done nothing since. I am at my wits’ end. My dad thinks he’s a waste of space and I should kick him out, but that seems harsh. He is polite and will help if I ask, but he has no motivation to do anything. If I try to talk to him about it, he digs his heels in and does less. His father and I split up when he was four; he’s never had a dad in his life. I was single until five years ago, but that relationship has just ended. At one stage my son was very depressed and talked about feeling hopeless. He had a few counselling sessions, but I don’t think they helped. He seems fine now, but I worry that pushing him will cause him to spiral again. He lacks self-confidence and seems happy to exist in the microcosm of his bedroom. I know he needs to take responsibility for his life, but how hard should I work to make that happen? His two older sisters are not like him at all; both are independent and getting on with their lives. I worry that if anything happened to me, my son wouldn’t have the skills to cope. Should I kick him out and give him some tough love, or let him grow up a bit? I loathe the term “tough love”. Sure, it’s tough loving people sometimes, through certain situations; but to me tough denotes something hard and unyielding, which isn’t love at all. I think you are torn between what you want to do and what you feel others are saying you should do. You should ignore what your father is saying: that is not helpful at all. You know your son: what’s your instinct telling you? What does need looking at, though, is your son’s history with depression. I asked a family psychotherapist, Jess Morris, for her opinion. She urged you to push him to get a proper assessment, to see if he is suffering from depression, and to get the appropriate treatment. “If he is depressed,” she said, “he’ll find motivation for anything difficult.” Depression isn’t linear or a disease you get only once. Even if it has been overcome, it can recur or compromise a person so that, when the next round of difficulties hits, they are less able to deal with it. So addressing this is key. Adult offspring can have trouble “launching” from the family home. This can be down to several things. Morris wondered whether the fact that he was the last child and the only man of the house might have something to do with it. Sometimes children don’t want to depart because they fear leaving the parent behind, rather than the other way around. “You might need to renegotiate your relationship with one another,” suggested Morris. You mentioned in your longer letter that you stopped working so you could make your son lunch. Why do you feel the need to do this? Could you perhaps go away for a few days to see how he copes? Not in an aggressive way, but in a cheery, confident, “I’m going to see some friends” way. “Also,” Morris said, “not everyone knows what they want to do at 20 – there’s not a magic button that gets pushed when children turn 18.” Twenty isn’t old at all. Lots of people haven’t found their feet by then. I certainly hadn’t. Morris also wondered where the male role models were in the family. “He might not have a role model to show him different ways of doing things. It’s interesting that your two daughters launched themselves successfully. Who is there who could help him with the little steps, help him access what he enjoys, what he’s good at?” Is there a man – a friend or someone from the wider family – who could tell him how they got started in life, share their stories with him? I asked Morris how you could support him without feeling as if you’re propping him up; in other words, when to help and when not to help. She advised “stepping in and stepping out: look at what help you can offer that’s enough to get him excited about something, and then step out to let him get on with it. You then step in again if need be.” Think of helping a toddler learn to walk. You don’t hold their hand all the time, but you steady them when they wobble. youngminds.org.uk; aft.org.uk • Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article.