Twice a week, with a haunting trumpeted signature tune and a view of terraced roofs stretching away into infinity, “Coronation Street,” Granada Television’s serial of North Country life, goes on the air. It has now had 200 issues and is coming up to its second birthday next week. It is one of Britain’s most popular television programmes. In the article below, our Television Critic examines the reasons for its success. The endless Street… Enthusiasts call it a major sociological phenomenon and one of the very few original contributions to television. In fact all marathon TV serials with fixed settings and regular characters are cunningly designed and processed to be like comic strips which aim, with slight variations on a familiar pattern, to turn the viewer into an addict. “Coronation Street” is undeniably strip-like. Where it does score over its rivals is in its effect of realism. It eschews glamour and sensational curtains and concentrates on trapping the rugged smug ambience of North-country working and lower middle-class life. It will follow a local event like a council election or an amateur theatricals through instalment after instalment with the tenacity of a parish magazine. Its characters provide parts that actors can sink their teeth into and digest and assimilate. They have become deeply planted, like the permanent set of seven terraced houses, the shop on the corner, the Mission Hall, and the pub. At its best, its fans will tell you, its matter-of-fact humorous naturalism suggests a Five Towns story by Arnold Bennett. At its worst, say its critics, everything about it is craftily calculated – like those patent medicine ads that aim at elderly people’s nostalgia – to attract the largest sedentary group of the population. The most popular TV programmes have a special indefinable quality – you might call it Verisimilitude Plus – which gives the viewer the illusion of being able to communicate back from hearthrug to screen. (Only a very few telly personalities have anything like this. One was the late Gilbert Harding, whose fans used to treat their sets like shrines, putting doses of cough mixture and invalid port on them when they thought he looked out of sorts.) “Coronation Street” has a high rating for Verisimilitude Plus. At Christmas people try to book rooms for parties in the Rover’s Return, the pub where much of the action takes place. When a new barmaid smashed an ornamental plate, viewers sent in replacements. If a house becomes vacant owing to somebody being written out of the script, there are always applications for it. The characters have devotees who insist on believing in their reality. When the buxom Elsie Tanner was involved with a sailor who, unknown to her, was married, she got scores of letters warning her of the danger. Jack Watson, the actor who played the sailor, was stopped outside the studio by one gallant mechanic who threatened to give him a hiding if he didn’t leave Elsie alone. The strongest personality of them all, the sturdy old bulldog bitch, Ena Sharples (now alleged to be getting, through no fault of her brilliant impersonator Violet Carson, a bit blown-up) who spends so much time with her two toadies, gossiping and croaking like norns in the pub, has a huge following. When she was sacked from the Mission Hall of which she was a caretaker, viewers from all over the country wrote offering her jobs. When she was in hospital temporarily bereft of speech, a fight broke out in Salford between a gang of her fans and an Irish detractor who said he hoped the old bag would stay dumb till Kingdom come. Some of the sociological implications of the programme are expressed in the close watch that welfare organisations keep on it. Pensioners’ groups write in to point out that the Street’s pensioners have too much cash to spend. Dog-lovers’ clubs complain of the slightest suspicion of anti-canine sentiment. Temperance societies protest that the tempo of the drinking in the Rover’s Return is dangerously fast. How long “Coronation Street” can carry on before its timeless clock runs down and its characters turn into dummies is impossible to say, but its lack of gimmicks should help to give it stamina. The younger generation and light-minded Southern Englanders may prefer the absurd “Compact” with its perpetually frustrated love in the office, or “Emergency-Ward 10” with its never-failing bed-pan drama. But once you have settled in for a fortnight or so of the Street’s Sturm und Drang it is difficult not to agree with the fans that this is much more like real life than most of what you see on television except the real thing. The endless Street... by Maurice Richardson was published in the Observer on 2 December 1962. At the time of writing this, on 1 December 2018, Coronation Street still airs six times a week and has broadcast 9,710 episodes.