It may seem churlish to object to a little noise at the Emirates given the unease over its absence in recent years. B ut there was an unpleasant edge to some of the interaction between crowd and players at the north London derby. The incident involving Tottenham fans and Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang may yet be subject to its own investigation and presents issues that go beyond, but are also contained within, football. Beyond this there were moments of unease as players on both teams baited the crowd. Few things are more unedifying in football than adults baying at footballers, then clutching their pearls the moment those players react. But the fact is people are often idiots, and idiots should not be provoked. Eric Dier will surely regret making pointless shushing gestures after his goal. Football can feel like a vicious place at times, surrounded by social media sneering and inane and trivial hatreds. Best not to feed it. Barney Ronay • Match report: Arsenal 4-2 Tottenham What now for Wolves and Nuno? After picking up only one point from a possible 18, Nuno Espírito Santo is facing his first major test since taking over as Wolves manager. Perhaps most alarming is the fact that the last two defeats have come against relegation candidates – Huddersfield and Cardiff – and on both occasions Wolves got exactly what they deserved. Wolves are no longer controlling games from the centre of the pitch, where Huddersfield did their homework and outnumbered Rúben Neves (suspended for Chelsea’s visit on Wednesday) and João Moutinho, and the suspicion remains that Raúl Jiménez will not score enough goals in the No 9 role. A couple of their wide attackers have also yet to deliver – Diogo Jota and Helder Costa have failed to score in the league this season – and that must be a concern for Nuno, who may need to change tactics, not just personnel, to arrest the slide. Stuart James • Match report: Cardiff 2-1 Wolves Ruben Loftus-Cheek has taken his opportunities, impressing in the midweek Europa League saunter against PAOK Salonika and, yet again, in a 23-minute cameo against Fulham yesterday. There has been greater urgency to his game in those displays, and more glimpses of that turn of pace which marked him out on his loan spell at Crystal Palace. The goal rammed in eight minutes from time on Sunday was a fifth in six club games. His previous 60 first-team appearances had yielded only three. All of which, given the competition for places at Stamford Bridge, may be presenting Maurizio Sarri with a problem. “No, in the last three weeks, he’s solved me problems,” pointed out the Italian. “He played the best performance from the tactical point of view in the Europa League, so I was sure he would have an impact in this match.” At this rate, those clubs who had aspired to secure the midfielder on loan in January will be disappointed. He is proving his pedigree. Dominic Fifield • Match report: Chelsea 2-0 Fulham The warmth and mutual respect between the managers Roy Hodgson and Sean Dyche before and after an entertaining clash at Selhurst Park was obvious. Strangely, the latter appeared more philosophical than furious post-match, even though Burnley, in a game where victory was a distinct possibility, were pedestrian. The Clarets’ lack of confidence was alarming throughout what was an easy win for Crystal Palace and the verve of Wilfried Zaha provides a feel-good lift for the Eagles moving away from relegation peril. Burnley have regressed and no longer hold shock value. Dyche, ultra-optimistic despite Saturday’s evidence, believes his team need to grow a collective mentality. “It’s not as easy as finishing seventh then rolling out again,” said the Burnley manager. “There are a lot of different challenges, the players and club become recognised, that brings a different expectation. All the players are going through a big shift in their careers.” Julian Taylor • Match report: Crystal Palace 2-0 Burnley As Romania celebrated its 100th birthday, Florin Andone marked the occasion by scoring his first Premier League goal at Huddersfield. The striker was a smart buy in the summer when Brighton exercised a relegation clause in his contract with Deportivo La Coruña to sign him for a relatively paltry £5.25m. The 25-year-old international striker missed the previous eight games with an ankle problem but returned to fitness for his first Premier League start to display neat link-up play, intelligent movement and a clever headed finish for the winner. Brighton have been heavily reliant on Glenn Murray’s seven goals this season – the only other players to have scored more than once are the centre-backs Lewis Dunk and Shane Duffy – so having a second striker finding the back of the net could be crucial to Brighton moving up the table. Will Unwin • Match report: Huddersfield 1-2 Brighton It is rare for a young English midfielder to be compared to Glenn Hoddle, a player of poise and skill with the ability to produce moments of genius. The Leicester City manager, Claude Puel, a former teammate of Hoddle’s at Monaco, reserved such praise for James Maddison. As well as technical ability the midfielder showed his temperament on Saturday. Having been sent off the previous weekend, he returned to the team with something to prove and did so with a fine volley against Watford. The former Coventry youngster controlled a pass and juggled the ball before volleying into the bottom corner, and he ensures Leicester can offer unpredictability. The volley will live long in the memory, but being adept with both feet and able to cut open defences means Maddison’s importance for Leicester will only increase the longer he is there. Will Unwin • Match report: Leicester 2-0 Watford It is probably best to leave Everton supporters to their thoughts for a little longer but, when they emerge from whatever darkened room Divock Origi’s bizarre, last-minute goal sent them into, they may take comfort from the fact they looked Liverpool’s equals at Anfield for the first time in years. Marco Silva’s insistence on a positive approach has plenty to do with that and so does the outstanding form of André Gomes, who ran the midfield at times and looks exactly the kind of player Everton require to compete with the top sides regularly. He should have scored in the first half but Gomes has picked up the Premier League tempo perfectly since making his debut last month and has been a huge factor in Everton’s push for the top six. The longer this goes on, the greater the anxiety that – for now – he is only on loan from Barcelona. Nick Ames • Match report: Liverpool 1-0 Everton Manchester City showed the strain just a little bit in winning this game, with an understandable reaction to the energy expended in twice coming from behind at Lyon. Pep Guardiola rested David Silva but was at pains to explain Sergio Agüero’s absence was on medical advice. “He has a muscular problem and the doctors said it would be a risk to play him because he might then miss four or five games,” the manager said. “We do not want to take that risk with nine games to play this month.” The chances are Agüero will not be risked at Watford on Tuesday, either. Guardiola expressed concern at this stage last season that the fixture schedule was killing his players but now seems a little more prepared for, or at least resigned to, to an English winter. “It is what it is, everybody just has to do their best. We are not playing any more games than our rivals, so why complain?” Paul Wilson • Match report: Manchester City 3-1 Bournemouth “For want of a nail, the shoe was lost; for want of the shoe, the horse was lost; for want of the horse, the rider was lost; for want of the rider, the battle was lost.” The nail represents the specialist left-back Newcastle’s Rafa Benítez was not permitted to sign as cover for Paul Dummett. With Dummett hamstrung – again – his inadequate replacement, Javier Manquillo, operated out of position on Saturday and came up against Robert Snodgrass. It proved an unequal duel. Significantly, the game’s best player was Felipe Anderson. During last summer’s transfer window when Newcastle made £20m and Manuel Pellegrini invested £100m, the Brazilian cost £36m from Lazio. Criticising Benítez for scrapping a back five or not playing Ciaran Clark at left-back misses the bigger picture; sometimes you really do get what you pay for. Louise Taylor • Match report: Newcastle 0-3 West Ham While it would be asking too much for Southampton to pin their survival hopes on Michael Obafemi’s shoulders, it was good to see the 18-year-old forwardthrive after being handed his first Premier League start. Obafemi was in sprightly form against a makeshift defence, catching the eye with a few dangerous runs and creating Stuart Armstrong’s early goal. He more than justified Mark Hughes’s decision to drop Charlie Austin and Manolo Gabbiadini, though he pulled up sharply around the hour and may be absent for a while. It was a bold call from Hughes, who was annoyed to hear that José Mourinho had accused Saints of playing for a point. “Oh, for Christ’s sake,” the manager said. “You guys were there, you know what it is. There was one team trying to press, we had the majority of play in their half. Their play was flat. Our goalkeeper hasn’t made any saves in my recollection.” Jacob Steinberg • Match report: Southampton 2-2 Manchester United