On the evening of 6 December seven-year-old Jakelin Caal Maquin was picked up by American border officials after crossing a remote part of the US-Mexico border with her father and 161 other asylum seekers. She would have been exhausted, perhaps already running a fever, when she got to a tiny outpost called Forward Operating Base Bounds. The Guatemalan pair had barely eaten or had anything to drink for several days, her father later told officials. However, US Customs and Border Protection (CBP) officials signed her off as in good health, and left Jakelin and her father Nery Caal waiting nearly eight hours for a bus to take them to a larger centre. Before they boarded in the early hours of the morning the bus, her father told officials that his daughter was sick and vomiting; by the time they arrived an hour and a half later her breathing had stopped. A helicopter rushed her from New Mexico to a hospital in El Paso, Texas, but treatment came too late and she died 27 hours after entering the US. “The initial indication from the Providence Hospital is that she passed due to sepsis shock,” the Department of Homeland Security said in a statement that was posted more than a week later. The death of such a young child in custody has caused national outrage, and led to calls for an investigation from Democrats. “A seven-year-old girl should not be dying of dehydration and shock in Customs and Border Protection custody,” said the Senate minority leader, Chuck Schumer. He demanded that the Department of Homeland Security and its leader, secretary Kirstjen Nielsen, be held accountable. The incoming speaker of the House of Representatives, Nancy Pelosi, said: “All Americans grieve the tragic death of a young girl whose family sought a future of freedom and safety for her in our country.” Both of New Mexico’s senators and democratic congressmen and women from the state and neighbouring Texas also demanded an investigation in an open letter. There were also questions about why the CBP commissioner, Kevin McAleenan, did not mention Jakelin’s death when he testified to the senate judiciary committee on Tuesday that the agency was struggling to deal with the large numbers of families and children crossing the border. The CBP only confirmed that a child had died in response to a Washington Post inquiry on Thursday, nearly a week after Jakelin had died. The White House, CBP and DHS say border agents tried to save her once they were alerted to a problem. They described initial screening forms signed by Nery Caal that said his daughter was healthy. But the interview with Caal was in Spanish, while the family’s mother tongue was Q’eqchi’, a pre-Columbian Mayan language, the Washington Post reported. The family come from the Alta Verapaz province, a poor area in the country’s north plagued by drug-related violence. Once it was clear she was unwell, agents “did everything in their power to provide emergency medical assistance for Jakelin Caal Maquin immediately after her father told agents of her distress”, McAleenan said in a statement. But their account of her journey also detail a 90-minute drive between outposts, without medical aid, which went ahead even after Nery Caal had raised concerns about her health. White House spokeswoman Hogan Gidley emphasised the dangers of crossing the border illegally. Administration officials say that asylum seekers should arrive at designated ports of entry instead of at other places on the 2,000-mile border, where risks include violence, trafficking, extreme weather and wild animals. Migrant rights groups, however, say the Trump administration is exacerbating those dangers by limiting how many people can present for asylum at designated ports of entry. Journalists and humanitarian groups have documented the US government capping how many people can present themselves for asylum each day at the ports of entry in a practice known as “metering”. Cynthia Pompa, the advocacy manager for the ACLU border rights centre, said the number of migrant deaths had increased last year even as the number of border crossings fell. “This tragedy represents the worst possible outcome when people, including children, are held in inhumane conditions. Lack of accountability, and a culture of cruelty within CBP have exacerbated policies that lead to migrant deaths,” she said.