London’s new knife crime agency must look beyond partisan pressures, prioritise local knowledge, and above all be allowed the freedom to fail, according to the team responsible for Glasgow’s pioneering Violence Reduction Unit (VRU). The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, in September unveiled plans for a dedicated unit based on the Glasgow model. Set up in 2005, the VRU treated violence as a public health issue and dramatically reduced stabbing deaths while unravelling the deeply rooted gang culture in a city which little more than a decade ago had the second highest murder rate in western Europe. As London reaches the end of another brutal year, which has seen 15 children and teenagers killed in knife attacks, the Damilola Taylor Trust has invited the co-founders of Glasgow’s VRU, Karyn McCluskey and John Carnochan, and its current director, Niven Rennie, to deliver the charity’s annual memorial lecture on 7 December in London. All three are keenly aware of the scale of the task facing Khan’s embryonic unit, and are adamant that their intention is to share experience rather than impose their template on a far bigger and more diverse city. They are also convinced that the dislocating effects of poverty, exclusion and childhood trauma are universal. Carnochan says: “It’s too trite to say, ‘Of course this will work because the young men in London are exactly the same as the young men in Glasgow, except they’re mostly young black men’.” The former Det Ch Supt highlights two key contextual differences to his own experience of setting up the Scottish VRU, which is directly funded by the Holyrood government and has an arms-length relationship with Police Scotland. “First there’s the relationship between the police and the community: not that we had a lot of cheerleaders in Easterhouse (one of Glasgow’s most deprived areas, where gang violence was rife), but there wasn’t that same inter-generational mistrust of the police,” he says. The fracture in London will will take years to repair, he says, and requires significant personnel investment, involving community officers embedded long-term in local areas, and campus police officers in schools “so that young people start to see that cops are not just the ones to stop them and move them on but they are actually there to help them”. Both Carnochan and McCluskey acknowledge the impact of austerity on police numbers and youth services in London, while campaigners have told the Guardian they believe the surge in knife attacks – with this year set to be the worst in a decade for the number of young people in England and Wales killed by blades – is a direct result of budget cuts. The intensity of public, political and media scrutiny around knife crime in London is also critical, Carnochan adds. “When we started VRU it didn’t seem anyone was that bothered, whereas in London everyone’s talking about it. That means everyone has a solution and there are so many groups that say ‘this is what you must do’. But you need to start mapping what is working in each community. That’s a challenge for everyone who works in the sector to hang their egos up.” McCluskey insists that one of the main routes to success for Glasgow’s VRU was that “we were allowed to fail at first, because the media weren’t all over us”. Scotland’s VRU adapted one initiative first used in the US city of Cincinnati, which was to target known gang members and ask other people in their community, including bereaved mothers, to explain the ripple effects of violence. It also offered young men a way out through education, training and mentoring – importantly, delivered by someone with similar experience of street violence. It has gone on to develop groundbreaking prevention programmes for schools, tailored for children from the age of 10, and A&E departments, as well as bystander training for bar and nightclub staff. The initially dramatic results in Glasgow have sustained over a decade. While 37 children and teenagers have been stabbed to death so far this year in England and Wales, continuing a five-year upward trend, according to figures collated by the Guardian, in contrast there were only two knife deaths of under 20s in Scotland. Rennie, who was appointed director of the Scottish VRU in July after more than 30 years as a police officer, accepts that the political pressures are far more acute in London. “I explained to Sadiq Khan that Glasgow didn’t solve its problems overnight, and that he should be looking at improvements over a decade. Khan started saying that, then opposition parties jumped on it and said ‘we don’t want to wait for 10 years’, which was really a misinterpretation,” he says. Last week, the Metropolitan police commissioner, Cressida Dick, rejected controversial calls from senior police officers to lower the level of suspicion needed for officers to carry out a stop and search. Carnochan is eager to clarify the Scottish experience: “I see lots of people saying we used stop and search, and yes we did initially. It was a key component, but when you start to use it excessively then it becomes a blunt instrument that alienates young people and entire communities.” Most crucially, he explains, introducing a public health template allowed Scottish police to collaborate with health, education and social services. “It’ll not happen just because you establish a VRU, you have to do it. And that’s simple: it’s about data, what causes the violence, where are the risks and how can we reduce them, how can we prevent it, and then looking at all the things that work. That’s the public health model.” McCluskey, who has worked in London and empathises with the “overwhelmingly complex” nature of the challenge, adds that the differences between deprived communities can be exaggerated. “People will say, ‘But you never dealt with this [BME] community in Glasgow’, but at the end of the day everybody wants to feel safe, they want to have a roof over their head and they want to feel hope. I’ve never met anyone who said those three things didn’t matter to them, and that’s what we tried to do in the Violence Reduction Unit, tried to think about the things that we share.” This basic human need to feel safe is recognised by Gary Trowsdale, a community activist who is organising the Damilola Taylor Trust event. Last week, Trowsdale attended a residents’ meeting in Tulse Hill, south London, where two teenage girls spoke about the impact of a recent stabbing on their estate. “Through their tears they spoke of the fear and hopelessness of living on the estate. They said, ‘Our friends are not gangsters, they are scared young people who just want something to do’.” From Glasgow, Carnochan echoes their frustration. “Everybody seems to know what the answer is – yes, it’s to do with gangs, county lines, territory – but every young black man in London is not carrying a knife or in a gang and we’re missing the point if we start to think like that.”