As we head towards midwinter all seems quiet in the garden, but now is the perfect time for the most exciting of horticultural new beginnings: planting a tree. Worry you don’t have the space? Gardening on concrete? Concerned about the foundations of your house? There is a simple solution to all of these common problems: grow a small tree in a pot. This is often overlooked so, in an effort to change that, here’s a round up of the best species for pot culture, which will work well in even the tiniest of city gardens. The most commonly suggested candidate for this treatment is an olive – and with good reason. They are evergreen, have character from a young age and, hailing from the often thin soils of the Med, don’t mind the root restriction and the faster rate of drying out that inevitably happens in containers. The ability of small trees in pots to be sited up against the walls of houses without affecting foundations means these exotic trees can benefit from the warm microclimate the brickwork creates as it absorbs heat in the day to then emit it overnight. Hailing from the often thin soils of the Med, olive trees don’t mind the root restriction Likewise yuzu, the Japanese citrus hybrid. In my experience it is at least as hardy as an olive and adds scented flowers and wonderfully fragrant fruit to the evergreen offer. Plants are thorny, but being large and few in number, I find the spikes easy to prune off. Additionally, get a tall enough pot and any thorns that do remain will be out of harm’s way. This highlights another benefit of growing trees in pots, you get up to 1m of added height (depending on the depth of your pot), which can be a good way to cheat the look of a more established plant for the same outlay and time. If you want something equally unusual, but far more hardy, I’d give some of the dwarf eucalyptus a go. E kybeanensis is much slower growing than its cousins, creating an airy canopy of scented leaves on trees just 5m tall. They are fully hardy and take pruning back well. But with the root restriction of the pot helping curtail its growth, you probably won’t have to. Another smaller gum tree worth growing is E gregsoniana. It isn’t quite as hardy as E kybeanensis, so you’ll need a sheltered garden, but if you have such a spot it more than makes up for the gamble with its wonderful peeling, grey and white bark and fluffy white flowers. If bright colours are more your thing, you can’t get better than Cercis canadensis ‘Forest Pansy’, which is clothed all summer in rich, burgundy, heart-shaped foliage with bare branches accented with hot pink flowers in the spring. As if that’s not enough, the whole tree bursts into red and bronze in the autumn. It’s a good choice for spots even when shaded by walls and tall buildings. Finally, if your garden is more exposed to the sun, the silk tree Albizia julibrissin, with its feathery, fern-like foliage and pom poms of bright pink, scented flowers is a real showstopper, forming a flat-topped, African acacia-like canopy even from a tiny size. Both these trees are fully hardy and should grow little more than 5m in a pot. Email James at james.wong@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @Botanygeek