For a while now, some of us in Westminster have been convinced that Theresa May is a sleeper agent whose mission is to undermine her own government. That conspiracy theory is now officially dead in the water. Because there is now nothing secretive about the prime minister’s actions. Her cover is well and truly blown. She is entirely open about using every opportunity to destroy her credibility. May has gone rogue. A one-woman Terminator whose systems are riddled with malware and who is hellbent on destroying everything around her. The government, the country, the universe. But most of all, herself. It’s long been axiomatic that the prime minister is at her most convincing when she is saying nothing at all. So her best chance of getting her Brexit deal through the Commons was always to hide under the duvet and watch Dynasties on her laptop. But at some point in the last few days, May has appeared to come to the astonishing conclusion that she actually has a hope of winning next Tuesday’s vote. Quite how she has come to that algorithmic impossibility is not clear – circuit overload is the most likely answer – but now the idea is in her head she is doing everything in her power to make sure it doesn’t become reality. Which is why she chose to spend her breakfast time giving a 20-minute interview to Radio 4’s Today programme. Here was the prime minister at her most Maybotic. Staccato, brittle and with a delivery that flatlined. She could not have sounded less enthusiastic about her deal if she had tried. It was a good deal because it was the only deal, she said in a dead monotone. Worried that she might be presenting herself as too coherent, May spent the last 15 minutes failing to give straight answers to straight questions, talking in meaningless soundbites and leaving everyone guessing as to whether she really had a strategy. If there had been anyone in favour of her deal at the start of the interview, there wasn’t by the end. Further evidence of May’s masterplan to undermine the country was on show at Brexit questions in the Commons. In its early days the Brexit department had a sense of national importance. Now it is nothing more than a sideshow, whose primary job is to try to make sure there are enough lorry parks in Kent in case the country grinds to a standstill on 30 March next year. Having already lost two Brexit secretaries in David Davis and Dominic Raab – no great loss, some might say – May has had to rustle up someone else to do the job. It hasn’t been easy. The Four Pot Plants declined to join the cabinet on the grounds that they were hopelessly overqualified. So the prime minister had to cast her net wider. In Stephen Barclay she made an inspired choice. Barclay is a man after her own heart. A man who can spend hours saying nothing meaningful. Though in his case he has little alternative as he doesn’t actually know anything meaningful. He is the nonentity’s nonentity. Brexit questions passed in a gentle haze of futility, while the few dozen MPs in the chamber dozed off. The radioactive isotopes Barclay is tasked with stockpiling have a longer half-life than his department. In the third day of the Brexit debate, Philip Hammond was talking down both the deal and the economy. He was very keen to keep his distance from the withdrawal agreement and future partnership by repeatedly referring to the deal as “the prime minister’s deal”. Nothing to do with me, guv. It was basically all a bit rubbish and everyone was going to be broke, but we’d be a bit less broke with “the prime minister’s” deal. Thanks. There were many interventions. Quite why Nadine Dorries is so keen to parade her ignorance is a mystery – you’d have thought she’d have preferred to leave room for doubt – and Hammond only made half-hearted attempts to defend the deal. The forecasts predicting doom weren’t forecasts. They were modelled scenarios that predicted doom. That sort of thing. Like the rest of the government, Hammond seems more concerned with considering his own future rather than the country’s after the vote is lost next Tuesday. John McDonnell gave a measured and reasoned deconstruction of why the government’s deal was a total mess. He rather glossed over the fact that the Labour leadership had yet to come up with their own plan that didn’t presuppose the EU would give us all the benefits of being in the customs union and single market with none of the obligations. Even so, the shadow chancellor’s contribution was rather more helpful than much of what followed. The nadir was David Davis, who knows even less about the economy than he does about anything else. His main thrust was that he had been absolutely right to do nothing as Brexit secretary because EU negotiations always got done in the last 10 seconds, and that Canada +++ was called Canada +++ because it delivered Canada – – – . Truly we are reaching the end of days.