Countries with great cuisines lift cheap eating into an art form. The courgette flower tacos you can find on every Mexico City street corner are just a way to use up excess flowers. The same is true of inzimino, a Florentine dish using greens and sauce to bulk up the dearer ingredient – classically squid, but here pork meatballs. It is a homely, warming dish to add to your repertoire – and it’s easy to turn meat-free. This rich and unctuous dish demands you use your best olive oil to dress it, and extra parmesan, if you like. Prep 10 minSoak OvernightCook 12 hrMakes 18-20 500g pork mince70g fresh breadcrumbsZest of 1 lemon, plus zest of another ½, to serve2 garlic cloves, finely minced40g parmesan 1 big handful parsley, finely chopped, plus extra, to serve1 egg, beaten2-3 tbsp rapeseed oil For the chickpeas250g dried chickpeas, soaked overnight2 bay leaves4 garlic cloves – 2 peeled and whole, 2 peeled and crushed6 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil1 red onion, roughly chopped1 stick celery, roughly chopped1 carrot, peeled and roughly chopped½ tsp dried chilli flakes1 x 400g tin tomatoes, drained400g swiss or rainbow chard, stalks sliced into 1cm pieces and separated from leaves Start by making the chickpeas. Once you have soaked them overnight, drain and transfer to a large pan with the bay leaf the two whole garlic cloves. Cover with plenty of cold water and bring to a boil. Turn down the heat and simmer for 40-60 minutes, (cooking times vary) until completely soft but holding their shape. Once cooked, add a teaspoon or so of salt to the water and leave it to infuse into the chickpeas. To make the meatballs, mix together all the ingredients bar the oil with your hands in a large bowl and season well. Shape into ping-pong-sized balls and rest in the fridge while you cook the inzimino. Warm half the olive oil in a wide, deep pan over a medium heat. Add the onion, celery, carrot, crushed garlic and a big pinch of salt, and fry gently for 10 minutes, until soft, then stir in the chilli and tomatoes. Fill the tomato tin with water, pour into the pan and repeat. Season, bring to a simmer and add the chard stalks. Cook for four minutes, then add the leaves and another tinful of water. After a few minutes, you will see the leaves begin to wilt, at which point, add the remaining olive oil and use a slotted spoon to add the cooked chickpeas. Taste, adjust the seasoning, and leave on a low heat while you fry the meatballs. In a large frying pan, warm the rapeseed oil over a medium-high heat. Once hot, add the meatballs, and fry until golden all over but still a little pink within – six to eight minutes –then add to the inzimino pan, pushing them under the hot liquid (add more water, if needed). Remove from the heat and leave the meatballs to finish cooking in the liquid for another five to 10 minutes. Serve warm with the parsley, a dash more extra-virgin olive oil and a sprinkling of lemon zest. Mop up with fresh, crusty bread. During the week, I sometimes make this meat-free by leaving out the meatballs, or bulk it up by sinking hunks of bread into the broth. Consider topping with chargrilled slices of Jerusalem artichoke or squash. If you make the chickpeas from scratch, cook double the quantity and freeze the excess for a rainy day.