Like many British Asians, I grew up in a household full of the smells of spice, the sound of lamb sizzling and the steady beat of a knife chopping coriander and ginger. Punjabi cuisine takes the highest place in my heart. It’s a reminder of my identity and my family, where food formed a huge part of life. When I cook, often cobbling something together from whatever is lying around, I stop thinking. It’s second nature. Which is great until I receive feedback that my shepherd’s pie has a really odd masala vibe, or that I put the wrong kind of “hot” in hotpot when I added a green chilli. The truth is, I have become dependent on spice. I keep chilli flakes on my desk; my spice jar collection is 30-strong. It has become a crutch – I would compare it to someone who slathers every meal with ketchup because they don’t how to create flavour any other way. What I’ve always called English food – although I suppose it’s really British-European – requires a different skill set. I don’t know how to use herbs effectively. Any sauce that involves flour strikes terror in my heart. Then there’s the mystery that is the oven, where you can’t control the heat minute by minute. (Punjabi cooking takes place nearly exclusively in pans on gas hobs, even for the bread.) And what exactly is a jus? It was only four or five years ago that I started getting into English food at all, through cooking shows such as The Great British Menu. On TV, everything looked delicious but also seemed to require spending inordinate amounts of money on dozens of ingredients. Then there was the time and skill needed. “It takes me 20 minutes just to get some clean pans together if my flatmates have been in,” I would think. “I have no chance.” Where English food was concerned I resigned myself to being an eater rather than a maker. It was like my relationship with Love Island: by the time I realised quite how excellent it was, it was too late for me to catch up. But last month it was decided that the hallowed New Year’s Day lunch – a tradition in my circle of Brits, Americans and Aussies – was to fall to me. It was time to face my culinary demons and finally add an English into my repertoire. And what could be a better foundation than a roast dinner? To guide me, I enlisted Hannah McCollum, 28, the founder of artisanal-hummus brand ChicP and a private chef. There are a few reasons. First, her sustainable, waste-not approach resonates with my own love of “make-do” cooking. She trained at the Grange, a cookery school in Somerset that had “a very eco and natural approach. You’d be cooking with produce you’d seen grow,” she says. Second, her work as a private chef has been mostly for families who hire her to cater holidays or events, so her focus on food is domestic rather than commercial. It was working for these clients that turned her on to dips: “At the end of each day I would blend whatever we had left over for the next day’s dips,” she recalls. “It became my signature.” Third, she’s about the same age as me, so hopefully she won’t be judging me for my tiny, shared kitchen, which doesn’t have a functioning grill, yet somehow has accrued 12 novelty shot glasses. Over the course of our sessions, Hannah will guide me to create an extensive roast, including crisp taters, cauliflower cheese, roasted roots, bread sauce, braised cabbage, a red wine gravy and, of course, a meaty pièce de résistance. Along the way, I hope to master time management, learn how to make sauces and get a better handle on herbs. We decide that for our roast we’re going to use game – meat from animals that have been hunted rather than farmed, such as venison, rabbit, wild duck, pheasant and pigeon. “Game should be at the top of every sustainable meat-eater’s list,” Hannah says. Hunting may seem cruel, but no more so than a lot of meat production. And it is kinder to the environment than turning wild land into farmland. We opt for pheasant, which Hannah tells me is a versatile meat that you “can do all kinds with, from pheasant bolognese to paté”. It’s quick to cook and no more expensive than organic chicken. Plus, pheasant sounds like something that would be served up for Henry VIII. What could be more impressive than that? We start by stuffing the bird with onion and rosemary, and frying it off in some butter. We will then roast it on top of some carrots that I’ve chopped but haven’t peeled. “I don’t see why you’d remove the skin,” Hannah says. “It’s quicker, healthier and avoids waste.” We won’t peel the potatoes either; those we will parboil, shake around in flour, add to a baking tray with hot oil and cook in the oven. Hannah is a believer in quick, simple cooking. For our cauli cheese there’s no parboiling, just white sauce (butter, flour, milk) added straight on to the veg then whacked into the oven with a bit of cheese on top. “You can roast anything if you have time,” says Hannah when I complain about stress. “What we’re doing with the hobs is actually a bit more complex. Usually just use what you have in, add oil, season and roast. That’s it.” But for me the lightbulb moment is learning how to create flavour complexities without spice – using vinegar, mustard and raisins, for example, to bring out acidity, heat and sweetness. Special mentions must go to bread sauce, which I had never eaten before, believing it to be some kind of punishing Victorian gruel with no place in modern society (I was wrong – it is delicious), and the simple genius of finishing dishes with nutmeg. And I’m certain that making a roux – the mixture of equal parts flour and fat that forms the basis of many sauces – will be a skill for the rest of my life. The trick is to really get stuck in with your whisk, give it some welly and keep the heat low. It wasn’t even as time-consuming as I imagined: going at full speed, even as a novice, I was able to turn out a pheasant roast dinner in less than two hours. I’m not sure if this is good or bad. I had hoped that roasting would be a more social activity, where I could pop out of the kitchen every so often and relax with friends and family. Instead, I’m working flat out. Still, I haven’t stopped roasting since. I’m a roasting fiend. My fridge looks like a morgue for birds. Chickens, pigeons, partridges: their carcasses line the shelves to be picked clean by my flatmates before heading into a stock. Forget spice: my new craving is for the impressed faces of my colleagues when I mention my lunch of grouse sandwiches. It’s all still very new to me, but I am hoping it will lead to a life-long relationship. I just wish someone had warned me about the amount of washing up.