Wild Oats XI deployed her new sails to great impact, winning the start of the 74th edition of the Sydney to Hobart. But the all-conquering supermaxi encountered trouble just eight minutes into the race, leaving their skipper searching for answers in a pulsing breeze. “We’re so slow,” said Mark Richards from onboard the eight-time line honours winner, “something is wrong”. Queensland entry Black Jack was quick to pounce, her decision to go it alone on the western side of the course reaping reward as she snatched the lead inside Sydney Harbour. It was a strategic master-stroke from America’s Cup veteran Brad Butterworth and put the domestic raider Black Jack in the box seat for the second time in as many years. It was also a looming reminder of the importance of tactical smarts as shifting weather patterns are expected to play a big role in deciding the winner of this edition of the blue water classic. Last year’s line honours champion Comanche suffered the most in the light air on Sydney Harbour and was at one stage the last of the five supermaxis - even behind a boat nearly half her size, the 60-foot Winning Appliances. But as the wind picked up Jim Conney’s 100-footer ramped up her charge with three full sails. As the pointy end of the fleet as it passed Maroubra, travelling at speeds approaching 35 kilometres an hour, it was Black Jack followed by Comanche, Wild Oats XI, InfoTrack and Scallywag. It was an impressive effort from Scallywag – given they had to borrow a sail from fellow supermaxi InfoTrack just to make the start line. The Hong Kong entrant’s skipper paid tribute to his crew, many of whom raced around together in the Volvo Ocean Race. “We counted the other day and there is nine of the 20 who went around the world with us so that definitely helps,” said David Witt. America’s Cup sailor Luke Parkinson is one of them. He first sailed with Witt as a 17-year old and feels this year presents the best chance for the pair to claim a line honours crown on Scallywag. “The boat is the most prepared it has ever been and we have the modifications where the boat is at its fastest,” said the West Australian, “We’re enjoying being the underdogs and hopefully we can enjoy being at the front of the fleet.” Parkinson is not the only big name from the west coast of the continent competing in the country’s most famous yacht race. Australia’s first female foreign minister, Julie Bishop, took part at the start of the race onboard Wild Oat’s XI’s sister ship Ocean Respect Racing. “It is a race the entire world focuses upon on Boxing Day. I am so excited to be a part of what is one of the greatest yachting races on the planet,” she said. Bishop said she was thrilled to have been able to participate in the start of the race, alongside the first all-female professional crew to sail in the Sydney to Hobart. “The cause that we are promoting today, not only female participation in sport but also ocean sustainability is one that is of great interest to me.” While Bishop jettisoned from Ocean Respect as planned after 37 minutes of racing, she told the Guardian she would like to take part in the full 628 nautical mile challenge in the future. “I would love to do the whole race,” she said, “I’ve been given permission to jump off. I don’t think I better push my luck to go all the way to Hobart [this time] but I am tempted to next year.” While the broadcast camera operators also jumped overboard as planned, for the first time in 74 editions of the blue water classic fans will be able to ride virtually with the front runners. Comanche and fellow 100-footer InfoTrack will be broadcasting from the canon until they rope up in Tasmania. “We have a couple of supermaxis live streaming all the way from start to finish which is the way of the future and the way we can get more involved with the 24/7 nature of ocean racing,” said race convenor and CYCA Commodore Paul Billingham. Current weather modelling indicates the race record will not be broken for a third year in a row. Light weather conditions predicted for Bass Strait indicating the 2017 mark of one day, nine hours, 15 minutes and 24 seconds will remain safe. 