Ole Gunnar Solskjær knows he will not be immune to criticism from the wide range of former Manchester United players in the media, even after beating Cardiff 5-1 in his first game since succeeding José Mourinho. Solskjær’s predecessors have frequently been unhappy with pundits such as Gary Neville picking apart United’s performances and offering strident opinions on their play. Some may think they will not be quite so harsh on Solskjær, as a former teammate, but he recognised in the afterglow of his debut victory that will not be the case. “Don’t worry, Gary will be really hard on me,” the caretaker manager said. “I sat next to him in the dressing room for 11 years. You know Gary. He’s paid now to give his opinion and of course he should do. I’m no different to anyone else. I’m no different to any other manager when you lead that team out on to the pitch. It comes with a responsibility but my job is to get the players enjoying themselves.” Even if the club’s former players are critical Solskjær does have plenty of positive former United experience to draw on: he declined to reveal the contents of a message sent by Wayne Rooney outlining what United’s all-time top-scorer thought was going wrong at the club but he will sit down with Sir Alex Ferguson at some point in the coming weeks. Solskjær takes charge of his first United game at Old Trafford on Boxing Day, something it looks as if he still cannot quite believe is happening. His last home game as a manager was in November when a little over 6,400 people watched Molde beat FK Haugesund 2-0. There should be more than 10 times that number in the stadium as United face Huddersfield looking to build on their fine start at Cardiff. “You try to keep your emotion in check, because I’m there to do a job,” said Solskjær, when asked how he was preparing for the occasion. “I’ve got to be focused. I don’t think it will be easy, but I’m looking forward to it and I think the boys are looking forward to playing at Old Trafford. That’s the key: we should be looking forward to playing there.” Whereas Solskjær thrived on the atmosphere at United’s home, some of the club’s players have struggled with the pressure. “That comes when you sign for Man United,” he said. “You know you’re going to play in front of the best fans in the world. Confidence is not something you store in the fridge and pick out. You earn it by your performances, by your training, how you feel. Hopefully this [the win over Cardiff] gave them a boost.” Solskjær has managed at Old Trafford before, but only twice: “I was sat next to René Meulensteen in a reserve team game once as a coach, and I was there with Cardiff [in 2014, when United won 2-0]. But of course it will be special.” A theme of Solskjær’s brief time in charge has been an attempt to bring a little more enjoyment to United’s football, to help them rediscover their attacking verve. “They’ve not said anything about that,” he said when asked whether the players had described playing with a handbrake on under Mourinho, “but we spoke today in the team meeting about how, when we get one, we want to get two. When we get two, we want to get three. That’s the nature of this team, this club. You always go and attack. I don’t think any team would like Rashford, Martial, Lingard, Pogba running at them.” There is a banner hanging at Old Trafford celebrating the return of Solskjær and it is clear the appreciation between fans and manager is mutual.“I have my history at the club and to see that banner is special,” he said. “I just hope in the next five months I’ll do a good enough job for them to keep singing my name.”