Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer has an 18-year unbroken track record of holding positions of responsibility within the CDU. She has been interior minister of the state of Saarland before becoming its leader, a position she held for six years, and earlier this year was elected to the post of general secretary of the CDU securing 99% of party support. The 56-year-old lawyer remains loyal to the small town of Püttlingen in the western German state where she was born, the fifth of six children, and where she still lives. Those who know her insist that this connection with her origins is the reason for the down-to-earth nature and strong sense of reliability for which she is well known. Married to a mining engineer with whom she has three children, Kramp-Karrenbauer, widely known as AKK, faced the challenge during the leadership battle of both wanting to appear to support Merkel and signalling that she would take the party in a new direction. What she has said about the Merkel era became something of a slogan for her candidacy: “One cannot arbitrarily continue in the same vein, neither can one dismiss it.” While she generally supported Merkel’s open-door policy towards migrants, she has admitted that grave mistakes have been made, and has pushed for a ban on refugees with criminal convictions being allowed back into Germany. She has pledged to listen to the party more than Merkel did, and to be less passive, and more willing to challenge the status quo, repeatedly using the complex phrase “the normative power of facts” (“die normative Kraft des Faktischen”) to argue: “I will be less inclined to accept as immutable fact that things are the way they are.” A staunch Catholic, Kramp-Karrenbauer has spoken out in favour of a ban on doctors who carry out abortions being able to advertise their services, after a court case propelled the topic into the headlines, and is also openly sceptical about the “marriage for all” law campaigned for by her opponent, Jens Spahn, who is married to his male partner. Kramp-Karrenbauer says she was taken aback when Merkel announced at the end of October she would not be standing again. They were said to be reasonably close, and the lack of communication between the two raised eyebrows at the time. Until she praised her Saarland win hours before the vote in her valedictory speech to the CDU as party leader, Merkel had done nothing to show her support of AKK during the campaign. As both women will have been well aware, an endorsement from Merkel – already associated with an era from which the party is desperate to move on – may well have done more to hinder than to help her chances.