I knew them right from the get go. They came all the way from Manchester, Pete and Howard, and turned up at Malcolm [McLaren]’s to track us down so that they could book us for a show up there, so they had someone to support. They really stuck their heads out when nobody had heard of us. They didn’t support us the first time we played Manchester because they hadn’t got a band together, but they did the second time. I remember Pete had this really cheap guitar with half the body missing. He said he had got it from Woolworths, and the top bit had just fallen off, but that’s all they had and they were going to do it anyway. They were different, quite wacky, arty, but they had the common touch as well. There was a sweetness about them that I loved because it was very human. Something about Pete’s writing had a slightly off-the-wall, knowing but humorous take on the way people go through life. He showed that you didn’t have to be political or angry to be punk, and touched on some quite important subjects, like his sexuality. I think that gave a lot of people encouragement that they can speak their mind – like Bowie did. A song like Ever Fallen in Love had that – but it was also a fantastic pop song, and he wrote loads of them. The last time they played London, I thought, I’ll go – but then I didn’t. I thought, I’ll see them next time around. But now I can’t. Us lot are all of an age now that means maybe you should make that extra effort before it’s too late. But 63 is no age at all. I knew about Spiral Scratch as soon as it was released. It was a big deal – the first independent record in that arena, that in itself was a major statement. But the record was so good: four songs, scratchy, trebly. I was very struck by what they were singing about – unlike lots of punk groups, they were singing about everyday life. Then I met them and my opinion was confirmed. It was probably my first exposure to people from the north – they were very unassuming, different from the London punk groups already in the business of posing. I was very struck by the openness of the Manchester punk scene. By autumn 1977, the London punk scene was hierarchical, very industry-infiltrated, druggy, macho. And in punk, I wanted everything to be new. Sex and gender roles were an important part of that to me, and Buzzcocks were singing about male vulnerability at a time when not many people were doing that. Pete later said he was bisexual, but even before that he said he wrote to appeal to both genders. And certainly all the Buzzcocks’ mannerisms, their approach – he wasn’t confrontational. He was sly, witty, and that was a different way of getting your message across. I suppose my favourite song is Orgasm Addict, which is one of the wittiest songs ever about sex: so fast, so exciting, just perfect. But there’s wonderful songs like I Need, which is all about the difference between wanting and needing – the capitalist perplex! He used love songs to talk about all sorts of things: the nature of perception, the nature of implanted desire, the nature and the problems of love itself. He was dismissed at the time for just writing about love, but he wasn’t just writing about love. I went to see the Sex Pistols at the Lesser Free Trade Hall on 4 June 1976, and as the gig finished me and Barney [Sumner] decided to form a group. We didn’t know that Pete Shelley and Howard [Devoto] had put the Sex Pistols on; it was only when we came to the next Pistols gig, when the Buzzcocks played, that we got talking to them. Me and Barney took to phoning Pete up to talk about our group. He’d only been in one a month longer than us, yet he was our mentor. Every time we phoned him, God bless him, he’d say, “Come and meet us and talk.” He was very generous. It was him that gave us the gig with Stiff Kittens supporting the Buzzcocks that started us off. He was always instrumental in making sure that our courses ran together. Without the Buzzcocks tour that Joy Division did, I don’t think any of us would have given up our day jobs. He never made you feel like you were imposing. I probably would not be where I am now without Pete Shelley. We had some drunken scrapes, and Pete wrote a dedication to me on the inner sole of his shoe, the poet that he was, when he decided we were deep, drunken soulmates. I still have this – it always makes me smile and remember the night we went to a bar where Pete joined in with the singing, standing in front of a lonely, concentrating musician playing Ever Fallen in Love. The guy nearly jumped out of his skin, but Pete was so sweet and charming. We went to the house of the Royal College of Art’s head of film production; he lived in the Albany, the rather exclusive and exotic apartments in Piccadilly. Pete and Simon Fisher Turner danced naked, happily and euphorically on his rooftop, causing rather a commotion. I, unlike in my song We Had a Really Smashing Time, kept my clothes on. We decided that night that Pete and Simon would come and sing on my song, Love a Loser, which they did, and Pete’s voice is particularly inimitable. In my band the Hangovers, we used to play a version of Why Can’t I Touch It – performing it used to make me feel like I was outside of my body. So many Buzzcocks songs are engraved on my heart, and I am so happy I knew Pete a little bit and that his songs live on and on. At 15 or 16 I was ready for the change that punk was bringing, ready to move on for a while from my Beatles, Bolan love and get into something a little more current. In the shock of the times, Buzzcocks became my thing: their already amazing catalogue of songs, the way their records looked, their muted styles, their everything. Pete Shelley, the modest magician frontperson, became a sort of hero to me. I was fascinated by him, how could he write so many amazing songs, sing and play them the way he did and make it look so easy. I loved them so much, I even considered trying to go out with this girl – probably totally unsuitable for me in every way other than she had a Love Bites poster on her wall. I stuck with them when people stopped going to their shows, and in a way they became more accessible to a smaller audience. I always come back to them, to their deceptive simplicity, the brilliance of it all, the thrill. They were great and they were a great gateway too, to Can and other music. They were the way into punk and the way out of it. I loved them, I loved him. Thanks, Pete. We were so shocked and sad to hear about Pete’s death. Until now, we never knew he was influenced by Throbbing Gristle. We like and feel privileged to have had that connection with him. Our paths only crossed a few times. Such a lovely genuine guy and an amazing songwriter. Wish we could have got to know him better. It seems last night I unwittingly gave the most heartfelt tribute to Pete Shelley while under the impression he was still alive. I started my show with I Believe, a seven-minute epic that finishes with the repeated refrain, “There is no love in this world anymore … ” Afterwards I described Pete as a genius – not only of the three-minute pop song, but also of the off-kilter. Then I talked to Vic Godard, who was in session with Subway Sect – who played lots with Buzzcocks in the late 70s – about Pete. He told us that he was in a hotel bedroom with several other band members while Pete wrote Ever Fallen in Love … In the last half-hour of the show, Rob Hughes and I finished the week with the Parallel Universe, a feature where we dissect an old music paper. On the cover of that week’s NME, from 28 April 1979 … Pete Shelley. One lone email came in just before Parallel Universe asking whether we’d heard anything about Pete passing. We googled Pete’s name and nothing came up. We thought it was a hoax or misinformation. Didn’t believe it. As we played the last song of the evening, the unwanted confirmation came through. I got upset and then had to go and tell Vic and the band – which includes drummer Sean McLusky, whose label put out the last Buzzcocks album – about Pete’s death. I first saw Buzzcocks opening for the Sex Pistols at the legendary Lesser Free Trade Hall gig in 1976. As a member of the Fall, I got to know Pete a little and since then have seen him from time to time. I compered the Buzzcocks reunion show at Manchester Apollo in the May of 2012, with the original Devoto lineup, the classic lineup and the then current lineup. I felt honoured to do so. The last time I spoke to Pete was when he engaged in a Q&A with Dave Haslam at Gorilla in Manchester this June. He was his usual sweet self. I was the usual fanboy. It’s not often when picking a band’s favourite album that I’d go for their greatest hits. In fact, I can only think of one such case. That would be Buzzcocks’ Singles Going Steady. It was a blueprint for modern pop music at that time. Song after song of absolute perfection, from blunt opener Orgasm Addict right through to one of the greatest B-sides ever, Lipstick, the music Howard Devoto borrowed for Shot By Both Sides. I remember Buzzcocks offered the Fall the support slot on their big UK tour in late 1979. Mark E Smith turned it down, and Joy Division ended up doing it. I was gutted. It took one mention of the title Orgasm Addict for the mum of one punk teen I knew to insist, “We’re not having that record in the house!” A tribute to just how pungent, pointed and indeed penetrating were the words of Pete Shelley. Punk was un-love music, and as proven by the diamond anthology, 1979’s Singles Going Steady, Shelley’s cynical wit, as tender as a fresh bruise, made him the bard of the emotionally confused – especially girls and boys who maybe didn’t quite fit in. Shelley understood that when your heart was cracking, it could let in some light; he knew where it hurt, and how if not a kiss, then a good laugh, could make it all better. I first saw Buzzcocks while DJing at the Roxy back in 1977, and they immediately struck a chord by bringing a pop sensibility to a form that, for the most part, was pretty pissed off and sounded as much. They delivered energetic punk songs that weren’t afraid to deal with topics like love and emotion, neither of which were on the cards when the whole punk thing kicked off. I really got know Pete on the White Riot tour in May of 1977, when Buzzcocks were supporting the Clash along with the Slits. It was during that period I came to realise Pete Shelley was far too intelligent to ape what were fast becoming the cliches of punk. Rough Trade might not exist without the Buzzcocks. The Spiral Scratch EP with the immortal track Boredom – which we bought direct from Richard Boon, Buzzcocks’ manager – was the impetus for us to start thinking about becoming a distribution hub for independent music. It was not only self-made and gloriously independent – more importantly, it was brilliant. Pete Shelley will never be forgotten. Pete Shelley’s music was utter pop perfection. Buzzcocks’ songs are as timeless as he was an incredibly enigmatic frontman. There aren’t many bands who have been so influential to so many generations of musicians as they continue to be to this day and will be for generations to come. Pete Shelley was a punk rock icon. He’ll be sorely missed.