England’s women have variously been offered opportunities for revenge, the reassertion of neighbourly bragging rights and a chance to put a historical enemy in their place in France next June. The draw for the group stage of the 2019 World Cup has paired Phil Neville’s Lionesses with Japan, Scotland and Argentina for games which will transport them from Nice to Le Havre and back to the French Riviera again. Given Japan narrowly defeated England in the semi-finals of Canada 2015 before losing to USA in the final and Shelley Kerr’s Scotland are fast improving, it looks a tricky group. That said, a woefully under-resourced Argentina are arguably the weakest team to have qualified and should hold no fears for Fran Kirby, Steph Houghton, Jodie Taylor and co. “I like Nice, the weather down there is always very nice,” Neville said. “It’s a tough group but they are all top games, all three have special meanings for English football. “England v Argentina will always be special to me because of the historic rivalry but I think all our games are ones fans will want to watch. We’ll need to be at our absolute best to beat both Japan – and it’s tricky that we’ll be playing them in the SheBelieves tournament in America next spring – and Scotland. Shelley is a fabulous manager, she’s done a great job and the two sets of players know each other inside out.” Top Group D and, owing to the mechanics of the 24-team tournament, Neville’s side would potentially face what appears, on paper at least, a fairly kind pathway towards the final in Lyon on 7 July. Significantly they would avoid meeting four formidable opponents in USA, Germany, Canada and Australia before that showpiece in France’s gastronomic capital. Despite receiving an £80,000 funding grant from the Scottish government that will enable them to turn full time in the preamble to next June, Kerr’s side are highly unlikely to reach Lyon – which also stages the semi-finals – but have improved significantly along the road to qualification for their first World Cup. They should be much stronger than when England thrashed them 6-0 courtesy of a Taylor hat-trick in Utrecht during the opening game of Euro 2017. “We’ve got to forget what happened at the last Euros,” Kerr said. “It’s going to be tough but exciting.” Such sentiments seemed to be echoing in the Parisian air. “It’s a tough group, possibly the toughest group, but a really exciting one for Phil and the players ,” said Baroness Sue Campbell, the FA’s head of women’s football, who attended the draw with Neville. “I think Phil’s going to need his full squad.” A few kilometres away in central Paris another day of rioting against government policies had seen cars torched, teargas deployed, armoured vehicles on patrol and more than 500 arrests but as the draw – expertly compered by the former England right-back Alex Scott – unfolded at La Seine Musicale all was serene. Group A  France, South Korea, Norway, Nigeria Group B Germany, China, Spain, South Africa Group C Australia, Italy, Brazil, Jamaica Group D England, Scotland, Argentina, Japan Group E Canada, Cameroon, New Zealand, the NetherlandsGroup F United States, Thailand, Chile, Sweden Matches take place from 7 June to 7 July Even Emmanuel Macron might have felt secure safely cocooned inside the World Cup bubble at the concert venue on an island in the Seine towards the city’s south westerly outskirts. With not a yellow-vested protester in sight, the Île Seguin might have been a Fifa enclave; on an evening when part of the French capital remained in lockdown it certainly felt like Narnia. “What better place to be than the city of lights,” said Amanda Davies, one of the draw’s moderators as, with no hint of irony, she introduced the spectacular football-themed sound and light show prefacing the draw. Presumably it was not a reference to the flames rising a few arrondissements away but by June’s kick-off the sun will surely be out, the game’s world governing body in firm control and the recent violent disorder – never a good look for tournament hosts – a receding memory. Certainly Campbell has no concerns about next summer. “I think every nation has its problems,” she said, diplomatically. “I don’t have any worries. You’ve seen how fantastic the security and organisation here is tonight and we’re confident it will be the same next June.” England, the bronze medal winners at Canada 2015, would love to emulate Japan’s achievement in winning Germany 2011 but Campbell does not want to pile too much pressure on Neville’s squad. “I don’t think we should overburden the players but yes, that’s the ultimate aim,” she said. “Some luck comes into it and there’s no guarantees – but if we play at our very best …”.