Exclusives dominate Sunday’s coverage as the clock ticks down to a vote that is widely expected to possibly end in a heavy Commons defeat for Theresa May’s Brexit deal. The crystal balls are well and truly out as to what happens before, during and after that. The Mail on Sunday has an interview with May in which she warns party rebels it’s her deal or the double whammy of a Corbyn government and no-deal Brexit. She says Britain “would truly be in uncharted waters” if the deal is voted down, though some might say the UK is already well into that territory. MAIL ON SUNDAY - May: Back me or get Corbyn and no Brexit #tomorrowspaperstoday (via @MrHarryCole) pic.twitter.com/Jq1z5x08yV The paper also suggests she might dash to Brussels this week to secure more concessions. May’s human side is demonstrated by the sidenote that she eats peanut butter straight out of the jar on stressful days. The Independent’s Sunday edition carries an exclusive poll by BMG Research suggesting December saw the Remain vote edging into a majority among the public after months of steadily rising support. Almost half of those polled think May’s deal is a bad one. Perhaps this was all part of the plan? Tomorrow's @independent front page #tomorrowspaperstoday To subscribe to the Daily Edition https://t.co/XF8VnDpHYF pic.twitter.com/yu4E479a6o The Observer focuses on a split – yes, another one – in cabinet over the issue of a second referendum. Some ministers feel it might be the only way to secure support for May’s deal, on which the PM’s heart appears set. One cabinet source said: “The polls have been remarkably stable for a while, but there does seem to be some kind of movement [to Remain], and that could well develop in the coming days and weeks.” Tomorrow’s front page pic.twitter.com/Bmqfq0yxBO The Sunday Times also says ministers are planning for a second referendum, but believes the prime minister can “handbag” Brussels into giving concessions (£) that will help her sell a version of her deal. The paper has a dewy-eyed moment, reporting cabinet sources as saying May needs to evoke Margaret Thatcher and get tough with EU negotiators. It reports the last-minute cross-border talks could mean Tuesday’s vote is delayed. Tomorrow's Sunday Times front page: May to ‘handbag’ Brussels in frantic bid to save deal pic.twitter.com/Gq2r6ZroVB The Sunday Telegraph goes in on the departure of aide Will Quince and the potential for more to leave in the next 48 hours. “May losing grip as party is rocked by resignations” is the headline. It says government whips have given Tory MPs until Sunday lunchtime to decide how they will vote and that May’s rivals are readying themselves. Boris Johnson is described as “focused” by friends, it says. The front page of tomorrow's Sunday Telegraph: ‘May losing grip as party is rocked by resignations’ #tomorrowspaperstoday pic.twitter.com/G7HNOdIpWK The Sunday Express doesn’t have room on its front page for Brexit because of an exclusive about the potential for state control of nativity plays. It does however raise the prospect of “Corbyn by Christmas” on a handsome spread on pages four and five. It cites SNP sources as saying that could mean two new referendums: one to reverse Brexit and another on Scottish independence. The Sunday Mirror puts the “Tory uncivil war” on pages eight and nine, saying May is fighting for her job and agonising over whether to pull Tuesday’s vote. The Sun gives page two to its exclusive on May’s Westminster woes, saying Johnson is getting ready to save Brexit by Christmas. “Ho Ho Bo” is the headline. It also notes cod and chips will cost 50p more under May’s deal.