The run up to Christmas is always manic – presents to be wrapped and last-minute jobs to ensure the next day runs smoothly (once the fizzy stuff starts flowing, it is always chaos in our house!). For Christmas Eve, I like recipes that can either be made the day before or put together at the last minute. Our tradition at home is usually to have fish. This quick recipe can easily be turned pescetarian by omitting the chorizo. Happy Christmas! The lemon aioli takes five minutes to make with a stick blender. Try it – it’s surprisingly easy, and adds a wonderful silkiness to this quick bean stew. Prep 10 minCook 45 minServes 4 4 tbsp olive oil1 large Spanish onion, peeled and finely chopped2 fennel bulbs, tough outer layer discarded and chopped150g cooking chorizo, cut into small 1cm dice4 large garlic cloves2 bay leaves1 big pinch saffron threadsSalt3 tins cannellini beans250ml fish stock200ml white wine or Pernod For the aïoli1 garlic clove2 egg yolks1 tbsp dijon mustardJuice of half a lemon2 tsp white wine vinegarSalt 250ml olive oil 250ml vegetable oil For the fish1kg hake fillets1 tbsp olive oil Warm the olive oil in a wide-based casserole pan, and gently fry the onion, fennel and chorizo for five to eight minutes over a medium-high heat. Turn the heat down a little, add the garlic, bay leaves and saffron, season with a teaspoon of flaky sea salt (or half a teaspoon of fine salt), and continue to cook for another five to 10 minutes, until the fat renders. Drain the beans, rinse in cold water, add to the pan with the stock and wine, and bring to a simmer for 12-15 minutes, until the fennel is soft. At this point you can cool the beans and refrigerate for a few days if you want to get ahead. To make the aioli, roughly chop the garlic. Put in a tall measuring jug with the egg yolks, mustard, lemon juice, vinegar and several large pinches of salt. Blitz with a stick blender for 30 seconds, then start slowly pouring in the olive oil, very slowly, in a thin, steady trickle as you blend. After a minute, increase the trickle to a thin stream, continuing to blend. Once you have poured in the olive oil, pour in the vegetable oil, now in a thicker stream, until it is all mixed in. I like to add two tablespoons of water here to thin it down (you could add saffron threads to hot water to make it an ochre-hued saffron aioli). Taste, check for seasoning, adding more vinegar or salt if needed. This will last well in the fridge for at least a week – but it very rarely lasts that long! When you want to eat, reheat the beans and heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Rub the hake fillets with olive oil, season, then put on a baking tray and pop in the oven for 10-12 minutes (check they’re done by inserting a metal skewer for three seconds into the thickest part and pressing it against the your lip – you want it to be hot). Spoon the beans into shallow bowls and top with the fish. Let everyone help themselves to the aioli at the table. I like to serve this with steamed spinach, but you could follow it with a crisp green salad. The homemade aioli is delicious as a dip for cold roast potatoes – a fantastic post-Christmas snack. If you love beans, cook dried ones instead of tinned, soak them overnight, and simmer for an hour with garlic and bay leaves until tender – they are great with roast chicken or turned into a warming soup. Fiona Beckett’s wine match“White rioja is often overlooked beside its red counterpart but works really well with robust fish dishes like this. Try the smooth, nicely rounded Conde Valdemar Rioja Blanco 2017, 12.5%, £9.75 at Booths.” The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US.