Between now and 11 December reports on Theresa May’s chances of success and survival will contain almost casual asides about near-criminal behaviour in the House of Commons. Government whips – desperate to win the vote that endorses the prime minister’s Brexit deal – will be said to resort to bribery, bullying and blackmail. Some stories will be exaggerations. Others will be pure inventions – peddled by the whips themselves to enhance their reputation as the stormtroopers of parliamentary politics. Tales of female MPs reduced to tears in the tea room will help to obscure the inconvenient, though undeniable, fact that, as the Brexit crisis developed, the whips failed to fulfil their most important duty – the collection of intelligence, not the enforcement of discipline. Had the Tory whips been the eyes and ears of the government, they would have known, within days of news of the Chequers proposals reaching Westminster, that May’s Brexit deal was certain to be rejected by the House of Common, and then the prime minister would have been given time to change course. It is too late now. And the idea the whips can redeem their failure by pressure and persuasion is nonsense. They can offer trivial inducements to obedience in the form of parliamentary trips to exotic places and they can utter threats that MPs, at peace with their constituency parties, will ignore. But they do not possess the authority to force MPs to vote against judgment and conscience. Perhaps they never did. The myth of whips’ unbridled power was given a boost in a 1995 documentary which investigated allegations that Tory whips had a “black book” which recorded the sins and misdemeanours of their backbenchers. Tim Fortescue – a whip in the Heath government – spoke of how he and his colleagues treated MPs “in a jam … which might be debt or it might be … a scandal involving small boys”. According to Fortescue, the threat of “scandalous stories” reaching the public was used to keep recalcitrant MPs in line. Horror at the idea of paedophiles being sheltered in the House of Commons and left to pursue their perversions so long as they came to the aid of the party obscured logical doubts about the story. Every whip – past and present, Labour and Tory – to whom I have spoken in the last two days has said their moral objection to such conduct would have been reinforced by the instinct for self-preservation. Convictions for blackmail or abetting a crime both carry long prison sentences. Other bar-room stories of whips’ impropriety are also open to question. Gyles Brandreth – admittedly more a comedian than a politician, but once a Tory whip – spoke darkly of dubious tactics he had witnessed, though not practised, during the years he had spent helping to keep the Tory backbenches in order. Jack Straw – sometime foreign secretary – wrote in his autobiography of a confrontation with Walter Harrison, Labour’s deputy chief whip, as a result of disagreements over a finance bill. “He fixed both eyes upon me and as he did so I felt a pain between my legs I had not experienced since the school rugby field. His grip tightened. I rose on tiptoe as he pushed up as well.” During 33 years in the House of Commons I never heard of a whip laying a finger on a dissident MP. That may be because, unlike Mr Straw, most members would have responded with a punch on the nose. Even if the Tory whips were prepared to adopt rough house tactics they are too late to save the day. They have let the rebellion fester and grow until there are too many to be picked off one by one. Whips to whom I spoke all agreed. Big revolts cannot be contained. As with the Conservative party, so with Labour. When, in 1971, 69 Labour MPs defied a three-line whip and supported the Tory government’s motion in favour of joining the Common Market, Harrison gave up his attempt even to reduce the number. He knew we were sustained by mutually held convictions and would only be further antagonised by pleas for loyalty. We were being loyal to the idea of European unity. So he politely asked for our intention and reported the result to Harold Wilson. His estimate of the rebellion’s size was two members greater than the actual number. The wheel has come full circle and in three weeks’ time Labour MPs will again receive a three-line whip, which instructs them how to vote on the UK’s European future. The likelihood is a three-way split – a handful of abstentions, half a dozen supporting the May deal and the rest opposing it. I doubt if the whips will even try to herd all the parliamentary party into the same voting lobby. It is unreasonable to expect MPs to follow the party line when it zig-zags crazily from one position to another and the leader seems out of step with party policy. Clearly Jeremy Corbyn’s own voting record – in 30 years he defied the whip something like 500 times – undermines Labour discipline. Retired whips made a crucial point about his voting record. Some people are pathological dissidents. There is no point in trying to change their DNA. Of course, the whips will struggle on until the votes on Mrs May’s proposals are finally despatched. That is their duty in a parliamentary democracy, which is built on the party system. And from time to time they will lean too heavily on the miscreants they are trying to redeem. But during the next three weeks, while Britain endures the biggest political fiasco in modern history and faces the greatest crisis in a century, it is important to blame the real culprits. We suffer, and will continue to suffer, from party leaders whose vision stretches at best as far as the next general election.