When Lando Norris takes to the grid for the Australian Grand Prix next season he will, at 19, become the youngest British driver to compete in Formula One. It is a daunting enough prospect and one that is accompanied by a level of pressure, expectation and scrutiny that would weigh heavily on the most experienced drivers. Norris will take to the wheel of a McLaren as the team try to put a disastrous season behind them and begin the process of returning to the front of the grid. Having endured a woeful year with a car that was fundamentally flawed and their sixth without a win, it proved too much for Fernando Alonso who called time on his F1 career. There is absolutely no doubt at McLaren just how painful it has been as the team’s chief executive officer, Zak Brown, admitted. “This has obviously been a difficult season,” he said. “We’re all glad it’s over. It is not one we will look back on with fond memories.” Alongside Alonso’s departure the team also dropped the Belgian Stoffel Vandoorne for a new line-up next year, with the experienced Carlos Sainz joining Norris. The British driver has a fine pedigree, with championship wins in the Formula Renault 2.0 European Cup, the Eurocup Formula 2.0 and at the first attempt in European Formula 3. This season he was second in F2 to his compatriot George Russell, who will drive for Williams next season. Earlier this year, even when F1 remained just a hope for the future, he was already more than aware of the task that might await him at McLaren. The wins, should they come he said, would be all the sweeter for all the hard work he and the team would need to do to bring them about. The attitude is admirable but he has yet to face the cauldron that will be McLaren. Vandoorne had great talent and promise but two years alongside Alonso in an uncompetitive car left him summarily ejected from F1 and having to try to rebuild his reputation. For Norris this will be as intense a baptism of fire as climbing into a car capable of wining races. McLaren say he is an asset of which they must take care. “Formula One can be a pretty cruel environment,” said Brown. “If you look at Charles Leclerc, there was commentary after the first two or three races of whether he should still be in F1 and now he has signed for Ferrari. So with Lando we have to manage expectations, not after three races pass judgment which we as a sport are quick to do. Lando clearly is extremely talented. We need to nurture him and manage expectations internally and externally and give him the equipment to show his talent.” Norris is not short on confidence. He has already said his goal is to beat Sainz in every session. A tough task against a highly rated driver with 81 starts and entering his fifth season. Matching Sainz would be an achievement, beating him would be a statement similar to the one Lewis Hamilton made in his remarkable rookie season against Alonso at McLaren. McLaren firstly need to provide them both with a competitive car and certainly Brown is confident more is to come but is under no illusion as to the weight on their shoulders. “It is a high-pressure environment and the first thing everyone does is compare you to your teammate,” Brown said. “That will be the first test and then we want to see Lando develop. We recognise he will make rookie mistakes, he will be at some tracks he has never been to before. It’s one thing to jump into a team that is rebuilding and one that has championship calibre cars. We know he has a difficult task ahead and we are going to be patient and work with him.” Norris, too, is going to have to display patience and control. Brown said he has presented a five-year plan to return McLaren to winning ways and that he has the backing and investment of shareholders to see it through, but that is an awfully long time in F1, especially for a young driver looking to make his mark. Back in July at the Hungaroring, however, Norris was already displaying a remarkable maturity that will be key in seeing him though what may be the most difficult season of his career. “I’ve learned to try and not be down as much when it goes wrong,” he said. “Sometimes there is nothing you can do about it. In the past I would have been the opposite, I would have been annoyed. I am still a bit up and down but have learned you don’t need to be down so much.” Brown declines to offer predictions of where McLaren will finish next season, insisting only that they expect to improve. “We learned a lot this year and will ultimately be a better team because of it,” he said. Norris must hope they will finally be on an upward curve but his task, come Melbourne, will be no less demanding, regardless. Reaching F1 was his dream but under a cruel and unforgiving spotlight, next season’s reality will test him to the limit.