Different times of the year bring to mind the various sporting events I enjoyed in my childhood. The new year means Eric Bristow winning another World Darts Championship; freshly cut grass in April evokes the FA Cup semi-finals; Easter equals the Masters at Augusta; and, oddly, December transports me to the G-Mex Centre in Manchester. At this time of year in the 1980s, a football tournament shown on Sportsnight signified that the countdown to Christmas had begun. This indoor six-a-side event, which was contested by the top clubs in the country, was completely different to anything I had seen before. Soccer Six was the talk of the playground. Six-a-side indoor football had been launched by the Football League in May 1982, with eight Midlands clubs contesting the Austin-Rover tournament at the Birmingham NEC. “We think we have developed a game which will bring back the fans and attract a far wider audience,” said Football League spokesman Graham Walker. “We hope to get the family back to watch football.” Watching the matches was so different and so exciting. Games lasted 15 minutes, with roll-on roll-off substitutions allowed throughout. Sin-bins added to the distinct nature of the tournament, as did the requirement for teams to keep at least one player in the attacking half of the pitch. Birmingham City won the first event in 1982 and successfully defended their crown a year later when the tournament was expanded to include teams from beyond the Midlands. Arsenal and Tottenham won the next two editions, with Oxford United winning the first tournament held at the G-Mex Centre in 1986, now sponsored by Guinness (both Atari and Courage had been sponsors before). Nottingham Forest triumphed in 1987, meaning they were one of three clubs seeded for the 1988 edition – along with reigning league champions Liverpool and FA Cup holders Wimbledon. The 1988 tournament was something of a classic. All 20 teams in the First Division took part, with second tier Manchester City also invited along. The three seeded sides automatically qualified for finals night on Wednesday 7 December. The other 18 clubs had to go through a set of qualifiers, which were held in the three days before the main event. Tickets for the first three days ranged between £3.50 and £5.50, with finals night costing an extra pound. The Radio 1 DJ Andy Peebles provided constant commentary for the crowd. With English clubs banned from Europe, some sides brought strong 10-man squads to Manchester for the event. Everton had Neville Southall, Kevin Ratcliffe, Pat Van Den Hauwe, Dave Watson, Peter Reid, Trevor Steven, Tony Cottee and Graeme Sharp in their ranks, which shows you how seriously they were taking the tournament. Others were not so willing to risk key players. In fact, after the tournament, the Football League threatened to withhold appearance money – believed to be £7,000 – from Liverpool, Arsenal and Tottenham. In general, clubs did send strong teams; after all, squads were not big enough to consider rotation. Although, it wasn’t hard to see why some wanted to use fringe and youth players – Jim Leighton later missed Scotland’s friendly with Italy due to an elbow injury he picked up in the tournament. Charlton Athletic were the first team to qualify for finals night. Struggling in Division One, Lennie Lawrence’s side were probably happy for the distraction. They knocked out Coventry and Newcastle in the group stage before beating Aston Villa 2-0 to secure their place, earning the club £21,000 in prize money. A highlight of the evening was Coventry City striker David Speedie replacing the injured Steve Ogrizovic in goal. If Charlton’s success had been a slight surprise, the same could not be said for Norwich City the following evening. They were leading the First Division at the time and took their league form into the six-a-side tournament. Ruel Fox and Andy Townsend looked particularly sharp as they hammered Manchester City 4-0, QPR 4-2 and Luton 5-1 to stroll into finals night. The third and final playoff evening was all about the reunion between Arsenal midfielder Paul Davis and Southampton’s Glenn Cockerill. Davis had recently completed a nine-match ban for breaking Cockerill’s jaw with a punch in a league match at Highbury. “We wouldn’t really avoid each other,” said Davis after their game at the G-Mex. “I asked Glenn how he was and wished him the best of luck in the future.” Arsenal won that match 1-0, but were pipped to finals night by West Ham. When finals night kicked off, the focus was on another midfielder. Jan Molby had just spent six weeks in prison for reckless driving and this was his return to football. It was a useful exercise for Molby, but Liverpool he could not help Liverpool from succumbing to an almighty collapse against Charlton. In truth, Liverpool had bigger fish to fry. Once Ray Houghton and John Aldridge pulled out through injury, the team had a raw look to it, with Nicky Tanner, John Jeffers, Charlie Boyd, Alex Watson, Jim Magilton, Mike Marsh and John Durnin included. Nevertheless, they still managed to race into a 3-0 lead over Charlton. However, goals from Mickey Bennett, John Humphrey, Carl Leaburn, Steve Gritt and David Campbell plus a Bruce Grobbelaar own goal, completed a remarkable turnaround as Charlton won 6-3. They followed up that result with an equally impressive 6-2 victory over West Ham to book their place in the final against holders Nottingham Forest, who had England internationals Stuart Pearce and Neil Webb in their ranks. Charlton midfielder Paul Mortimer opening the scoring in the final before Franz Carr levelled matters with just two seconds left in the first half. Peter Shirtliff scored the winner for Charlton and later picked up the player of the tournament award, which came with a cheque for £1,000. “I just hope it will boost our confidence for the fight in the league, which is always going to be a battle for a club like ours,” said Shirtliff after lifting the trophy. The club benefitted financially, collecting £51,000 in total – or three times the gate receipts they received for the recent “home” match against Forest at Selhurst Park. “The players and our loyal supporters need a boost,” said Lawrence. “This is the ideal thing.” Charlton were popular winners in an event that attracted decent crowds and – judging by the conversations I had at school with the other football nuts – was a definitely a ratings winner. Trevor Phillips, the Football League commercial director, sounded buoyant about the future of the tournament, declaring: “There is a growing belief that indoor Soccer Six could well prove to be the growth sport of the 1990s.” Alas, by 1991 the tournament had been consigned to the rubbish bin. With the European ban lifted, clubs in want of more money from TV deals and the Premier League on the horizon, there was never going to be room for Soccer Six. If you had told me in 1988 that there would only be two more Soccer Six tournaments, I would have been shocked and saddened. That green carpet, the boards and Plexiglass, those goals, Sportsnight and the countdown to Christmas. They were happy days. • This article appeared first on That 1980s Sports Blog• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter