As Australia’s Test team has struggled in the past year, the focus has been on batting. The three players suspended last March were top-four batsmen. The replacements have struggled. Collapses have kept coming. The Sheffield Shield is not exactly a rich seam of alternatives. What gets less focus is how poor batting affects bowlers. In the Melbourne Test against India this week, Patrick Cummins bowled 34 overs in the first innings across two stinking hot days. When he finally left the field, 25 minutes before the close of play, he padded up as nightwatchman. Where Cummins should have been in an ice-bath with an ice-pack eating an ice-cream sundae, Usman Khawaja asked if he fancied a bat. At which point Cummins should have looked around for an ice-pick. He wasn’t needed that second night, but he was after lunch on the third day. On the same pitch where India’s top order had patiently resisted across six sessions, Australia’s specialist batsmen had come and gone. Jasprit Bumrah bowled magnificently for his 6 for 33, but too many dismissals were too much of the batsmen’s making. Cummins batted for over an hour, then just after tea was bowling again. The camera cut to Josh Hazlewood, looking exhausted. To Cummins, shoulders slumped. To Nathan Lyon, weariness clear on his face. Then in ran Cummins and got a short ball to leap at Hanuma Vihari, conjuring some venom from sore shoulders to create a catch in he gully. A storm blew through, four wickets in 19 balls, Cummins smashing out the blue-chip trio of Cheteshwar Pujara, Virat Kohli, and Ajinkya Rahane, the latter two in two balls. If you’ve bowled two days in the field, you deserve your batsmen to give you a full day off. Time to get treatment and massages, rest aching muscles, have injuries strapped and soothed, top up fluids, eat some hefty meals without worrying about mobility – all these things sandwiched between two long nights of sleep. Do that, have some fun with the bat the subsequent day, and you can just about return to the bowling crease feeling up to the task. Instead, Australia’s bowlers keep getting called back after barely time to scoff a couple of Arnott’s Assorted and hop in the shower. They bowl for sessions, bat for longer than the batsmen, then start bowling again. It’s been happening all year. In Cape Town, South Africa batted around 100 overs in both innings, while Australia’s first dig didn’t reach 70. In Johannesburg, Cummins’ resistance actually hurt him, because he batted for long enough that South Africa didn’t enforce the follow-on. In Dubai, the bowlers strained on the flattest of decks for two days, only for the batsmen to start a slide of 10 for 60. In Abu Dhabi, the bowlers knocked over Pakistan for 282, then the batsmen mustered 134. Adelaide against India was almost identical. No bowler can deliver their best like this. Opposition teams in second innings get on top, as deliveries stop biting, speed drops, bad balls become more frequent. Fatigue increases as confidence diminishes: neither body nor mind has an endless reserve. Cummins drew on a reserve to produce his third-day spell. The roar he dragged out from a sedate MCG crowd was just as impressive, the applause tidal as the bowler walked towards the Members Stand after his fourth wicket. To produce pace and bounce and a sense of threat after all his exertions showed pure heart. You could say he had luck with leg-side dismissals: Pujara and Kohli glancing to backward square, Rahane gloving down the leg side. But the field was set for them, and the bowling was at the ribcage. In any case, Cummins was in fortune credit after a first innings where he beat the bat repeatedly against both Pujara and Kohli. The list of bowlers to have dismissed them both for a duck in the same innings now exists. It has one entry. Cummins never seems to let the hard work get to him. He’s never surly or aggro. In Johannesburg, as the deficit grew towards 600, he just kept working. In Melbourne, as Rohit Sharma pulled the hat-trick ball past a potential catching hand at backward square leg, Cummins’s exclamation immediately gave way to a grin. When he’d bowled Pujara in the first innings, he gave an inquisitive look at the stumps and a polite smile, as if to acknowledge that it had indeed kept a bit low. There are no Toyota leaps or chainsaw mimes in the Cummins repertoire. But doing all the work takes a toll. In Adelaide he was praised for his fitness on the first day, after swooping in the final over to run out Pujara from mid-on. But in Melbourne late on the second day he dropped a simple catch in the deep, something he never does. The Adelaide moment was after one day of the series. By the third Test fatigue was kicking in. On ABC radio, Dirk Nannes talked about poor batting from a bowler’s perspective. “Once you go five down and you’re trying to get a break, you think ‘Oh no. I’ve got to front up again.’ It’s a hard slog. And you start blaming the batsmen, you start getting upset with them. There’s no way you can escape that feeling that these guys aren’t doing their job.” When asked a related question after play, Cummins’ face expressed an answer that his polite words couldn’t. I had a housemate once who always did the dishes. Everyone else was lazy or forgetful but he would just plough in there every day, blasting some music or putting his headphones on, dancing away while elbow-deep in greasewater. He never seemed to mind, so no one else minded either. One day he quietly packed up all his stuff and left without a word. A note to Australia’s batsmen: no matter how cheerful someone is, don’t rely on their goodwill to last forever.