Rafael Benítez has urged the quartet of potential bidders considering buying Newcastle to seize “a unique opportunity”. Mike Ashley is desperate to sell up and last week indicated that a takeover could be close. Although no exclusivity deal has yet been signed there is apparent interest from the United States – with one transatlantic consortium led by Peter Kenyon, the former Manchester United and Chelsea chief executive – Turkey and the Middle East. While much could go wrong before any sale is completed – and some observers remain sceptical as to Ashley’s true intentions – the manager believes Newcastle are well worth buying for an asking price around £350m bracket. “I don’t have much information about a takeover but it’s very clear this club has the potential to be one of the top sides,” said Benítez as he prepared for Sunday’s meeting with Wolves at St James’ Park. “For me, Newcastle has to be in the top six or, easily, the top eight and play in Europe again. You can attract anyone here. I’ve seen some people criticising the north-east but it’s an area with great potential. For sure, Newcastle can be mentioned in the same breath as the other clubs I’ve managed, there’s massive potential here. Newcastle is similar to Napoli in terms of everyone in the city supporting one club. When you have that, it’s positive and unique.” Despite the 52,000-capacity St James’ city centre location in one of England’s major regional capitals, some analysts have claimed that Newcastle is too far north to be attractive to major investors. Benítez shakes his head at that notion. “I am here because I can see this great potential,” said Benítez, who won the 2005 Champions League with Liverpool. “You don’t have too many big cities with massive clubs like Newcastle [for sale]. The fact is, it’s a great opportunity.” Although the 58-year-old’s contract ends in May, Benítez would hope to extend that agreement if the ownership changes. “In my head I’m still a young manager,” he said. “I want to keep on managing for a few more years, but, in the future, I would like to maybe become involved in a small club, to give them some advice. “I like to see players coming through the academy into the first team and to teach them the principles of the game. Sometimes you see top-class footballers but they still do not know how to use their left foot or things like that.” Asked if that club might be Tranmere, the nearest team to his family home on the Wirral, Benítez said, jokingly: “I didn’t say the name – but close.” Warming to his theme, the Spaniard said he would not be averse to offering his expertise at grassroots level. “I coached the lads at my daughter’s school for a bit and I was impressed,” he said. “When I asked the kids questions they put their hands up. That was very respectful. In Spain, they would be talking all the time.”