Mauricio Pochettino accused his players of complacency after Tottenham’s stunning late collapse against Wolves dealt their title hopes a major blow. Tottenham were poised to continue their winning run after taking an early lead through Harry Kane, who would later be booked for diving, but Pochettino’s side fell nine points behind Liverpool after succumbing to an inspired comeback from Wolves at Wembley. Pochettino was unhappy with how his team responded in the second half, admitting they made the mistake of thinking the game was over when they led 1-0. “The game was under control in the first half,” Tottenham’s manager said. “I think maybe it was easier than we expected to dominate. They played so deep, chasing us, we didn’t concede one chance. But in the second half we started to feel maybe the game was over, and when you feel the game is over you start to decide the wrong way, start to play too many long balls and then it was difficult to recover the balls. “We played more with the heart rather than with the head and we started to spend a lot of energy, and of course you need the energy in the end. I am very disappointed, like the players, but there is nothing to say. Now we need to move on and be sure we are ready for the next game.” Pochettino dismissed suggestions this defeat will heighten the impression that Spurs lack the bottle to win the league. Yet the Argentinian did question his team’s consistency after Wolves moved up to seventh place thanks to the goals from Willy Boly, Raúl Jiménez and Hélder Costa. “I don’t care about what the people say,” Pochettino said. “I cannot control what happens around us. If you see my comments always it’s about being humble. We know very well, the experience is if you are not 100% in every single game in the Premier League, it can happen. It’s not enough to play 60 or 70 minutes. “You need to play 95 minutes your best. Like today, we dropped a little bit our energy and focus, and in the last 20 minutes we conceded three goals. It can happen to us, it can happen to Wolves, to Liverpool, to Manchester City. That’s why it’s so tough to win the Premier League because you need to be consistent. And today it’s a clear example if you are not consistent enough, with not only good quality during the game but the right energy, it’s difficult to compete for these things.” Pochettino said Spurs struggled to cope after Boly’s equaliser. “We miss that freshness to kill the game. Different things could have happened with Everton or Bournemouth but I think, for me, we killed the games and then we managed the game. Today I think the moment we concede the first goal the team was down and it was difficult to find the energy to win the game.”