The award-winning German journalist who admitted falsifying stories on a large scale over several years has voluntarily handed back four prestigious press awards and been stripped of others. As the German media world reeled from the revelations about Claas Relotius, who worked for Der Spiegel, rightwing populist organisations claimed that the scandal was proof of their long-standing claims of widespread fake news in the mainstream media. Relotius, 33, has gone underground, rebuffing attempts by colleagues to reach him. But he text the organisers of the German Reporter of the Year prize to apologise and say he was returning his awards. The US broadcasting network CNN stripped him of the two journalist of the year prizes it had awarded him and at least one further leading German prize-giver said it was doing the same. At least 14 articles by Relotius for Der Spiegel were falsified, according to Steffen Klusmann, its editor-in-chief. They include an award-winning piece about a Syrian boy called Mouwiya who believed his anti-government graffiti had triggered the civil war. Relotius alleged he had interviewed the boy via WhatsApp. The magazine – a prestigious weekly – is investigating if the interview took place and whether the boy exists. Relotius won his fourth German reporter prize this month with a story headlined “Child’s Play”. Klusmann admitted the publication still had no idea how many articles were affected. On Thursday it was revealed that parts of an interview with a 95-year-old Nazi resistance fighter in the US were fabricated. Juan Moreno, the colleague at Der Spiegel who rumbled Relotius after carrying out his own research at his own expense after bosses failed to listen to his doubts, released a video in which he tried to explain how Relotius had got away with the falsifications, and how he had to expose him. Moreno said: “He was the superstar of German journalism if one’s honest, and if his stories had been true, that would have been fully justified to say so, but they were not. “At the start it was the small mistakes, things that seemed too hard to believe that made me suspicious.” Referring to a story that the two worked on together on the US-Mexican border that led to Relotius’ falsifications coming to light, Moreno described how protagonists whom Relotius claimed to have interviewed had not wanted to be photographed in spite of being prominent in the US media. “At some point I just thought something is monumentally wrong here … I started to do my own research only to discover that that protagonist had already appeared in the New York Times,” said Moreno “A lot of people have been asking me: ‘Is there a particular pressure at Spiegel to come up with the hottest stuff, always the best stuff, yours is after all one of the few newspapers which still sends people out into the world, for which you have to do a lot of research etcetera?’ Yes, there is this pressure to deliver good material, but above all there is a duty to ensure that it is true, for heaven’s sake.” He described Relotius as a “well-liked colleague, who was modest and charming, a fantastic colleague, that was the overall impression”. A commission is now reviewing all of Relotius’s work including during his years as a freelancer, when he wrote for many respected German and Swiss newspapers. Der Spiegel, which sells about 740,000 copies a week and has an estimated 6.5 million online readers, said it was keeping his works in its archives for the time-being for “the sake of transparency”, and to allow anyone with information about works that may have been faked to come forward with evidence. German commentators said the scandal could be as damaging to the media’s reputation as the faked Hitler diaries scandal in 1980s – 60 volumes of diaries supposedly written by the dictator that were pronounced genuine by historians and serialised by the magazine Stern and other publications around the world. In the latest of several mea culpa editorials, Der Spiegel said on Thursday that the Relotius case was likely to have an impact on the way it operates in future. Martin Sellner, of the Identäre Bewegung in Austria, part of the far-right “identitarian” movement, described the scandal as “phenomenal” and “spectacular”. In a YouTube post, Sellner said Relotius had been exposed as a “representative of the lügenpresse”, or lying press, a term used widely during the Nazi era to denounce the media, and now in broad use among far-right populists. “This is a good day,” Sellner said, “because it exposes what we’ve known for a long time, namely that the lying press is not only the lying press, which presents things incorrectly, distorted, covers up …. but also quite simply that it makes up stories.” The anti-immigration Alternative für Deutschland, which is Germany’s leading opposition party, said the case meant it was justifiable to question the country’s entire news agenda.