Late-night hosts analyzed Michael Cohen’s three-year prison sentence and the launch of a Fox News streaming service. Donald Trump’s former lawyer and personal fixer Michael Cohen was sentenced to three years in prison on Wednesday for financial crimes and illegal campaign payments on behalf of the president, marking “another big decision in the landmark case of Donald Trump v Getting Caught,” joked Stephen Colbert on the Late Show. Unfortunately for Trump, Colbert noted, “before Cohen climbed up on to the prison bus, he made sure to throw Trump under it” through several statements to the court in which he expressed contempt for his former loyalty to the president. “I have been living in a personal and mental incarceration ever since the fateful day that I accepted an offer to work for a famous real estate mogul whose business acumen I [deeply] admired,” Cohen said, according to court documents. Cohen’s poetic language is telling, Colbert said. “That’s how bad working for Trump is – Michael Cohen is happy to trade metaphor jail for jail.” Cohen got his metaphors down, but Colbert took issue with his use of a second literary element. “The irony is today is the day I am getting my freedom back,” Cohen told the court. Colbert offered a quick correction: “Actually, the irony is that while you’re in prison for your crimes, the guy who ordered you to do the crimes will be at Mar-a-Lago sharing chocolate cake with [Chinese president] Xi Jinping and Kid Rock.” Jimmy Kimmel also dug into the implications of Cohen’s sentence for the president. “The big question, of course, is whether Trump himself knew about and directed these illegal payments,” Kimmel remarked on the money paid to two former Playboy Playmates in exchange for their silence over affairs with Trump. “And the big answer to that question is: duh. “Just to recap,” he continued, “Donald Trump cheats on his wife while she’s at home with their infant son, Donald Trump has a long-term affair with a Playboy Playmate, Donald Trump illegally pays the both of them off, and Michael Cohen goes to jail for it.” On the plus side, Kimmel noted, Cohen already has the looks for his latest role in Trump’s ongoing legal woes. “Here’s the thing about Michael Cohen … for whatever reason he always looks like he’s just been sentenced to three years in prison,” Kimmel joked. Like Colbert, Kimmel pointed to another instance of irony overlooked by Cohen in his court statements. In a tweet from two years ago, Cohen wrote: “@HillaryClinton when you go to prison for defrauding America and perjury, your room and board will be free!” “Yes, and I’ll be there working in the cafeteria providing that board,” Kimmel said as if speaking for Cohen. “The lockers have become the lockees.” Meanwhile, over at Full Frontal, Samantha Bee focused on the upcoming launch of the Fox News’s streaming service, Fox Nation. This “birth of a Fox Nation” provides exclusive access to the channel’s personalities in several new original programs, a sort of “Netflix for conservatives”, as one New York Times headline put it. In other words, Bee joked, “it takes America’s favorite news channel and adds the one thing it’s always been lacking: the thoughtful restraint of the internet”. Just like Netflix, she continued, Fox Nation “offers literally tons of programs in all the most popular genres, from lifestyle shows to history shows, to Hillary is an evil bitch shows, to colleges are turning your kids into whores and lesbians shows, to poor people are parasites shows and Muslims want to murder you shows”. The common thread in this slate of “resentertainment”, she joked, is the Fox worldview of “this is our country and people are trying to take it away from us”. The bevy of options – including “10 Minutes of Justice” with Jeanine Pirro (also known as “ASMR for sociopaths”, according to Bee), a cooking show with Steve Doocy, and “Laura [Ingraham] and Raymond” – on top of a 24/7 news network begs the question: who is this streaming service for? “Who could possibly have time to watch more than 48 hours a day of cable news?” Bee said in front of a large picture of the president.