In light of looming environmental catastrophe, many of us are ramping up efforts to combat rising temperatures and conserve dwindling resources any way we can. Research consistently supports that reducing or eliminating meat from our diets is one of the most effective ways to do just that, but it’s easier said than done. Here’s how to go almost or entirely meat-free without feeling overwhelmed, alienating your friends, infuriating your family, and/or collapsing from malnutrition. It is entirely possible to eat a healthy, balanced diet without meat, but some tinkering is usually required, especially in the beginning. There are a few necessary nutrients which are only available from animal sources, and while many meat and dairy alternatives add these into their products with vegetarians in mind, it’s a good idea to cover your bases with a few supplements. Adding vitamins B12 and D3, Omega-3, and iron to your diet, you can reliably fill any gaps left by cutting down on your meat consumption. This means biting your tongue when tempted to educate (ahem, lecture) friends or family about their eating habits. Whether you’re making this choice for ethical or environmental reasons, remember it is your choice, not theirs. I’ve yet to see one person converted to the cause by way of overbearing proselytizing, so keep the statistics to yourself unless asked. Which brings us to our next point … I’m not sure whether it’s due to genuine curiosity, defensiveness, or maybe it’s a combination of both, but virtually every time you reveal yourself as someone who chooses not to eat meat (or eats less of it), you will be asked why. Have your reasons ready. I usually default to a short answer (“For ethical reasons”) when the question is asked just to make conversation. If further questions are asked, I dive into things in a bit more detail and whip out the aforementioned statistics with great flourish. The trick here is to walk the line between explaining the solid environmental and ethical reasons behind your choice without tipping too far towards preaching. Talk just enough to answer each question, then draw the line. Which reminds me … We’re quite fond of nice, tidy, black-and-white situations, but this is real life. So, while some hardcore devotees might want to jump down your throat for the occasional meat meal, your choice to continue buying leather products, or your position on fish, remember that you are entitled to create your own rules. If making an environmental difference is your goal, it’s more effective to make changes that are sustainable in the long term for you. For instance, many people find it easier to avoid using labels like “vegetarian” or “vegan” altogether. Especially if you’re just trying to reduce the amount of meat you eat without eliminating it entirely, it allows for more leeway and removes the potential for a “gotcha!” moment from snide naysayers. If you, in fact, do want to be strict about it, get used to reading labels. Animal products lurk in some truly strange places, so you may have to do a bit of research to find vegetarian gummy candies (without gelatin), cheese (without rennet), or Caesar salad dressing (without anchovies). Let your host know your dietary preferences, especially if this is a new thing for you – it’s not obnoxious, and any gracious host would want to know. Depending on the occasion, you may offer to contribute a vegetarian dish to the meal. In my experience, most hosts will decline but it’s a nice offer to those who might be left scratching their heads about what to feed a vegetarian. Worst-case scenario, I fill up on salads and side dishes – I can’t remember a dinner party where I’ve left hungry or unsatisfied from lack of options. It’s a classic rookie vegetarian mistake to continue eating exactly as you did before and just substitute faux meat products for the real thing. Not only is this entirely unsatisfying, but it’s also missing the point. Vegetarian meals can be some of the most delicately spiced, richly seasoned, deeply nourishing meals you’ll ever eat. Delve into recipes and go beyond the fake meat to discover the incredible variety of meatless cuisine. You’ll be glad you did.