It has been endlessly picked apart and analysed and described as an allegory for both communism and Christianity but the daughters of Richard Adams have revealed the true meaning of Watership Down. “It’s just a story about rabbits.” Rosamond and Juliet, to whom the story was first told to keep them quiet in the car, have spoken ahead of a two-part animation to be shown on BBC1 over Christmas. The 1978 animated version of Watership Down holds a particular place in the cultural psyche of an entire generation. Everyone remembers the hopelessly sentimental Art Garfunkel theme song. Many will never forget the trauma of witnessing big-eyed bunny rabbits being mercilessly and bloodily slain. In an interview published in the Radio Times Christmas edition, Adams’s daughters explain how the book, first published when their father was a civil servant in his mid-50s, came into being. They also address the multiple theories about the true message of Watership Down. “Honestly, the stuff we got through the post from fans about what they think the book is about,” said Rosamond. “‘Is Woundwort an allegory of Stalin?’ ‘Is Hazel Jesus Christ?’ It shows that people really connect with the story, they really think hard about it, but it cut no ice with Dad. ‘Rubbish!’ he always said. ‘It’s just a story about rabbits.’” They recall being six and eight in the mid-60s and on a long car journey to the theatre from London to Stratford-upon-Avon. They pestered their dad for a story and then came: “Once upon a time there were two rabbits called Hazel and Fiver …” Persuaded by his daughters to put pen to paper, Adams’s book was published in 1972 and won the Carnegie medal and the Guardian children’s book prize. The 1978 animation, featuring the voices of John Hurt and Richard Briers, was scarringly graphic. Rightly so, said the daughters. “Daddy didn’t like the way people babied, and pandered to and ‘icky-ised’ children, lying to them about death and so on,” said Juliet. “We’re destroying the environment and endangering all the animals – I think it would be strange to ignore that.” Producers have suggested the new version, a BBC/Netflix co-production, will be less violent. There will also be more comedy and more prominent female characters. Nicholas Hoult, who voices Fiver, has predicted people will watch it and cry. “I remember me and (director) Noam (Murro) both crying when we were doing the last scene. We were both hugging as we were crying. I did the take probably 450 times and I cried every single time. I defy anyone not to cry.” Other voices include Gemma Arterton, Anne-Marie Duff, John Boyega, James McAvoy and Olivia Colman. Sam Smith has recorded a song called Fire On Fire with the BBC Concert Orchestra. The programme will be shown on on Saturday 22 December and Sunday 23 December.