Repeats of old Morecambe & Wise episodes are a British TV Christmas tradition. But this year’s schedule includes material from the comedy pair that is new to UK viewers. Morecambe & Wise in America, a Gold three-parter hosted by Jonathan Ross, includes numerous sketches of theirs performed in the 1960s on the CBS variety series The Ed Sullivan Show. The career in America of the double act is summed up by the treatment of Morecambe’s stage surname. Introducing the act from England, for the first time in 1963, Sullivan pronounces the second syllable to rhyme with “ham” rather than “some”. But the double-act proved so popular – returning a dozen times in the 1960s – that Sullivan was soon saying the word as naturally as a Lancastrian. Superior to other British TV comics in every other respect, Morecambe and Wise also stand alone in having had sustained success in the US. Bruce Forsyth, who admits in his memoirs to having desperately wanted to break the defining entertainment market, made only one American show, Bruce Forsyth’s Hot Streak, which lasted for a brief season in 1986. Graham Norton, the UK’s most successful contemporary talk-show host, has twice tried to take on David Letterman, the American host who most influenced him, on his home turf. After rehearsing the move with a series of 10 New York-based shows, entitled NY Graham Norton, towards the end of his time at Channel 4, Norton fronted The Graham Norton Comedy Effect for Comedy Central. He proved happier, though, bringing Americans over to talk to him on BBC One. Piers Morgan, briefly poached by CNN, also came home after audiences in the States found him “too English” (especially on the issue of gun control). It was ironic, as many British viewers said they found Morgan “too American”. Morecambe & Wise in America suggests that the comedians broke through the usual export barrier because they benefited from particular conditions not available to later acts. The well-developed Anglophilia of Sullivan, who made regular talent scouting trips to London, gave them a first chance, and their latter appearances on his show coincided with a general enthusiasm in New York for UK culture, including the Beatles, also championed by Sullivan. As Michael Grade, once the pair’s agent, points out in the series, Wise, in particular, always had the US as his benchmark, his heroes being Gene Kelly and Fred Astaire. Morecambe’s weakening health made it impractical to go on commuting to the US after the late 1960s, but, these programmes convincingly suggest, exposure to the lavish production values and “special guest star” tradition of American TV shaped Morecambe and Wise’s later, greatest, British work: their Christmas specials. As their biographer Graham McCann put it: “Instead of taking Morecambe & Wise to Hollywood, they brought Hollywood to Morecambe & Wise.” Family and collaborators also remember the pair tailoring their act for the US; for example, changing the word “trousers” to “pants” in a tailoring sketch. (Language seems likely to have been the most frequent barrier to attempted transfers to the States.) Ronnie Barker and Ronnie Corbett had some success in Australia, but the US eluded them, probably because many of their jokes depended on specifically English place-name double-entendres (“Bognor”, “Little Hampton” and so on) or, in one famous sketch, pronunciation: the “four candles”/“Fork ‘andles”, and other verbal misunderstandings between customer and salesman in a hardware store, arise from the stress patterns and dropped aitches of London cockney speech. Similarly, speedy Enfield-inflected speech of the host on Bruce Forsyth’s Hot Streak, also seems to have caused problems; the show was a word game in which easy comprehension for competitors and audience was crucial. The most durable UK exports to the US have been those who were almost “honorary” American broadcasters, including Alistair Cooke (1908-2004), born in Salford, but whose adoption of US citizenship and delivery led British viewers and listeners to assume he was American. In this respect, the heir to the host of Letter From America could be John Oliver, the Brummie whose success as the UK correspondent on The Daily Show, with Jon Stewart, led to his own continuing HBO show, Last Week Tonight With John Oliver. The American TV fate of another post-Morecambe and Wise British double-act – Fry and Laurie – is instructive. Hugh Laurie, who switched accent and genre, became a superstar in House, while Stephen Fry, staying close to his home persona, flopped in the sitcom The Great Indoors. Crucially, broadcasting manner has to be adapted as much as vocabulary and accent. Jeremy Paxman fronted an international, USA-themed, edition of Newsnight on BBC America for 10 months in 2008, but, at least pre-Trump, Americans were not ready for politicians to be treated with such sceptical disrespect. The BBC’s co-ownership (with AMC) of an American network, however, has progressively made it easier for British talent to travel. Screening on BBC America of Ricky Gervais’s The Office and Extras gave Gervais a visibility in the US that led to a movie career. Phoebe Waller-Bridge has similarly benefited, with the showing of Fleabag in the US leading to Killing Eve, a US-UK co-production shown in both countries. If a BBC America had existed in Morecambe and Wise’s time – or they in its – the pair’s British shows might have been screened on the network. But in their day they had to make the choice. Those for whom Christmas is a largely a celebration of television will be glad they made the choice they did. Morecambe & Wise in America – Gold at 8pm, 27 December, 3 January and 10 January