In the hours since Wednesday morning’s announcement that a Conservative leadership contest has been triggered, more than 135 Tory MPs have declared their backing for Theresa May on Twitter. BBC and Sky estimates including others to have declared their position in TV and radio interviews put the tally at more than 150. 48 letters against her were required to trigger the contest and four people have tweeted to declare they would not support her in the vote. Of course, because the ballot is secret, there is no way to know how many of them are telling the truth. Here is a list of who has come out on each side: Rory Stewart A leadership contest wd be an indulgent and unnecessary distraction - I’ll be making this argument on 5 Live at 9:05 & making clear why I back the PM” Kevin Hollinrake “100% supporting the PM in tonight’s vote” Jake Berry “100% behind the PM” Jeremy Lefroy “The Prime Minister has my full support” Robert Halfon “I will be backing Prime Minister Theresa May … My one ask of PM is to genuinely and passionately reboot #socialjustice agenda for our country” Liz Truss I fully support the Prime Minister and believe it would be completely wrong to have a leadership election now. She is the right person to deliver Brexit and has shown herself to be strong and determined. Chris Skidmore “Just think how bad this looks” Julian Knight “This vote is a distraction” Ed Vaizey “We don’t need a self indulgent leadership election at this time” Marcus Jones “I’m backing the prime minister” James Heappey I’ll be supporting the PM tonight. Changing our leader right now would be an act of utter self-indulgence & it wouldn’t change anything on Brexit. Guy Opperman “To indulge in a leadership contest is completely wrong” Huw Merriman “Her determination to serve and deliver for our country deserves better” Helen Grant “Conservatives can ill afford further introspection and division at this crucial moment when our country needs us most” Vicky Ford “I’m very boring and very conservative. I don’t believe the country needs the added uncertainty” Alok Sharma “Many in the country will be aghast” Craig Whittaker “Complete madness by a minority of Conservative hardliners” Heidi Allen Utterly dismayed at the sheer indulgence being shown by some of my parliamentary colleagues at this time of National crisis. Quite why they think a change in leader is the right course of action is beyond me. Nick Hurd “Theresa May has my full support” Steve Brine “This is about the national interest not personalities and naked ambition” Luke Hall “I look forward to @theresa_may refreshing her mandate later today” Matt Warman “The country deserves better than a self-involved Conservative Party” Michael Gove I am backing the Prime Minister 100% - and I urge every Conservative MP to do the same. She is battling hard for our country and no one is better placed to ensure we deliver on the British people’s decision to leave the EU. Mary Robinson “This is the UK’s future, more important than one Party” Simon Hoare “I look aghast at some peoples’ behaviour. Self indulgent” Alan Mak “I will be voting for her tonight” Michael Ellis “She is hardworking, courageous, diligent and dutiful” Bim Afolami As will I. https://t.co/hycmLFwWX4 Caroline Spelman “I’m very disappointed” Alan Duncan “Stick with her and let’s see it through!” David Mundell “The public want us to sort #Brexit now!” Damian Hinds “A leadership challenge does nothing to secure brexit” Mims Davies “We simply don’t need additional instability & division” Andrea Leadsom Vital to support @theresa_may today. She is working hard in the interest of the U.K. to get a good Brexit deal and she has my full support. Alistair Burt “I will be voting for the Prime Minister” Nick Boles “Few MPs have been more critical of Theresa May’s leadership than me. But now is not the time to replace her” Margot James “No one could have done a better job leading the Brexit negotiations” Justin Tomlinson “She has remained focused, determined & courteous” David Lidington “She has always put the national interest first” Andrew Stephenson “A leadership contest is a distraction and doesn’t change the maths in Parliament” Liam Fox I will support the Prime Minister @theresa_may tonight. This is a totally inappropriate time to have a contest. The country expects us to provide stability not damaging division. Bob Neill “This is a distraction” Mark Lancaster “The last thing the country needs” Alec Shelbrooke “Theresa May is working hard to deliver Brexit” Alun Cairns “We need to honour the outcome of the referendum and support the PM” Mark Spencer “To indulge in a leadership contest now is completely wrong” Sajid Javid The last thing our country needs right now is a Conservative Party leadership election. Will be seen as self-indulgent and wrong. PM has my full support and is best person to ensure we leave EU on 29 March Robin Walker “Totally agree [with Sajid Javid]” Richard Harrington “I have always said that she is the best person for the country and the Conservative Party” Alex Chalk “No one has offered a credible alternative strategy. Time for loyalty!” Maria Miller “She deserves our full support” Amber Rudd The PM has my full support. At this critical time we need to support and work with the PM to deliver on leaving the EU, & our domestic agenda - ambitious for improvements to people’s lives & to build on growth of wages & jobs. Sarah Wollaston “I hope the ERG lose badly and we can see the back of their pompous threats for a year” Greg Clark “I admire the grit and determination the Prime Minister has shown” Penny Mordaunt “The Prime Minister has my full support” Matt Hancock “We should all be focussed on coming together for the sake of the future of the country” Kit Malthouse “Hear hear [to Sajid Javid]” Philip Hammond The Prime Minister has worked hard in the National interest since the day she took office and will have my full support in the vote tonight. Her deal means we leave the EU on time, whist protecting our jobs and our businesses. Paul Scully “The light at the tunnel that some people are seeing is a train coming fast the other way” David Gauke “Removing her would be self indulgent and irresponsible” Patrick McLoughlin “I have every confidence in our Prime Minister” Stephen Hammond “Any colleague who believes changing our leader during the negotiations is in our country’s interest should think again” Andrew Murrison “I’ll be supporting @theresa_may tonight. No question” James Cleverly “I’m disappointed that some in my party have triggered a vote of no confidence” Nadhim Zahawi “We do not need further instability and division” Jeremy Hunt I am backing @theresa_may tonight. Being PM most difficult job imaginable right now and the last thing the country needs is a damaging and long leadership contest. Brexit was never going to be easy but she is the best person to make sure we actually leave the EU on March 29 Nick Gibb “Theresa May has my absolute confidence” James Brokenshire “Now is not the time for this distraction” Therese Coffey “I will be supporting @theresa_may to continue” Brandon Lewis “I hope all my colleagues will join me & support @theresa_may” Sarah Newton “Changing leaders doesn’t change the fact that Parliament needs to deliver” Stephen Crabb “It is a reckless course which does nothing to make Brexit easier to deliver” Robert Buckland My words to those who seek to remove the Prime Minister, (with apologies to Aneurin Bevan): “You call it statesmanship, I call it emotional spasm.” Mel Stride “Time to put our country first and get the deal done” Jesse Norman “A leadership election would be utter folly” Victoria Prentis “Inundated with messages of support for the #PM from my constituents” Kelly Tolhurst “To even consider changing our leader at this time is totally wrong” John Howell “We must let her complete the task” Jonathan Djanogly “Ill advised, self indulgent and contrary to the national interest” Caroline Nokes “Being PM is a phenomenally difficult job and she is the best person for it” Tobias Ellwood “I came into politics to solve problems – not add to them” Damian Green Good stuff https://t.co/FGOEHo8ZwK Geoffrey Cox “This is no time for the self indulgent spasm of a leadership election” Nigel Huddleston “She is an honourable public servant who has served her country with great dignity” Adam Afriyie “It’s a tough job, the toughest possible right now, and she has my full support” John Glen “Now is not the time” Julian Smith “Her integrity, drive and focus is vital at this time” Sam Gyimah The country is divided. Parliament is in deadlock. That was the case yesterday, and is still the case today - this flows directly from the fact that we have a hung parliament. Changing leader will not address this real and pressing issue with Brexit - this should be our focus. Peter Heaton-Jones “Yes, I am loyal, and I wear that badge with pride” Oliver Letwin “I shall be supporting the PM wholeheartedly” Gavin Williamson “She works relentlessly hard for our country” Philip Lee “The ERG think it’s ok to have another vote on @Conservatives leader but not the #Brexit deal. What nonsense!” Jo Churchill “This is a distraction” George Freeman “It’s no time to indulge in a 2 month Party Leadership contest” David Warburton “The national interest is not served by dangerous and damaging self-indulgence” Rebecca Pow “Now is not the time to change leader” Anna Soubry We don’t need to change PM but the PM must change course. Get the vote back next week. And when it’s lost take this matter back to the people. It’s the only way out of #BrexitChaos & only way PM stays. @peoplesvote_uk Kevin Foster Retweeted constituents’ messages of support for the PM Antoinette Sandbach “I believe this is a pointless piece of navel gazing” Michelle Donelan “Distractions like the vote today do not help anything” Leo Docherty “Let’s help her get on with it!” Nicholas Soames “#manupgrowupgetrealdoourduty” Mark Prisk “I will support the PM @theresa_may today and it’s important that she gets a clear result” Tom Tugendhat I’ve now spoken to my local @Conservatives party, chairman and many councillors and the view is clear - the numbers in Parliament won’t change and March is fast approaching. I’m backing @theresa_may. Andrew Jones “I hope and expect the PM will win and win well” Alberto Costa “It is right that we come together as one Team Conservative” Wendy Morton “We need to honour the referendum and support the PM” Andrew Bowie “She has my full and unwavering support” Paul Masterton Walking to Committee Room 14 at 6pm to support the Prime Minister like: pic.twitter.com/vhGsiPl0x8 Oliver Heald “I am supporting the Prime Minister tonight” Chris Heaton-Harris “tonight I’ll be supporting the prime minister” James Cartlidge I will be voting for the Prime Minister in the ballot this evening. I know that some colleagues & members of my local association have deep reservations about the backstop & withdrawal agreement, but further destabilisation at this moment is the last thing we need. Kirstene Hair “She is a true public servant who has the national interest at the forefront of everything she does” Rachel MacClean “Changing leader now is the wrong thing to do. There is a real risk that we end up with no Brexit” Changing leader now is the wrong thing to do. There is a real risk that we end up with no Brexit. Employers in Redditch want to plan for the future and we need to focus on these negotiations. https://t.co/Vy0ZOwVKne Amanda Milling “I fully back the prime minister” Stuart Andrew “We have to get on with the job and not this self indulgent navel gazing” Alex Burghart “I shall be supporting the Prime Minister in the vote on her leadership tonight” Robert Jenrick “My priority is to ensure we leave the EU on 29 March. A leadership contest now puts that at risk” Jackie Doyle-Price Well said George x this all looks self indulgent & irresponsible outside the Westminster bubble https://t.co/ojfuLFz6DM Caroline Dinenage “The last thing our country needs is more uncertainty”. I’ll be backing @theresa_may in the vote this evening. The last thing our country needs is more uncertainty, more division and more time wasted on an unnecessary distraction that won’t get us any further forward. Iain Stewart “Her resilience, sense of duty and attention to detail are exactly the qualities we need at this time” I will be backing @theresa_may 100%. Her resilience, sense of duty and attention to detail are exactly the qualities we need at this time. Gillian Keegan “This not solve the parliamentary arithmetic which means too many people can play politics with our country’s future” Heather Wheeler I will be supporting the Prime Minister in tonight’s confidence vote.She has done her best in unprecedented circumstances, showing huge resilience and determination. Let’s have the vote, move on and deliver on the will of the majority. #Brexit Richard Graham “The leadership challenge combines crass timing & deep irresponsibility” Richard Benyon Mark Pawsey “What is best for businesses up and down Britain is finalising a deal between the UK and the EU and I will therefore be supporting the prime minister” Chris Philp “We are at a critical juncture ... I will therefore vote for the prime minister” Kemi Badenoch I am supporting the Prime Minister at this critical juncture in the future of our country....(1/7) Ken Clarke Tory MP Ken Clarke says it would be "unhelpful, irrelevant and irresponsible" for the Conservative party to embark on weeks of a leadership contest.Follow the latest on #PMQs here: https://t.co/7P21abjXLF pic.twitter.com/h0LMUO0LNT David Rutley “Theresa May is working hard for the country at this vital time and should be given the support to get on with that important work” I am backing the Prime Minister in this evening's vote. @theresa_may is working hard for the country at this vital time and should be given the support to get on with that important work. Ben Wallace “At a time when security in the world is being tested I know more than most how well Theresa May has dealt with real threats to our citizens” Garry Streeter “This is not the time for a challenge”. Kwasi Kwarteng I am supporting the Prime Minister @theresa_may tonight. The Prime Minister continues to work in the national interest and we all need to support her at this critical time. Chole Smith “Determined, clear & capable at PMQs and right to see through the Brexit deal” Nusrat Ghani I will be supporting @theresa_may tonight. A leadership contest is a distraction and doesn’t change the maths in Parliament. We should be focused on delivering a good deal and leaving the EU in March. Lucy Frazer “Now is not the time for a leadership contest” Helen Whately “We need to move forwards not backwards, look outwards not inwards. I will be voting for Theresa May this evening” Anne-Marie Trevelyan “I will therefore not be discussing which way I will vote” Royston Smith "Now is not the time" - but the vote has been triggered. I have not decided if I will support the PM yet. I am considering all the options. https://t.co/wMz9XUMSTb Robert Syms Having said I was minded to support PM but wanted views of my constituents when I spoke to whip at 9am had phone call from Cabinet minister at 11am to try firm up support ! Desmond Swayne “Stop asking” Michael Fabricant “All these factors will be weighing in my mind when I cast my vote” Andrea Jenkyns I take it that those cabinet ministers defending the PM this morning, will not put their name in to succeed her if there is a leadership election? I hope colleagues will vote the right way this evening. It is time that we had a new leader to save Brexit, and unite our country. Bernard Jenkin The UK changed Prime Minister in May 1940 - in the middle of a monstrously greater national crisis than this. If it has to be done, it has to be done. @conservatives James Duddridge I can not see how the PM can limp on with 48 of her own back benches having no confidence in her. She may go directly following the vote due to losing or in the days after because she has lost authority and a majority to govern. Nadine Dorries If MPs with small majorities vote to keep the Prime Minister tonight, they will be voting to secure her in place for the next 12 months, which means she will very likely lead us into the next General Election. Labour will be hoping and praying that we all wimp out. Others who have said they have written letters of no confidence Andrew Bridgen Philip Davies Anne Marie Morris Laurence Robertson Jacob Rees-Mogg Simon Clarke Steve Baker Henry Smith Maria Caulfield Sheryll Murray Lee Rowley Martin Vickers Peter Bone, Adam Holloway Mark Francois John Whittingdale Ben Bradley Chris Green Zac Goldsmith Sir Bill Cash Philip Hollobone Andrew Lewer Crispin Blunt Owen Paterson