A woman and a boy who were pulled unconscious from a pool north of Brisbane last week have died in hospital. The 31-year-old woman and 11-year-old boy were Chinese nationals and had been fighting for their lives in separate hospitals since on Thursday, 20 December. They were found unconscious at the Grange residential complex pool at Brendale, north of Brisbane. The announcement followed the the death of a New Zealander who drowned at a popular waterfall in the Grampians national park in western Victoria. Victoria police said the 27-year-old had fallen into a rockpool at MacKenzie Falls on Wednesday evening. A witness had tried to rescue the man but was unable to reach him. Police divers recovered the body at 1am on Thursday and officers are preparing a report for the coroner. Four other people have drowned across Australia since Christmas Eve. The body of a diver was retrieved from rocks on Victoria’s Mornington Peninsula on Christmas Day. A father and son drowned at a beach on Phillip Island in Victoria on Christmas Eve. The body of a Korean man was recovered at Lake Conjola on the New South Wales south coast after going missing while snorkelling on Christmas Day. Life Saving Victoria’s general manager, Paul Shannon, urged swimmers to assess their vulnerabilities and swim at patrolled beaches and waterways if they weren’t confident in their ability. Last year a third of drowning deaths in Victoria were associated with alcohol. “We’re asking people to separate their aquatic activity from celebrations,” Shannon told Guardian Australia. “Go and have a great day at the beach and on the lake, creek or river, but don’t booze at that time. “If you’re drinking at lunch time, I wouldn’t think you’d be swimming that day. That would be a safe measure.” Another risk factor for drownings is being unfamiliar with the local water conditions. About a third of those who drowned in Victoria last year were foreigners. Overseas tourists, interstate holidaymakers and new migrants should consult the Beach Safe website to find local knowledge about beach safety and lifesaver patrols, Shannon said. Information on the site is also available in other languages. “Always ask a local and never swim alone,” Shannon said. “At inland waterways if no one else is swimming and it’s not a well-known place, you’re better off going to cool off at the local swimming pool, where there is supervision from the lifeguards.” Parents are also urged to resist being distracted by their smartphones and to keep an eye on children by the water. The warnings come as families and holidaymakers try to cool off as a heatwave scorches much of Australia. The Victorian premier, Daniel Andrews, called for people to take extra care when in and around the water. “Don’t have what should be such a special time for you and your family turn into a tragedy,” he said. “Be aware of the circumstances, don’t drink and swim and, if you are not confident in your swimming ability, then the only place you can swim is at a supervised beach.”