There’s a truism in the world of online media: if you’re not paying for the product, you are the product. The aphorism also holds true in the world of gaming – and particularly in the case of freemium phone apps. You’re probably aware of these apps, if not the terminology: they arrive as free downloads, on the proviso that in order to access all their features you will either pay in time (through watching advertising) or money (via in-app purchases). The freemium genre exploded with the arrival of smartphones, and this year it evolved into what I think might just be its final form: Cat Condo, a game released in March on Android and iOS by Taiwanese developer Zepni. The game is a perfect distillation of the fundamental question posed by these apps: how much is your time worth? (It is also a test of the limits of our affection for cats.) Most freemium games strike a sort of balance: they provide enough gameplay to get you to stump up for their premium features, but also annoy you enough that you don’t just want to stick with the free experience. Cat Condo, by contrast, distils gameplay down to the barest minimum, so much so that it’s only a “game” in the very loosest sense of the word. It works like this: every 10 seconds a drawing of a cat carrier appears on your phone’s screen. When you tap the carrier to open it, a small, white cartoon cat appears. When you have two of these cats, you can drag them together to create a new cat. These new arrivals can themselves be combined, two by two, into further cats: two kittens equal a “sneaky cat”, two sneaky cats equal a Japanese Bobtail, two Japanese Bobtails equal a Somali cat, and so on and on, all by powers of two. Sitting and waiting for a new carrier to appear isn’t much fun, but if you tap your screen repeatedly the arrival of boxes is accelerated. And so you tap. And tap. And tap. (Amusingly, this means that Cat Condo works almost exactly like Cow Clicker, a 2010 satire of Facebook games and their unsophisticated gameplay, which ended up being so popular as to leave its creator distinctly unnerved by the whole thing.) In total, there are 40 special cats to collect, which means that to access the final, god-level cat, you’d need to collect 2^39 of the original small white cats. That’s ... a lot of cats: 549,755,813,888 of them, to be precise. More cats than there are galaxies in the observable universe. Objectively, this is absurd: studies suggest the average person can tap about six times a second, meaning if you did nothing else but tap your screen as fast as you could, forever, it’d take about 2,905 years to reach cat #40. At this point, a sensible person might put down the phone and, I don’t know, read a book or something. Lunatics like me, however, who can’t get enough cats – virtual or otherwise – will be delighted to know there are ways to short-circuit the process. Each cat you collect provides an ongoing source of in-game currency, which can be used to buy higher-level cats. You can also part with real money to upgrade your carriers and to speed up their arrival. But the real key to building your virtual cat collection is watching ads. Want a free gift cat? Watch an ad! Want to upgrade the cat you got from that gift box? Watch another ad! Want to double the coins you earned since last time you opened the game? Watch yet another ad! The genius of Cat Condo is that it’s completely unabashed about the fact it is, for all intents and purposes, a voluntary ad delivery network. And here’s the thing: this only seems to heighten its appeal. It’s not just me who’s obsessed with it: the game got largely positive press coverage on its release, and its Apple App Store rating at the moment sits at 4.8 of a possible 5, on the basis of some 1,500 user reviews. (The latter, as always, should be taken with a grain of salt – but if nothing else, the rating is evidence that a lot of people continue to play this game, regardless of its reliance on ads.) What does this say about us? What does it say about me? There’s been plenty written about exactly why certain types of games are addictive, and Cat Condo certainly ticks some boxes: pattern recognition, imposition of order, a compulsion loop. But it doesn’t have the wildly addictive gameplay and disproportionate feedback of, say, Candy Crush Saga or Angry Birds. There’s nothing flashy about it. In fact, there’s something soothing about its simplicity. In this respect, it’s reminiscent of another peaceful, cat-themed game: Japanese hit Neko Atsume. Even Neko Atsume, though, involves some measure of strategy: choosing what food to buy your virtual cats, working out which toys attract which cat, how to expand your yard, etc. There’s nothing strategic about Cat Condo. You just ... tap. And collect cats. And watch ads. It’s perhaps a measure of how conditioned users have become to trading their time for content that the app can be this transparent about its motives and still appeal to us. Or perhaps we just appreciate the honesty. Whatever the case, there’s something weirdly, maddeningly compelling about Cat Condo. I’ve got as far as cat #22 (spoiler alert, it’s a serval), and if you’ll excuse me, I have some tapping to do. • Tom Hawking is a freelance writer based in Melbourne