The death of former US president George H.W. Bush has prompted one of those mass amnesia events that occur whenever certain public figures die. For Bush’s fellow politicians and much of the Western media, as well as the bloodless Twitter fanboys for whom all politics is a live-action West Wing episode, his death was a chance to engage in some serious legacy-polishing. Even public figures and news outlets that otherwise pretend to act as checks on power suspended their critical faculties to join the love-in. The Atlantic eulogised Bush as “a kinder, gentler Republican,” as if he were Donald Trump’s opposite rather than his ideological ancestor. The New Yorker fawned over his “irreducible niceness,” a quality which may have come as a surprise to the women he allegedly groped. Senator Bernie Sanders Tweeted that Bush “served our country honorably” and will be remembered for his “humble and devoted service to the country [he] loved”. Outside official channels, the verdict on Bush has been very different. Queer Eye’s Jonathan Van Ness posted on Instagram that Bush and former president Ronald Reagan “have the blood of thousands of Americans on their hands” for their indifference to the HIV/AIDS epidemic. This tension arises every time someone like Bush dies. As Britain’s great and good lined up to pay tribute to Margaret Thatcher upon her death in 2013, south Londoners who remembered the misery of life under her government danced in the streets. It’s natural that the political and media establishments would mourn one of their own – their legacies will need some airbrushing, too. Bill Clinton and Barack Obama have been praised for their words in Bush’s memory, as proof that “bipartisanship” is still possible. If Obama were to point out the massacre of fleeing Iraqi soldiers on the Highway of Death in 1991, he would open himself to similar charges over the hundreds of innocent deaths caused by his drone strike program. If Clinton were to reminisce on Bush’s infamously racist Willie Horton attack ad it would call to mind Clinton’s execution of Ricky Ray Rector – a profoundly mentally disabled Black man with an IQ of 71 – to project a tough-on-crime image in the 1992 Democratic primaries. There is a cringing quality, though, to the calls for “civility” and “respect” from people not personally invested in the whitewashing of atrocity. It has nothing to do with the propriety of criticising the recently deceased. Otherwise, the televised character assassinations of unarmed Black people shot dead by police, or the posthumous slandering of innocent people to justify their immolation in drone strikes, would attract more outrage than some mean words directed at a dead president or prime minister. It’s more a question of power, and how different people relate to it. Is the arbitrary exercise of power something to oppose, or something to cuddle up to? Are you more likely to be a beneficiary of the way power is currently exercised in our society, or a victim of it? Is politics a matter of life and death? Or is it a glorified high school debate club, where the rules of the game mean more than the real-world impacts? How you respond to those questions might determine where you stand. A willingness to go into bat for the George Bushes of the world to betrays a reflexive response to side with the strong over the weak; to be on the winning team, regardless of whether it’s in the right or not. With social media, it’s become much easier to declare an affinity with the powerful. Authoritarian leaders like Donald Trump and Recep Tayyip Erdoğan routinely stick their legions of followers on their critics, sometimes with violent results. Predatory capitalists like Elon Musk and Jeff Bezos have thousands of self-appointed defenders ready to terrorise anyone who calls out their depredations. Identifying with those who would happily slaughter us, or let us die rather than see their profits drop, can result in some wonderful displays of logical and moral gymnastics. The peaceful protests of Black NFL players become more upsetting than the arbitrary state violence that compelled them to kneel in the first place. Deliberately setting the entire planet on a course to environmental apocalypse is less offensive than marching against that state of affairs with some signs that have swear words on them. That love of power is a love of death. It is spluttering at “incivility” while shrugging at piles of corpses. Pointing out the cracks in the facades of dead leaders prompts such indignance because it questions the legitimacy of the system in which they built, held and exercised their power. If deference to them and their crimes is not upheld, there’s no reason why we shouldn’t question how they were able to do what they did. When murderers die, the only truly respectful response is to remember their victims. We need only show people like Bush as much respect in death as they showed for us in life. In other words, we owe them nothing. Alex McKinnon is a Walkley-nominated writer and journalist, and Schwartz Media’s morning editor.