Catherine Shelley and Darius Kanuga were walking around Shoreditch taking pictures of graffiti when the two 19-year-olds sparked up a conversation with a group of homeless men – and were inspired to start the Homeless People Project to allow London’s homeless population to tell their stories in their own words. It provides a snapshot of London’s housing crisis, where record numbers of rough sleepers have been recorded in recent months. Charities found 3,103 people sleeping on the capital’s streets between July and September this year – the first time the figure has exceeded 3,000 in a three-month period. The account features people of all ages and experiences: victims of domestic abuse, destitute veterans, people whose relationships have fallen apart, and many casualties of a broken housing system. The project is not-for-profit, and they donate money to everyone they speak to, as well as offering information on local soup kitchens and resources if wanted. But they say much of the focus is on raising awareness of the issue among people their age. Contact the Samaritans for free from any telephone on 116 123. You can call even if you don’t have credit on your mobile, and the number won’t show up on phone bills. Or you can email jo@samaritans.org or go to www.samaritans.org to find details of your nearest branch, where you can talk to one of our trained volunteers face to face. Guardian Cities brings together the best in urban photography on Instagram at @guardiancities. Share your shots with us on Instagram with the hashtag #guardiancities David: “I’ve been homeless for half a year. I used to work in Leeds in a warehouse, but then the agency told me that my contract was temporary and it was finished so I needed to get another job. They only gave me a few days notice. I came to London because my brother lives here, but he doesn’t want to help me, he won’t even talk to me. I have a case worker and she’s helping me to find shelter, but it’s not much help, she waited 5 weeks to tell me that I’m European so there’s not much they can do for me. I’m from Lithuania, so not being English so I can’t get benefits, I can’t get shelter and I can’t get proper help. In my view this is some kind of discrimination of people, just because I’m an immigrant they don’t want to help me. I’m just 20 years old and I don’t have people around me, family or anyone, who can help me.” #thepeopleproject #homeless #homelesspeople #photos #photo #photography #cause #charity #project #interview #story #stories A post shared by  The (Homeless) People Project (@people_project_) on Aug 7, 2017 at 11:06am PDT