Born in Sheffield, Dominic West, 49, studied at Trinity College Dublin. He found fame playing Jimmy McNulty in the HBO series The Wire, from 2002 to 2008. He stars in the Sky Atlantic series The Affair and the new BBC1 adaptation of Les Misérables, which starts on 30 December. His films include Pride, Testament Of Youth and Colette, which opens on 11 January. He is married with five children, and lives between London and Ireland. When were you happiest? Last year. I was with my wife and all my kids in northern California, driving an RV. I remember thinking that life couldn’t possibly get any better. What is your greatest fear? That I would not be able to protect my children. What is your earliest memory?I was very ill when I was three, in this daunting hospital. I can picture the corridors of Thornbury hospital in Sheffield now. Which living person do you most admire, and why?Stacey Dooley. She does incredible documentaries – in one, she took spoiled British kids to the Philippines to work in a factory. It’s exactly what my kids need to watch. What was your most embarrassing moment?About 15 years ago, I did a photoshoot and shat myself. It was appalling. What do you most dislike about your appearance?My short little legs. Who would play you in the film of your life?Me. What is your most unappealing habit?Lateness. What is your favourite word?Lafite. What did you want to be when you were growing up? I wanted to race cars. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?“You must be exhausted.” It’s what people say when they come and see you in a play, and they hate it. Is it better to give or to receive?I’d rather receive. What is your guiltiest pleasure?Disco. To whom would you most like to say sorry, and why?To Mark Smith, a boy we bullied at primary school. I’ve always felt terrible about it. Which words or phrases do you most overuse?“Keep it real.” What has been your biggest disappointment?My singing career. How do you relax?I smoke pot. How often do you have sex?Never enough. What do you consider your greatest achievement?Getting all four kids to school in the morning. What has been your closest brush with the law?As a student, I broke into Club Med in Mexico, stayed three days and was then arrested. I was jailed for a couple of nights. Which living person do you most despise?Anyone in the Trump administration. Tell us a secretI’m gay.