Late-night hosts looked at the White House’s forlorn search for John Kelly’s replacement and the president’s role in felony campaign payments. The host of The Late Show harkened back to his faux 2007 presidential campaign by throwing out his name to replace the departing White House chief of staff, John Kelly. Following reports on Monday that Donald Trump’s pick to fill the role, Nick Ayers (or, according to Colbert, “bro who’s not going to allow those nerds to host a luau on campus while he’s president of Sigma Phi Epsilon”) turned down the role, the host proposed that he get the front-row seat on a sinking ship. “Who would pass up the chance to spend 10 minutes on the deck of the Titanic while it’s sinking?” he joked. Colbert also touched on the latest in special counsel Robert Mueller’s investigation: the sentencing recommendation for former Trump attorney and “regret emoji” Michael Cohen, in which it was revealed that in 2015 he spoke with a Russian offering “political synergy” with the Trump campaign. “‘Political synergy’ is such a nice way to say ‘colluding to fix the election’,” Colbert scoffed. “It’s like describing repeatedly stabbing someone as ‘torso ventilation’.” Seth Meyers also skewered the president’s escalating news crises during a segment on Monday night. “People [are] quitting this White House like it’s a Kmart the day before Black Friday,” he said. But while Colbert jokingly nominated himself for the White House chief of staff, Meyers played Kelly’s departure straight. “I just hope that now that his tenure is over, everyone who hailed him as a paragon of discipline and order when he first took over will look back and admit that they were very wrong,” he said. Meyers also pulled no punches on the findings revealed in prosecutors’ sentencing recommendations for Cohen. “Prosecutors spelled out as clearly as possible in this document that they believe the president of the United States committed a crime by paying hush money to cover up his affairs,” he said. As for the allegations against “Individual-1” Meyers joked that Trump could have it worse. “The only thing worse for Trump than finding out he’s Individual-1 would be if he found out that he’s Individual-2.” Later in the episode, Meyers hosted Representative-elect Jahana Hayes of Connecticut’s fifth congressional district. A former history teacher, Hayes vowed that she was “going to die trying” to address rollbacks in education regulations by the current secretary of education, Betsy DeVos. “I know how it disproportionately impacts children,” she said of removing safeguards against predatory college loan lenders and campus sexual assault. “And it’s ridiculous that we’re even having conversations that begin with not protecting children. It’s not OK.” So who wants to spend every day being insulted by a 72-year-old 5-year-old? https://t.co/e8BvkjBUWZ pic.twitter.com/QCT45AOAHg On The Daily Show, host Trevor Noah focused on Ayers, former chief of staff for Vice-President Mike Pence, who both turned down Trump’s job offer and announced his intention to return home to Georgia. “That’s how bad this job is. President Trump offers this job to some guy, and he responds by quitting the job he already has and fleeing to another state,” joked Noah. Besides Ayers, four other government officials reportedly on Trump’s shortlist all expressed non-interest in the role. “So many American don’t want this job, Trump might have to let a Mexican do it,” said Noah. The Daily Show offered an alternative to the uninterested shortlist and the self-nominated Colbert: self-nominated Daily Show correspondent Michael Kosta. “I got all the qualifications he cares about,” joked Kosta. “I’m white, I’m male, I’m straight. I can poop standing up. I’m the whole package.” Trump can’t find a new chief of staff. F**k it -- let @michaelkosta do it. https://t.co/e8BvkjBUWZ pic.twitter.com/bJCo80FJtj The job is simple, he said. “All you’ve got to do is make sure that Trump doesn’t stick his finger in a socket. It’s pretty much daycare, and most of the kids I babysat didn’t die.”