We all remember that one Christmas present we got as a kid. The one we’d begged our parents for all year, the one we’d looked up 100 times in the Argos catalogue or on Amazon, depending on our age … For many of us, that present was a games machine. Whether it was a ZX Spectrum or a PlayStation 2, the process of unpacking these technological marvels, getting our mums and dads to set them up, then finally playing with the whole family, was magical. We asked game developers, gaming journalists and Guardian readers to share their favourite memories of receiving a games console at Christmas. They didn’t disappoint. “I think it was 1997. We had a normal Christmas, woke up, opened presents, had dinner as always – super nice. Anyway, it got to around bedtime and me and my little brother went to brush our teeth and get ready. All of a sudden, my dad calls to us: ‘Boys!? What’s this?’ He’s shouting from our bedroom. Confused, me and my brother head in and Dad’s like, ‘How did you miss this? Under the bed!’ We look and there’s a big present all wrapped up. We were so confused, but ecstatic. We opened it and … it was a Nintendo N64. So much happiness and shock! We couldn’t believe it. We stayed up an extra hour setting it up and playing Super Mario 64 for the first time with Dad on the bedroom floor. Best Xmas ever.”Liam Edwards, host of the Final Games Podcast I spent hours reading the F1 98 manual and the PlayStation user guide from cover to cover “My mam told me two weeks before Christmas that the shops had sold out of Sega Saturns. I told her it was fine and had to hide being upset (I was nicer back then). On Christmas morning, lo and behold, there was my Saturn and I proceeded to cry my eyes out. The deception still stings, tbh.”Gav Murphy, games video presenter “I was so keen for a Wii in 2006. Absolutely desperate. My parents told me they’d tried to find one but they were sold out. I finished opening all the presents on Christmas Day, then they bring down a little letter with a treasure hunt to find a Wii at the end. It was lovely.”@AtheneAllen “My parents gave me a treasure hunt from Peter Pan when I was four, leading to a Sega Master System. They’d spent all of December playing it while I was asleep so that they could show me how all the games worked.”Sonny Morgan “I remember finding out that I’d gotten Pokémon Gold because I caught my mum playing it in secret in the toilet.”@thelongscream “When we were kids, my brother and I got a secondhand SNES. It had loads of games with it, which my parents wrapped individually and hid around the living room. I think we were still finding them in the summer.”@alittleredpanda “Back in 1996, I was eight and really wanted a PC of my own (I’d been playing with DOS games on my stepdad’s PC for a while). My parents didn’t have much cash at the time, but my stepdad managed to scavenge parts from his office and build a PC from scratch. They covered it in Transformers stickers to make it seem more appealing, but to me it was a pipe dream made real on Christmas morning. Good times!”Sam D’Elia, Bafta “My brother and I were dreaming about getting an N64 with Goldeneye after playing one in Electronic Boutique. On Christmas morning, we were waiting on the stairs (we still do this), talking about what we’d do if we actually got one. Mum and Dad opened the door to the front room and we rushed in, super-excited. We opened up the final box to find an N64 with Goldeneye! We plugged it in to find the game had a bunch of levels unlocked. We thought, ‘Whoah, Mum and Dad played it to unlock them for us, this is amazing!’ Years later, Mum told us they picked it up preowned because cash was tight, but to this day we still say they played it to unlock stuff for us to give us more to do.”@just_Ge0 “One Christmas, my brothers, who are a few years younger than me, got a SNES with Super Mario World and Yoshi’s Island. I was allowed to stay up later than them, so the night my mum bought it, we tried setting it up, just to make sure it worked. We gave it a go, and then suddenly it was two or three hours later. So that was how my mum and I spent the fortnight before Christmas: waiting for the boys to fall asleep, getting out the SNES, quietly hooking it up, playing, and then boxing it up again at my bedtime. Obviously we didn’t ever tell the boys – we were just inexplicably really good at the games once Christmas day finally came.”Holly Gramazio, game developer and event organiser I was so happy and surprised I had an asthma attack “In the early 1980s my folks bought me a secondhand Atari 2600 console – a classic six-switch version with the wood-grain frontage – plus a bag of loose carts. Best gamer Christmas ever. And I still own that bad boy.”James Swallow, author “My dad surprised me with a Mega Drive when I’d asked for a SNES. My disappointment was immediately overcome when I met my first boyfriend, Sonic the Hedgehog.”Hannah Flynn, communications director, Failbetter Games “We were very tight on cash. I was usually gifted consoles at the end of their life cycle when they would drop in price. From age eight to 11, I did little jobs for pocket money and I would save any birthday money, too. Over three years, I’d raised half the amount for a Nintendo DS and my mom met me in the middle. It was my first console and the best Christmas! Later on, I didn’t ask my mom for a PS3 because I knew we couldn’t afford it – but secretly she bought me one for that Christmas and it truly changed my path as a 16-year-old. I now study games in London.”Erin Louise “At nine years old, the one that started it all for me was Donkey Kong Game & Watch. I’d dreamed of it for months. I played it so much that Christmas I made myself ill. I still have it. It still works.”Gareth Clark “The first ever console that was ONLY mine and didn’t have to be shared with my brothers was a black DS Lite (gorgeous little thing!) with Mario Kart DS and Animal Crossing: Wild World. Mum was clueless as to what Animal Crossing even was but it introduced me to my favourite ever series. I would go on to request various Japanese import DS games for birthdays (Electroplankton!!) and a new Phoenix Wright game every Christmas, which I would always rattle through all Xmas Day and Boxing Day while ignoring my lovely family. Good times!”Jen Simpkins, deputy editor, Edge Magazine “As a child, my access to video games was somewhat limited. I could either share my brother’s Amiga or get about an hour a day on the family PC, so I often dreamed about having my own console. My parents said they had already bought all my Christmas presents and the Mega Drive was too expensive, but a few days later, I stumbled across a used Mega Drive in my dad’s bag. He said he got it cheap from a work colleague and wasn’t sure if it’d work; it needed a controller and all the cables. I was doubtful, but by Christmas Day, my parents had got it working, controller and all. I finally had a console of my own ... It was my favourite Christmas!”Lucy Blundell, game developer “I got my original PlayStation for Christmas when we were staying in America with my godmother, so I couldn’t use it until we got home! I spent hours reading the Formula 1 98 manual and the PlayStation user guide from cover to cover in the meantime!”Ken Allsop “One incredible year my parents bought me an Amiga 500. I hadn’t expected it at all (I’d dropped hints about an Atari ST but they were so insanely expensive I knew it was never going to happen). I stayed up until 2am drawing stupid creatures in Deluxe Paint II. It was amazing.”AJ Jeffries “My brother and I had a joint present in 1992 or 93 – it was the first time we’d had one from Santa with both our names on. We opened it to find a Super Nintendo with Super Mario World. I still remember us both dancing in the living room and then the torture of not getting to play it until after dinner.”Jordan Tunnicliff “I was told in the weeks before Christmas that I wasn’t getting a PS1, so I wouldn’t be disappointed. When I found it under the tree on Christmas morning I was so happy and surprised I had an asthma attack.”David Merrett