Writing about last year’s Turner prize, I said Charlotte Prodger was on my fantasy list of artists I thought should be included. And now she has won this year’s prize, from a shortlist focused entirely on artists working in film, video and digital imagery. In the end, I felt that only Prodger or the Forensic Architecture group could possibly win. In very different ways, both interrogate the world and attempt to analyse the differences between objective and subjective views. Both pick subjectivity apart. Forensic Architecture attempts to uncover truth by following the trajectories of bullets and ricochets, mapping contested terrains and sequences of events, both present and historical. Prodger digs deep in a different way, grounding us in the present and the everyday, while unpacking memories and telling other people’s stories as well as her own, in an attempt to locate herself psychologically and intellectually as much as physically. She shows us how mutable and fluid, and dependent on the things around us, our influences and our desires, a sense of self can be. Bridgit, Prodger’s single work in this year’s exhibition, is memorable in all kinds of ways. It takes us from a static view of her own body, stretched before us on a sofa, and shot with her iPhone, to grey Scottish seas, the heaving deck of a ferry, to wet woodlands and standing stones. She takes us from ancient mothers and myth to hospital recovery rooms and the experience of anaesthetic. Watching Bridgit, I somehow felt I was going under too, lulled by the measured pace of the film, and especially by Prodger’s voice. Like her earlier work Stoneymollan Trail, Bridgit connects her own life and thoughts with others. The earlier film included confessional writings of black gay sci-fi novelist Samuel R Delany and American land artist Nancy Holt as well as Prodger’s own diary fragments. Bridgit includes text by musician and standing stone obsessive Julian Cope, as well as her own writings. Nina Simone is in there, too. Prodger uses quotation and reading as a kind of interior landscape of thoughts, ideas and erotics. Always rich and beguiling, her films are a repeated attempt to locate herself. In her Turner prize film, she goes through the historical variants of the name Bridgit and describes instances when she has been perceived to be a boy. Her touch is always light, however complex and difficult her material. All artists have to have a voice, but not all of them are as good as Prodger’s. As distinctive as her imagery, her voice is her immaterial medium, calm, measured, beguiling and confessional.