Good morning briefers. I’m Martin Farrer bringing you the news that you need this Thursday morning. The British government has strongly rejected Donald Trump’s claim that Islamic State has been defeated after he surprised his own administration and western allies by suggesting that US troops would be withdrawing from Syria. Pentagon and White House officials were left scrambling after the president tweeted that US involvement in the years-long civil war was over because Isis – “my only reason” for being there – had been defeated. Administration sources said the Pentagon was trying to persuade Trump to accept a more phased withdrawal, but the UK’s junior defence minister, Tobias Ellwood, contradicted Trump’s assertion about Isis, saying: “I strongly disagree. It has morphed into other forms of extremism and the threat is very much alive.” Our Middle East correspodent, Martin Chulov, says that Trump’s move would be a “remarkable gift” to the group, which could be reborn if US troops are allowed to withdraw. And the danger posed by Islamist extremists was highlighted by Interpol which said that Europe faced a new wave of terror as jihadists radicalised by the conflict in Syria returned to their home countries or were released from jail. Gatwick chaos – Flights in and out of Gatwick airport were suspended last night after air traffic controllers received reports of two drones flying close to the runways. The closure caused widespread disruption during one of the busiest periods of the year. Flights were diverted to airports all over England, including Luton, Stansted and Manchester, as well as Paris and Amsterdam. One traveller said on social media his plane had been diverted to Stansted while they waited for the airport to reopen, while others reported being stuck on tarmac at airports for hours. At 3am, Gatwick said the airport had been reopened. Sexism row – Jeremy Corbyn has found himself at the centre of row over sexism after he was accused of calling Theresa May a “stupid woman” in muttered remarks in the Commons. The Labour leader denies the allegation, claiming that he said “stupid people” as the prime minister and her MPs goaded him pantomime-style for his failure to bring a no-confidence motion against her government. One lip reading expert said she believes Corbyn said “woman” while Hollywood actor Rob Lowe, who is deaf in one ear, tweeted that he agreed. It wasn’t all fun and games for the PM though. She could be forced to backtrack on the £30,000 earnings threshold for overseas workers laid out in her flagship post-Brexit immigration plan. Chancellor Philip Hammond is reportedly leading a backlash to force down the threshold to meet business demands for cheaper labour from abroad. Saved for the nation – A thatched bus shelter, a cattle trough in Hampstead and a railway station closed for the last 60 years are among the latest additions to English Heritage’s register of listed buildings. Otterington station sits on the east coast mainline in North Yorkshire. But most travellers zoom past at 100mph and would be hard pushed to note what English Heritage calls its “sense of modernity and speed”. The newly grade-II listed bus shelter can be found in Osmington, Dorset, while other notable inclusions are a sculpture of Robin Hood in Nottingham and an iron mine in Cumbria. Rape victims’ data breach? – The information commissioner is to investigate the way police trawl the mobile phones and private data of rape victims in search of evidence. The watchdog says the inquiry follows concerns that privacy or data protection regulations are being routinely breached in the criminal justice system. Material gleaned by detectives can include highly sensitive records such as medical, education, psychiatric, social service and family court reports. Flat-pack frenzy – After years of rumours, New Zealand is finally going to get an Ikea store, sparking celebrations in the nation long-starved of the joys of utlitarian furniture and meatballs. The country’s largest media outlets sent out alerts on the news and the story ran as a lead item on many websites. Jonathan Elms, a business studies professor in New Zealand, said the arrival of the Swedish store could be “quite significant”. The Guardian’s editor-in-chief, Katharine Viner, revisits the biggest stories of the year from the Windrush scandal, Cambridge Analytica and Facebook, the Brexit saga and the Trump administration to the World Cup and the royal wedding. Plus: Michael Braithwaite on how he got caught up in the Windrush scandal. If you struggled a bit on the morning commute today, spare a thought for your counterparts in Germany. For so long considered to be the most efficient country in the world, where everything works properly, Germans have turned on the national rail operator Deutsche Bahn as cancellations, delays and strikes make the system a the butt of jokes. DB once boasted that 95% of trains ran on time but at one point this year that figure slumped to a third. It’s also upset the Swiss whose network is being disrupted by German tardiness. “Just make the trains run on time again, that’s all we want,” says one despairing commuter. Amid the angst, observers blame chronic underinvestment which is not limited to the railways but afflicts the country’s potholed roads and crumbling schools. Tottenham have beaten rivals Arsenal 2-0 to book an all-London semi-final in the Carabao Cup against Chelsea after goals from Heung-Min Son and Dele Alli. Meanwhile, Manchester United are hoping the appointment of club legend Ole Gunner Solskjaer as interim manager will help convince stars such as David De Gea, Anthony Martial and Paul Pogba to remain. Premiership rugby clubs will receive a windfall of around £18m each after a private equity firm, CVC Capital Partners, bought a 27% stake in the competition for around £230m. Missy Franklin, the swimmer once touted to match Michael Phelps, has retired from the sport, aged 23, after injuries ravaged the five-time Olympic champion and star of London 2012. And, darts player James Wade has been accused of “thuggish” behavior after a passionate post-match outburst in which he claimed of opponent Seigo Asada, “I wanted to hurt him, I wanted to really hurt him in his face”. Asian stock markets have taken a battering overnight after the US Federal Reserve voted to raise borrowing costs for the fourth time this year, signalling a further squeeze on liquidity around the world. In Tokyo, the Nikkei fell more than 3% to its lowest point for 14 months as the Fed’s pledge to continue with “gradual” rate hikes next year sent shivers through financial markets. The FTSE100 is expected to dive 2% this morning. The still-sickly pound is buying $1.264 and €1.097. Your donations can help bring fairness, justice and dignity to vulnerable British citizens and migrants. Groups like the Windrush Generation have been denied even basic human rights. Our chosen charities are dedicated to giving these people justice and respect. Donate by calling 0151 284 1126, or visit guardian.ctdonate.org. The papers loved the row about Jeremy Corbyn allegedly calling Theresa May “stupid woman”, especially the pantomime dimension. “Panto politics,” said the i. The Telegraph reported: “With only 100 days until Brexit, MPs stage end-of-term pantomime”, and the Guardian has “‘Oh no he didn’t...’ Corbyn denies calling PM a stupid woman”, though its main story is “May will be ‘forced to back down’ over migrant curbs”. The Mail, which engaged the services of a lip-reader to confirm what was said, concludes: “Read our lips Mr Corbyn: You’re a liar”. The Sun has: “You must think we’re all stupid” and the Times sums things up in a straightforward manner: “Corbyn under fire over ‘sexist’ attack on May”. In other news, the Mirror’s headline is “Grey rage”, as Royle Family actor Ricky Tomlinson joins their calls for free TV licences for over-75s to be protected and the FT has “GSK break-up plan set to create £9.8bn joint venture with Pfizer”. The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, you can sign up here. For more news: www.theguardian.com