The seed was sown when my son Jack – then 10 and a massive fan of the books – said: “You do history programmes, Dad, why don’t you make Horrible Histories into TV?” I spent several years trying to persuade my colleagues, that a comedy history show for children was an idea worth backing. CBBC eventually did. Nearly 10 years, seven series and 2,000 sketches later, it’s been a wonderful adventure. The great thing with the books’ success was that the comic, factual, gory, anarchic and anti-authoritarian tone was set. Terry Deary and Martin Brown – the author and illustrator – really understood something about what engages children with the past. No one could tell us, “You can’t say that” – we could point to it already published in a children’s book. Terry told us three key rules for Horrible Histories: it must be horrible, funny and accurate. We’ve no desire to be a tool of Michael Gove [who, as education secretary, praised Horrible Histories], but were happy that he recognised our determination to go beyond well-worn classroom subjects. Whether he’s as enthusiastic about our commitment to the diverse history of Britain, the legacy of Britain’s colonial history, world history and women’s history, I don’t know. It’s good for our audience to know there were black sailors in Nelson’s navy and African Romans guarding Hadrian’s Wall Horrible Histories has a political dimension with a small p. We poke fun at the powerful – kings, queens, generals, presidents. And, in the humble form of a comedy sketch, we try to reflect the latest historical research. So, if we find strong, interesting female role models or new takes on social history, we embrace them. We champion our diverse history. We think it’s good for our audience to know there were black sailors in Nelson’s navy, and African Romans guarding Hadrian’s Wall. We are keen to explore our history in a more complex, interconnected world – as long as we can make it funny. We are blessed in Britain with the ability to laugh at our history: Blackadder and Python cast long, hilarious shadows. We seek influences from everywhere – Channel 4’s First Dates has provided us with our latest parody – the chance to send Henry VIII on six first dates. We have had fun with Christopher Columbus as a teacher getting his geography spectacularly wrong in Historically Educating. Now when I watch the film The Death of Stalin or the musical Hamilton, I see something of kindred spirits in them. My favourite HH songs? Born 2 Rule, sung by the boyband the 4 Georges. The Charles II Rap because it’s a banger and for the look of horror on the faces of the staff of Hampton Court Palace where we filmed it, when Mat Baynton [as Charles II] started rapping standing on the table in the Great Hall. Boudicca is a mini-feminist anthem – a teacher friend plays it before games to inspire her girls’ netball team. And Frozen Freuchen, inspired by Frozen, because the idea that an explorer called Freuchen would chisel his way out of an avalanche using a frozen poo is just too crazy for words. My favourite Stupid Death must be the Greek playwright Aeschylus, who died when an eagle dropped a tortoise on his head. How random is that? It’s great to play the big historical figures such as Florence Nightingale or Mary Queen of Scots, but the ones you end up loving are often the ones you don’t expect. In the Great Fire of London episode, I had a brilliant time playing an old crone who just shouted: “Beware the egg!” I had worked with [Horrible Histories series producer] Caroline Norris on Armstrong and Miller, so Caroline got me in to audition for series four of HH. I became a part of the main troupe from series six. I’d done plenty of stuff at the Edinburgh fringe: I can do lots of silly voices. And, as far as performance goes, it might be a funny fact about the historical figure, or you might spot a quirk or funny voice in someone and decide to use it to create a character. I’ve been able to do some writing on the show in the past two series. We spend the read-throughs in stitches hearing new sketches. The jokes are as much for adults as for kids. There are so many ways to get information. If a sketch where someone gets wee poured over them helps people learn some historical facts and makes them laugh, we’re doing our job right. I really enjoyed doing the Storytellers Little Mix parody. Being in a girlband dressed as Beatrix Potter was a dream I didn’t know I had come true! My favourite stupid death? Richard the Raker, who drowned in his own poo. • Horrible Histories – Horrible Christmas is at Alexandra Palace, London, 13-30 December.