Twentysomethings are getting fed up with what they see as an overload of political correctness, which is bad news. One young woman in my family heard a piece on Newsbeat this morning about the clampdown on advertising that’s sexist or stereotyping, and told me she thinks it’s getting out of hand, and we should all stop getting so overexcited about it. What, though, would she make of an advert for vitamin pills, featuring an attractive woman and the words: “The harder a wife works, the cuter she looks”? Or a Palmolive ad that sang out: “Most men ask is she pretty, not is she clever”? Or the Volkswagen ad that features a photo of a car with a bump, and proclaims: “Sooner or later your wife will drive home one of the best reasons for owning a Volkswagen …” She was, predictably enough, shocked after hearing about them: these adverts date back several decades, and she hadn’t realised such blatant sexism was once the norm. None of them would feature on a billboard today, partly because – as the Advertising Standards Authority’s Ella Smillie said of the new rules announced on Thursday to cut down stereotyping – standards have changed over the years. “We don’t see ourselves as social engineers,” she said – which is a shame, because that’s what the advertising industry is. How sad it is that the work to make the world fairer has to start from lived experience, rather than knowing that the expectations placed on certain sorts of people – often, but certainly not exclusively, women – will limit those people’s lives, preventing them from reaching their potential or following their dreams. Advertising stereotypes affect everyone, but especially and most critically the very young, which is why a Gap ad that featured a boy who was a “little scholar” and a girl who was a “social butterfly” was roundly condemned for sexism – and that was just two years ago. The point is that society is already working within limited expectations that go back to previous generations’ lived experience, so we need the media and especially advertising to challenge us and to show us alternatives. Once the scales fall from your eyes, you wonder how you were ever taken in: I raised two daughters in the 1990s, buying them dresses to wear and dolls’ houses to play with. A few years later along came another daughter who, for some reason, saw right through all these assumptions, and who never cared about being like anyone else. As soon as she was old enough, she literally took me by the hand and walked me across the floor of the clothes shops and the toy shops, to the boys’ clothes, the cars and the train sets. It took a three-year-old to make me realise how taken in I’d been by advertising (and, to be fair, society’s expectations); suddenly, I could see how much more rounded my daughters’ lives would be if they had the entire toy shop, and every rail in the children’s clothes store, at their disposal. That daughter, incidentally, passed her driving test six months after she turned 17, determined to be the first pupil in her year at school to do it (overt competitiveness, of course, is another frowned-on female attribute). Someone suggested that she shouldn’t stress as she’d surely be the first girl in the year to pass; she didn’t even get the point – and she achieved her ambition. Thinking outside the box is the key to so much of what makes life interesting, exciting and stimulating – but advertising is designed to encourage us to think inside the box, to feel we should be like everyone else. Those images in glossy magazines or online might soar us up to the stars, but all too often the message behind them clips our wings – and the last wings we should clip are those of the young. If today’s story encourages more families, like mine, to have a conversation about stereotyping past and present, that’s a major win for the Advertising Standards Authority’s new guidelines; and if they make advertisers think about challenging society’s predicted behaviour patterns, rather than falling into line with them, that’s a rare bit of good news to bring us some early Christmas cheer. • Joanna Moorhead writes for the Guardian, mostly about parenting and family life