‘Homelessness is now so visible on a day-to-day level that that it’s becoming hard to ignore,” says photographer Nigel Shafran. “I just felt the need to address it in some way that wasn’t cliched or exploitative.” To this end, The People On the Street is a photobook about homelessness, but without a single picture of a homeless person in it. Instead, it comprises 52 snapshots of Shafran taken by various homeless people he encountered in London and Paris. Each has a simple caption – Daniel from Leytonstone, Charing Cross, WC2; Sherinne, Old Street, EC1. “The big problem with the subject is how do you photograph a homeless person without it becoming a picture of a victim?” asks Shafran over coffee in Soho, where evidence of just how chronic the problem has become is all around us. “The book is my perhaps peculiar response to that question and I’m sure I’ll get a bit of criticism for it, but there you go. My approach came from a genuine place and I stand by it.” From its polystyrene cover and cheap paper quality to the haphazard compositions, The People on the Street may well be the year’s least aesthetically pleasing photobook, but that, according to Shafran, is not the point. “I wanted above all for the photos to have an immediacy,” he elaborates. “I’m not that interested in good photographs. It’s about communication. It’s an uncomfortable book and so it should be. It’s a book about those not being shown.” It is also strangely compelling, not least because of how uniformly unflattering the portraits of Shafran are. In the majority, he looks ill at ease. In several shots, he seems to be shouting instructions. In others, we catch only a glimpse of his clothing as someone passes in front of him. There is one photograph of a dog with its jaws clamped playfully, one hopes, around Shafran’s arm. In another, taken by Will from Northampton, on Oxford Street in London, he appears to be attempting to climb a tree – “I asked him where he wanted me for the shot and he said, ‘Can you go up to the top of that tree, mate?’” In person, Shafran comes across as shy and self-deprecating. Was it difficult having to interact with vulnerable strangers? “That’s part of it, too, ” he says, shrugging, “I approached people and asked if they would take a photograph of me and these are the results. Apart from one woman, everyone, even the most vulnerable looking, agreed. They seemed to get where I was coming from.” In the 1980s, Shafran was one of a generation of photographers, including Juergen Teller, Elaine Constantine and Corinne Day, whose work appeared in the style magazines of the time, forging a defiantly low-key, gritty aesthetic of the everyday. Shafran was the most everyday of them all – as, for instance, with his series of teenage shoppers in Ilford town centre which ran in i-D. He has continued on his own singular journey ever since. An early, self-published book was simply called Dad’s Office. Another, Compost Pictures, comprises daily photographs of vegetable peelings in a small bowl in the corner of his kitchen. His deceptively simple photographs are oddly seductive. They trace the passing of time though the myriad details of domestic routine. Unsurprisingly, The People On the Street is different in style and tone, though there are four images that one might define as characteristically Shafran. They are photographs of his son’s hand, covered in inky scrawls, suggesting, he says, the taken-for-granted security of home, family, shelter and warmth. They wilfully disrupt the flow of the street portraits, where what comes across most strongly is the doggedly repetitive nature of day-to-day life at its most precarious. So many of these people were already vulnerable before they became homeless – abuse, mental illness. It unnerved me Most of the shots are framed from below, reflecting the ground-level perspective of those pressing the shutter. Many capture central London’s blur of passing people, cars, taxis and buses as well as shopfronts and advertising displays, all of which attest to an everyday world of work, travel and shopping. They represent a life beyond the reach of those who, for whatever reason, have found themselves surviving on the same streets. In their peculiar way, the pictures speak of social exclusion at its most extreme. “So many of these people were already vulnerable before they became homeless,” says Shafran, “When you speak to them, that’s what comes across – the abuse, the mental illness. It unnerved me. I’d like to think that the book might make people think about who took the pictures.” It is also, of course, a book about photography, albeit one that neatly sidesteps the vexed issue of how the privileged represent the “other” – whether homeless people, refugees or those with mental illness. “I suppose I’m questioning good photography, which has traditionally aestheticised suffering and poverty,” says Shafran. “I don’t think that approach is viable any more. What came home to me while doing the project is that our own inner lives aren’t that far from theirs. They aren’t the other, they are us. They are people just like us.” The People on the Street is available from nigelshafran.com. All proceeds go to homelessness charities. There is a launch event at Donlon Books, London, on Wednesday 12 December.