“Four quicks?” Of all the familiar Waca Ground tropes, that this question would always be asked in the lead up to a Test was one of the most consistent. Sure, it may have been well over a decade since the surface was re-laid changing the characteristics considerably, but the reputation for fire and fury lived on. With the move across the Swan River to the clean and pristine multi-purpose stadium by the casino, the consensus was that those days were over. Drop-in pitches, known for their relative tranquility, would take care of that. Except that now, four quicks are precisely what are being discussed ahead of this second Test between Australia and India on Friday. But there is a difference. Usually, it is the home side talking about pulling the lever in order to cause maximum physical and mental duress for their visitors. Instead, it is Virat Kohli who is set to go all-out, and not without justification on a pitch greener than any seen in this country since Australia were bowled out for 80 by South Africa two summers ago in Hobart. That Perth Stadium is becoming only the 10th Test venue used in Australia since 1877 would typically be enough of a talking point. But this week, with curators and administrators alike foreshadowing a pitch that takes us back to the days when the West Australian mythology was born, the 22 yards in the middle are the primary point of fascination. The decision for India is helped by the fact that R Ashwin, their champion spinner, has been ruled out of the Test due to an abdominal strain acquired during his heavy workload in Adelaide. It speaks volumes about the strength of India’s existing attack that from the bench Kohli can choose from Ravindra Jadeja, the world’s No 5 ranked spinner, or Bhuvneshwar Kumar, a seamer at the very peak of his powers. The Indian camp elected not to reveal the news about Ashwin before Kohli addressed the media, but the language the Indian skipper used when discussing the surface suggests that he will hand over a team sheet with four quicks as he did in Johannesburg in February. Then, his side knocked over the hosts for 194 and 177 to record a wonderful 63-run victory with Jasprit Bumrah taking five wickets in the first innings, Mohommed Shami five in the second, with Ishant Sharma and Bhuvneshwar doing the rest. “I was pretty happy to see the pitch the way it is,” Kohli said. “I hope that no more grass is taken off the pitch because that will mean the first three days will be obviously very lively and we as a team are happy with that. The pitch is going to offer significantly more to the bowler than Adelaide did and that’s something we’re very excited about to be honest. I’m just lucky they [India’s fast bowlers] are at their peak when I’m captain.” Instructive of India’s broader mindset was Kohli saying that they are “more excited than nervous” about taking on lively wickets – a far cry from subcontinental touring teams of seasons past who have been routinely blown out of the water when pace and bounce prevailed. “I have played all around the world for 10 years now and I’ve not played on a wicket like Johannesburg,” he continued. “We’re not alien to pitches like these, we’ve played many times on these kind of wickets. It’s nothing new for us. We know what to expect.” After having his own press conference delayed by two hours, Tim Paine confirmed that Australia will go in with the same XI that lost by 31 runs in Adelaide. The home captain also revealed Aaron Finch would remain in the opening position rather than dropping down the order, as coach Justin Langer said would be considered between Tests.