The United States coast guard has suspended the search for a missing British cruise ship entertainer, two days after he reportedly went overboard. In a statement, the coast guard said it had ended the search for 20-year-old Arron Hough at about 2.30pm on Thursday. Crews searched for approximately 83 hours and covered more than 3,700 square miles, the statement added. Commander Christopher Douglas, Coast Guard Sector San Juan chief of response, said: “We’ve been in contact with members of Mr Hough’s family throughout our search efforts and know this is a very difficult and painful time for them. “Suspending a search is one of the most difficult decisions we have to make as first responders, and it is never made lightly.” Royal Caribbean earlier said a member of the entertainment team onboard Harmony of the Seas en route to Philipsburg, St Maarten, did not report to work as scheduled on Tuesday. A spokesman said: “We are saddened to report that after a review of the ship’s closed-circuit camera footage, he was observed entering an area on deck five at around 4am and was not seen again. Local authorities were notified and a ship-wide search for the crew member was conducted. “Our care team is providing support to the family and friends of our colleague, and our thoughts and prayers are with them during this difficult time.” In July, the talent agency Russell Smith Associates tweeted that Hough would be joining the cast of Grease the musical on Harmony of the Seas. The agency said he was a recent graduate of the Urdang Academy, a dance and musical theatre college in London. On Wednesday night, the college tweeted that its staff and students were praying for Hough and his family. We are all praying for @Arronhoughxox and his family. Please keep up your hope and faith that he is found safe and sound as soon as possible.https://t.co/Fpe5Edp2tN The Royal Caribbean website says the Harmony of the Seas was awarded the title of largest cruise ship in the world in 2016, although bigger vessels have since been launched. The ship cost $1bn (£695m), can carry 6,780 guests and 2,100 crew, and took nearly three years to construct.