I’m not entirely sure why I bought a pineapple. I only know that I did and what is more, I do each and every Christmas. Pineapple is far from my favourite fruit. Too sweet, too much trouble to peel and slice. It can dominate in a fruit salad and I have yet to find a cheese for which it does any favours, which is why this year’s specimen has ended up in a cake with walnuts, cardamom and capped with icing. I have much fondness for the pineapple upside-down cake of my youth with its lurid glacé cherries. Believe me when I say it was as exciting as cake got in 1960s Wolverhampton. But it was one of the first cakes I ever baked and we always remember those early successes. The pineapple in today’s cake was a subtle addition, diced small and enriched with ground walnuts from the distinctly depleted fruit bowl. I put passionfruit in the icing, bought for a pavlova (never made) and one of the few fruits whose acidity will stand up to a pineapple. There are a couple of pomegranates remaining whose garnet seeds will end up in a tabbouleh, but the real treasure is a wooden casket of clementines. Their juice and zest are the distilled essence of the season, but that doesn’t quite explain why I bought so many. They stayed for a while in a brass bowl on the hall table, as jolly as a bag of baubles, but they are showing their age. I shall not waste them. They will dazzle again in a New Year water ice, their slightly thin juice fleshed out with a splash of scarlet bitters. A little cheer for the slow days following the feast. A mercifully un-sweet, nutty cake, kept exceptionally moist by the inclusion of fresh pineapple. It would be good for dessert, served with ice cream. Vanilla for preference. The cake will keep in perfect condition for several days, wrapped in foil. Serves 8 For the cake:eggs 4caster sugar 125gwalnut halves 120ggreen cardamom pods 10self-raising flour 100gpineapple 250g ground almonds 65gfresh white breadcrumbs 60g For the icing:icing sugar 120gclementines 3clementine or orange juice about 1½ tbspwalnut halves a handfuldried rose petals 1 tbsp You will need a loaf tin measuring approx. 20 x 9cm across the base and 7-8cm high Set the oven at 180C/gas mark 4. Line the cake tin with baking parchment. Separate the eggs. Put the yolks in the bowl of an electric mixer, add the sugar and whisk until thick and pale. Chop the walnuts. They should be neither be finely chopped or as fine as commercially ground almonds but somewhere in between, rather like fine gravel, so that texture of the finished cake will be chewy. Clementines, once as jolly as a bag of baubles, will dazzle again in a New Year water ice Crack open the cardamom pods, extract the small black seeds then grind to a fine powder and stir into the flour. Finely dice the pineapple. Beat the egg whites until almost stiff. Mix together the walnuts, ground almonds, breadcrumbs and flour. Using a large spoon, fold a third of the dry ingredients into the egg yolk and sugar mixture together with a third of the beaten egg whites, then continue with the rest of the mixture. Lastly fold in the diced pineapple. Transfer the batter to the lined tin – it will come almost to the top – and bake for 60-65 minutes or until a metal skewer inserted into the centre of the cake comes out without any raw cake mixture on it. If it browns too quickly cover loosely with a piece of foil. Remove the cake from the oven and set aside, letting it rest in its tin, for 30 minutes before lifting out by its paper and transferring to a cooling rack. Sieve the icing sugar into a small mixing bowl. Finely grate the zest from the clementines and add to the sugar then stir in the juice, a very little at a time, until you have a pourable icing that will coat the cake and run slowly the sides. Spoon the icing over the surface of the completely cooled cake, letting it trickle down the sides. Roughly chop the walnuts and scatter over the icing with the dried rose petals. The colour of a winter sunset, this deeply refreshing ice will use up a whole pile of clementines and even make a hole in that bottle of Campari. I have also made this with grenadine, and although slightly sweeter, it was good, too. This is not an ice to scoop but rather to fork the surface into coarse crystals, as you might a granita. Makes 1.75 litres, serves 10 clementines 1.75kglemon 1passion fruit 6caster sugar 100gwater 200mlCampari 75ml Finely grate the zest from 6 clementines into a large measuring jug. Halve all of the clementines and the lemon, and squeeze into the jug. You will probably end up with about 750ml of mixed juice. Put the sugar into a saucepan with the water and bring to the boil. Remove from the heat and pour the clementine juice into the pan. Halve the passion fruits, then scrape their seeds and juice into a small sieve or tea strainer balanced over the clementine juice. Using a teaspoon, scrape the seeds against the sides of the sieve until all the juice has been extracted from the pulp and seeds. Pour the Campari into the juice, tasting as you go; transfer to a freezer box, seal with a clip-on lid and freeze till solid. To serve, run the tines of a fork across the surface, ploughing up the ice crystals. Serve in glasses. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater