This is a lively, sweeping curve of a high street, catering for a whole host of tastes and interests. Immortalised in the Dire Straits song Tunnel of Love and once a beloved destination for hen and stag parties, it has come a long way of late. Now it’s packed with independent boutiques and stores such as Hound Dog Music, Lottie McPhees (cupcakes), Whitley Bay Skate Club (skateboards, rollerskates, scooters etc) and Pulp Fiction Future Food. There’s local craft ale in its own microbrewery pub, The Dog & Rabbit, and a bottle shop/tasting room, Nord. Follow the street to the sea and the recently renovated Spanish City – the majestic white dome providing spellbinding views of the rugged north east coastline from its elegant art deco champagne bar.Susan Marshall This small city near The Hague has a lovely mix of artisan bakeries, small fashion and design shops, galleries, cheese shops, the wonderful ethnographic museum shop and vintage stores. It also has superb food and textiles markets on Saturday and Wednesday respectively. Combined with picturesque canals lined with old houses and bustling with crowds of students on bikes – to say nothing of museums, cafes, botanic gardens. Caroline Crook I hate shopping but Lake Geneva is one of the places I can make an exception for. There are plenty of cool knick-knack and novelty stores, as well as those selling useful things like clothes (and chocolates). It may be 1,000 miles from the ocean but with its surf shops, bicycle cafes, record shops and stunt kite shops it has the vibe of southern California. In winter there’s ice-fishing, skiing and helicopter rides off the frozen lake. In summer there’s a beach, ziplining and paddle steamers. For the best breakfast try Joni’s, an authentic 50s diner.Antony Away from the tourist shops full of Putin calendars and endless Russian dolls, New Holland, a group of renovated industrial buildings on a triangular island surrounded by canals, is becoming a cool arts hub. At its heart is The Bottle, a beautifully converted circular naval prison. Inside are all the local designer-led jewellery, beauty and clothes stores you’ve been searching for, and at the centre a courtyard that stages film screenings and concerts. It all feels very off-beat and unique. Outside there’s an ice rink and, in summer, space for gigs and picnics, plus a ship-shaped playground.Alison Mussett On little-known rue Hermel and rue Versigy, north of Montmartre, you can buy everything you need for a dinner party (or a picnic or a suitcase full of edible souvenirs) within a stretch of 50 metres, without setting foot in a supermarket. Organic fruit and veg, freshly baked breads and patisseries from Boulangerie du Square (50 rue Hermel) and pâtés, hams and assorted delicacies from Les Fines Gueles. A dizzying array of cheeses, from great wheels of tomme to camemberts so ripe that they’ll run off your plate, can be found at the Fromagerie du Bas-Montmartre. Top off your basket with a bottle of wine from Rouge aux Levres or craft beer from Bièrothèque Belge for a stylish, locally sourced spread.Steph Fifteen years ago a derelict Victorian whiskey distillery just east of downtown Toronto was reborn as 10 pedestrianised streets worth of retailers and restaurants. The developer’s insisted on not leasing to chains, so now all the businesses are independents: from clothing and giftware shops to jewellers and candlemakers selling direct from their workshops to passionate collectors of sporting goods and craft beer who have turned their hobby into a business. The food shouldn’t be overlooked either – 18 months on from visiting, I still think about the sandwich I bought at Brick Street Bakery.Paul Jones The narrow, graffiti-flecked streets of this district just outside Hamburg old town offer a kaleidoscope of indie shops for all tastes. There’s enough vinyl here to make your head spin. Headbangers should check out Fischkopp-Plattenshop’s ear-shredding sounds, while more mellow notes can be found in Groove City. Fashion boutiques ranging from grungy to high-end line the main drag, Marktstrasse. Sift obscure vintage items at Hot Dogs or splurge on cutting-edge, designer pieces at Sium. Refuel at Happenpappen, an airy vegan cafe serving sumptuous food, such as rice, chickpea and coconut patties with wasabi mayo.Patrick Strode Once a rundown Hells Angels haunt, today Jægersborggade street, in Nørrebro, is filled with independent coffee shops, restaurants and boutique shops. From the Coffee Collective  at its northern end, to fresh deli La Dispensa at the other end, there’s plenty of shops amongst the beautiful cobbles and wonderful tall buildings. A few of my favourites to browse are the homemade art treats at Vanishing Point, modern colourful prints at CMYK and the weird and wonderful mushrooms growing at Beyond Coffee in the discarded coffee grounds.Dave Wood In the heart of St Leonards is this gem of wonderful independently run shops providing everything from ukelele lessons to fresh fish, meat and vegetables. All of which pride themselves on being local and sustainable. My favourite is Leela: it sells really unusual homeware, gifts, fashion and other stuff. You can tell it has taken hours to carefully source all of the stock, and it is all fairtrade and sustainable.Ashlie Hamlyn Lerwick’s historic town centre is a thriving hub of eclectic small shops and local entrepreneurs. Long-established businesses rub shoulders with the new and innovative. Wander around long enough and you’ll catch sight of seals and orcas, too. There are lovely cafes (Peerie Shop Cafe), shops (Jamiesons of Shetland knitting supplies, the Camera Centre, Ninian for designer gifts, homewares and accessories), areas to walk and views of sea, country and architecture.Emma