It’s coming home, it’s co-ming … politics is coming home. The seizure of initiative by parliament on Tuesday night is a repatriation of power worth cheering. For two years Brexit has been a performance of bluster and bluff in public. Theresa May hammered out the terms in private and in Brussels. Now the House of Commons, the home ground of British democracy, is taking back control. May’s fragile administration suffered three defeats, including a contempt motion, extracting the attorney general’s legal advice on the deal from between gritted ministerial teeth. That was the most historically resonant of Tuesday’s parliamentary dramas, but the more significant legislative event might prove to be the vote that followed. Dominic Grieve’s amendment sounded technical, but in the Commons, procedural obscurity can be a lethal weapon. Grieve, a former attorney general, now a leading pro-European Tory backbencher, won a concession asserting that – and bear with me here – the provisions of standing order 24B should not apply to any motion pursuant to section 13 of the 2018 European Union (withdrawal) Act. What the hell does that mean? In short, it beefs up the power of the Commons in the event that May’s deal is beaten and she or her replacement can’t get another deal through parliament. It reduces (but does not eliminate) the risk of Britain leaping off the Brexit cliff without a parachute. Previously, in an imminent no-deal scenario, the prime minister would have been obliged only to inform the House of her intentions. Grieve’s amendment, backed by Labour, opens that statement to amendment. In theory, the Commons could put on record its call for a much softer Brexit, or a referendum, or a request in Brussels to extend the article 50 negotiating window, or even a retraction of the article 50 notification. None of those things would have the force of law, so some (presumably deranged) prime minister could ignore them and run at the cliff edge anyway. But the balance of control has shifted. It has been said many times that there is no majority in parliament for an insane course of action, but no one has been able to say how a majority for sanity might constitutionally assert itself. Now a coalition of the reasonable is starting to take shape. The list of Tories who voted in favour of Grieve’s amendment includes former ministers and MPs who have tried to be loyal to May, or at least not be wantonly destructive in their divergence from her approach. One co-sponsor was Nick Boles, who is touting a back-up plan to steer the UK into Norwegian-style arrangements with the EU. Another is Oliver Letwin, once a fixture of David Cameron’s cabinets, who declared that he would vote for May’s deal next week and was acting only to provide insurance against no deal, which would be “a catastrophe for our country”. Those Tories who think the opposite, that no deal is just the bracing tonic that Britain needs to snap it out of a Europhiliac stupor, have been relatively quiet. Boris Johnson, who has found himself, largely by accident, at the head of the posse of unicorn-rustling ultra-Brexit cowboys, did not get a good reception. His speech was a rambling medley of Vote Leave myth-making and Daily Telegraph op-eds while parliament’s ears were tuned for historical gravity – an idiom Johnson only does as cod Churchillian pastiche. Conservative party members might still like that tune and the Jacob Rees-Mogg B-side, but the parliamentary party is tired of it. The failure of Rees-Mogg’s European Research Group to muster enough letters to trigger a no-confidence vote in the Tory leader has damaged that faction’s credibility. For months they were boasting about rebel numbers and it turns out they can’t count. They had a shot and they threw it away. They might get another one, but the pressure of the clock – the need to confront, in responsible terms, the consequences of what they are really proposing – works against them. Rees-Mogg’s smooth style has soured under scrutiny. No one can spray that amount of venom without eventually looking like a snake, and Conservative MPs are seeing the Slytherin side to the man in the Harry Potter-style glasses. It is too early to call the peak of ERG no-deal bravado, but it feels as if a fever is breaking. There is a wide spectrum of opinion in the Conservative party, and much of it has been unrepresented in the polarisation between Brexit extremists and die-hard remainers. There is a mulch of reluctant pro-EU Eurosceptics and undogmatic, get-on-with-it leavers in the middle who have lacked leadership. Crucially, also, there is the Tory tradition of dogged pragmatism that cares about stability, security and upholding the continuity of institutions. That school is instinctively suspicious of the ideological puritanism embodied by Rees-Mogg and friends. Mainstream Tory Euroscepticism was always rooted in the idea of parliamentary sovereignty and so not necessarily attracted by the quasi-Leninist revolutionary Brexitism that is being drummed up on the hard right. It isn’t yet clear how the balance will shift in the coming weeks, nor what that means for the prime minister and her deal. But it is surely significant that now, at the 11th hour, the Conservative party is finally becoming conservative again. • Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnist