We were all surprised when (ye olde spoiler alert) Dan Humphrey turned out to be Gossip Girl at the end of the show in 2012. So maybe it is less surprising that in 2018 he’s gone full-on stalker. In You (Netflix, from Boxing Day), a glossy new drama, Penn Badgley plays bookshop manager Joe. When hot yoga instructor, poet and basic bitch Beck (Elizabeth Lail) comes into his shop and buys Paula Fox’s Desperate Characters, he does what any logical person would do: Googles her. Then he takes it way too far and mines her social media for information about her life, goes to her house, watches her get changed through the window and breaks in while she’s out. Look, we see why he took it IRL. Breaking and entering is bad, but have you ever felt the cold sweat of panic when you’re trawling someone’s social media and you like a Facebook status from 2009? The fun part is that instead of giving the same lecture your dad loves to wheel out (the internet is bad, everyone shares too much online), the message here is actually: “All people are awful, trust no one.” A big 2018 mood. Also, it is telling us to look up from our phones, because Beck is incredibly unobservant and has no idea she is being stalked even though Joe is standing very, very close to her, all the time. You know how annoying it was when Clark Kent put on glasses and no one recognised him as Superman? Joe puts on a baseball cap and, suddenly, Beck can’t see him in bars, on her uni campus and once, bizarrely, masturbating outside her window. Beck’s boyfriend Benji (Lou Taylor Pucci, a bargain-basement Charlie Hunnam) is supposedly the “bad” one. He uses her for sex, has a small heroin habit and runs an “artisanal soda company”. But really, it’s “nice guy” Joe who should be Beck’s red flags. He doesn’t use social media, he claims, because he’s “old fashioned”. He listens to vinyl. He thinks Beck needs “saving” from her bad decisions. He is obsessed with “protecting” her; basically Single White Female for mansplainers. He hates people who buy celebrity autobiographies and watch reality TV. He is, in short, the unbearable human Dan Humphrey would be today. Joe thinks he is cleverer than everyone because he loves books. But the show doesn’t credit the audience with the same intelligence. When Joe reads Beck’s group text with her obnoxious friends, it’s in Japanese. He doesn’t understand the language of friendship, see? Joe lends Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein to his young neighbour, who says he likes the book “because you get to see things from the monster’s point of view so you know he’s not all bad” – just like Joe, who narrates the story. But when it isn’t hitting the viewer over the head with its subtext, You has some genuinely tense moments, including one that will make you afraid of your own shower. It is creepy, and weirdly relatable. Who hasn’t accidentally Instagrammed their address and had to delete it, or had a 2am booze-fuelled look at their new boyfriend’s ex’s holiday photos from six years ago? Lock your doors, lock your Instagram account, never date someone too pretentious for social media and trust nobody. XOXO, Gossip Girl.