In theory, McMafia had lots going for it. A captive January audience. A topical edge involving dubiously financed Russians in London. James Norton’s glowering charisma. Plenty of viewers bent over backwards to give it a chance. But, dear God, it was dull. The sterility of these lives was probably partly the point, but it didn’t lend itself to empathy. The storytelling was unforgivably sluggish. Watching it crawl towards its resolution was like watching a puddle evaporate. Taking rich, handsome, ruthless gangsters and surgically removing every ounce of their picaresque charisma might be a worthy pursuit, but it’s not much to look at. PH Was anything in 2018 as gruellingly portentous as Westworld? Every single second of this damp fart of a season dripped with unearned seriousness. The dialogue was delivered exclusively in a concussed monotone. The action was suffocated by six inches of intellectual detachment. Any trace of characterisation was bulldozed in favour of a witless cat-and-mouse game with the most insufferable Reddit percentile. Midway through this year’s season, I began to hate Westworld for existing. You are supposed to be a show about crazy robot cowboys, for crying out loud. Lighten up a little. SH Maisel’s second series swapped storyline for absurd set pieces in Paris and the Catskills that did nothing but show off Amazon Prime’s Emmy-abetted budget. Its fatal flaw? Empathetic characters such as Susie – battling not only mobsters but also, potentially, life as a queer woman in 50s New York – are treated like cyphers. The lead – brittle, babbling, blithe Midge – is framed as a saint, but somehow manages to steamroller everyone else. Hence, perhaps, the sickly surrounds: they are the only thing that can withstand the grating charm offensive. And yet, like a trip to Disneyland or a mouthful of Quality Street strawberry creams, it’s seductively sugary. LS The Romanoffs was Matthew Weiner’s first creation since Mad Men. In theory, it contained all the elements that might replicate the latter’s greatness. It had the kind of luxurious movie aesthetic that streaming services love to pay for; it was an anthology series at a time when anthologies are thriving; and its cast, from Isabelle Huppert to Aaron Eckhart, exuded elegance. But it took those ingredients and cooked up a bloated series too heavy with self-importance to be worth the feature-length running time. RN Understandably, there was much fanfare after the announcement that Sacha Baron Cohen was returning to TV to take aim at the US political class. “The most dangerous show in the history of television” was how Showtime billed Who is America?, while we wondered whether it would be “the TV event of the year”. In the end, both assessments proved optimistic for a series that acted as a limp rehash of the sort of prankery Baron Cohen has unleashed on public figures for much of the past two decades. A much-trailed segment with Sarah Palin failed to materialise in the show itself, but there were a couple of high points – a segment in which Republican lawmakers were coaxed into calling for the arming of kindergarten kids, and the resignation of the Georgian politician Jason Spencer after he screamed racial epithets while baring his backside on the show. For the most part, though, this was a confirmation that much of our current politics is just too farcical to satirise. GM Everything was in place until it all fell apart. There was the traumatised soldier-cum-security-officer conflicted by his appointment guarding a government minister who represents all he hates. The irresistible sexual attraction between them. The political wheels-within-wheels set in motion. A bit of terrorist skulduggery, then an unexpected bomb at the end of episode three, blowing up one of the leads – and the whole thing wide open. However, it didn’t coalesce into something compelling that made sense or used all that had gone before. National goodwill kept it going, but, as far as Jed Mercurio dramas are concerned, it went out with a whimper. LM It looked so promising. Sean Penn taking on his first TV role, all about a mission to Mars, made by the same studio that brought the world The Handmaid’s Tale. But what we got was a glacially paced drama featuring Penn either jogging, sweating or hugging an almost unfathomable amount of people. It started with a huge bang, but failed to carry any propulsion and disappeared without trace, another victim of the endless stream of great TV. LB After the removal of Kevin Spacey while filming for the final season was underway, Netflix scrambled to concoct a satisfying conclusion to the series. The plot threads were kept but retooled, while – in a fitting and welcome move – Robin Wright’s Claire Underwood became president. An increase in her screen time was a silver lining (she was always the better actor and the more interesting character), but the rush to patchwork together the rest of the season led to a messy, cheap-looking swansong. The show’s far-fetched soapy theatrics took centre stage, but without the fun that would suggest. In the dismal final episode, a garbled race to the finish line made us feel like losers for sticking with it so long. BL If only Margaret Atwood had written her sequel sooner, perhaps we wouldn’t be in this mess. Having followed the feminist dystopia of our time faithfully in the outstanding first season, Offred and the red cloaks found themselves cast adrift in a rudderless Gilead created by a misguided writers’ room. The second season started well, with a sickeningly tense mock-execution scene. But as the season wore on it became ever more gruelling. It reached its nadir in the episode that showed Offred giving birth, alone, in a snowstorm, in real time. Then the final scene came along and made me want to hang it from the Wall. At least next year we get to read a do-over in novel form. KA Which clangers did our critics miss? Let us know in the comments below.