It was a night of two dead presidents, one missing president and one singing president. The Kennedy Center Honors, America’s most prestigious celebration of the arts, are named after the late John F Kennedy. This year’s ceremony began with a standing ovation for George H W Bush, who died on Friday aged 94. For the second year running, Donald Trump was missing from the audience. But the show included a musical number from Christopher Jackson reprising his role as George Washington from the blockbuster show Hamilton, which received an unprecedented special award. The honorees for lifetime achievement in the arts were singer and actor Cher, composer Philip Glass, country singer Reba McEntire and jazz saxophonist Wayne Shorter. The night started with a tribute to Bush’s memory at the request of host Gloria Estefan. “I think it’s appropriate to recognise the passing of a wonderful man who dedicated his life to service and who graciously attended this event many times during his administration, laughing, applauding, singing along and even shedding a tear from right up there in the presidential box,” she said. Estefan recalled being invited to the White House and how Bush “literally spent 45 minutes patiently talking to my eight-year-old son” about how the government worked. A day later, Estefan’s tour bus was in a serious accident that nearly left her paralysed. Bush called her in hospital, she recalled. “He gave me words of comfort and solace and strength … He was a gentle and kind man who my family and I will never forget.” David Rubenstein, the chairman of the board of the Kennedy Center, said he often thinks about the values Bush brought to public service. “I never met a more decent man, a more philanthropic person, a more genuine person,” he told the audience. Bush attended the Kennedy Center Honors every year during his presidency except 1989, when he was at a summit in Malta, and returned when his son, George W Bush, was in the White House. Trump is the first president to skip them twice. He and Melania Trump returned to Washington from the G20 summit in Argentina early on Sunday morning. The president’s absence was thrown into stark relief by the presence of the Democratic House leader, Nancy Pelosi, and the chief justice, John Roberts, as well as cabinet members Elaine Chao, Betsy DeVos and Steven Mnuchin and senators Jeff Flake, Amy Klobuchar, Rand Paul and Mark Warner. Christine Lagarde, managing director of the IMF, Susan Rice, former national security adviser, and Kim Darroch, the British ambassador to the US, were also in attendance. An appearance by Trump could have been somewhat awkward on a night that lauded Hamilton, a musical about the first treasury secretary, Alexander Hamilton, that celebrates diversity with a multiracial cast playing America’s founding fathers. In 2016 Michelle Obama described it as “the best piece of art in any form that I have ever seen in my life”. Later that year, the cast made a direct plea from the stage to vice president-elect Mike Pence to “work on behalf of all of us”; Trump used Twitter to demand an apology and described Hamilton as “highly overrated”. Writer and actor Lin-Manuel Miranda, director Thomas Kail, choreographer Andy Blankenbuehler and music director Alex Lacamoire were honoured as “trailblazing creators of a transformative work that defies category” – a first in the history of the Kennedy Center Honors, which began in 1978. A special medallion was created to recognise the four co-creators yet differentiate them from those acknowledged for lifetime achievement. Deborah Rutter, the president of the Kennedy Center, explained: “Most of the time you wait 30 years to acknowledge an artist when they have achieved something. We should really note that this is a pivotal moment in the world of our performing arts and, rather than wait, we should do it now.” Asked by reporters how he got the organisers to create a special category for Hamilton, nearly four years after its off-Broadway debut, Miranda replied: “One couplet at a time, and then finding the smartest people around me to help make a great musical. What’s great about this award is it’s a group award and it’s a celebration of collaboration, which is the only way musicals get made. There’s no lone genius behind any musical, no matter what anyone tells you.” Hamilton has been garlanded with numerous awards but Jackson, who performed the song One Last Time with Miranda on Sunday night, insisted that the latest one is special. “I don’t think there’s any built-in cynicism here. This is our nation’s highest artistic award and I think there’s something really beautiful about that, even in this time where other things seem more important, other things are more distracting in the world. “I think that to pause and say hey, these guys are doing something really special, this show is doing something really special, that’s profound. It’s just something to feel good about, if nothing else.” Star turns on the night included Kelly Clarkson, who performed McEntire’s hit song Fancy, Paul Simon, who paid tribute to Glass, opera singer Renée Fleming, who honoured Shorter, and Whoopi Goldberg, who wore a black flowing sparkly gown and informed Cher: “I went into your closet.” That got possibly the biggest laugh of the night. When Cyndi Lauper appeared on stage, Cher yelled from her seat: “You told me you were going to Los Angeles!” Lauper shrugged and replied: “I lied.” Lauper, a longtime friend of Cher’s, performed If I Could Turn Back Time. Cher and Trump were born less than a month apart in 1946. Speaking to reporters during a celebration at the state department on Saturday, the pop queen dropped a big hint that had the president been there, she would not. “Oh, God, I couldn’t,” she said. “Someone would have to give me the little honour in the bathroom.”