On a wet and windy day outside Manchester United’s Old Trafford, an air of despondency met the news that José Mourinho had been sacked after the club’s worst start to a season in nearly 30 years. Most fans said they expected him to get the bullet but many expressed surprise at the timing. “He had to go. I think it was inevitable but not now,” said Neil Crawford, 72, out shopping at the club’s gargantuan megastore with his wife Liz, 77. “They may as well have waited until May as this season is more or less over for United.” A season-ticket holder since the 1992-93 season, when the club won the inaugural Premier League title under Alex Ferguson, Crawford can only laugh when asked how the recent brand of football compares to United’s glory years. “It doesn’t,” he said. “We’ve been spoiled. Fans should realise we’re not going to keep that up forever. It’s disappointing particularly with [Manchester] City and Liverpool doing well – it makes it worse.” While United fans have endured a season to forget, reminders of their best years are all around at Old Trafford. Tourists from east Asia posed for selfies beneath a statue of United’s “Holy Trinity” of Sir Bobby Charlton, George Best and Denis Law, as news of Mourinho’s dismissal emerged from the club’s Carrington training base five miles away. Not all fans welcomed the news. “I’m not happy,” said James Cullen, 41, sheltering from the rain beneath the stadium’s famous east stand, better known as the scoreboard end. “Look at all the trophies he’s won – he’s a serial winner. It’s only because of City’s points totals that he doesn’t get the credit.” Cullen blamed the players and the United hierarchy of the Glazers, the club’s owners, and the executive vice-chairman, Ed Woodward, for the current malaise. “Questions need to be asked higher up. We need a more forward-thinking structure and we need a sporting director,” he said. “Fergie’s success was amazing – the impossible journey – but we’re not going to get back to that by chopping and changing managers.” Another fan, Alan Raymond, 43, agreed. Mourinho did not get the club’s proper backing in the summer, he said, and it is time United appoint an all-powerful sporting director to oversee the club’s future on the pitch. “[David] Moyes wasn’t supported and Mourinho wasn’t supported. It’s not like watching United anymore,” said Raymond, as his 10-year-old son, Harry, held an old-style brown leather football and framed picture of Old Trafford purchased from the club shop. “I thought Mourinho would have gone a long time ago,” he sighed. “He had lost the dressing room and he lost the plot, bless him.” Wayne Bailey, 33, a United season-ticket holder, had set off at 5.30am from his home in Portsmouth to meet former players at a special event at Old Trafford on Tuesday. He heard the news in the car on the way north. “I was shocked but not shocked,” he said. “It’s the Mourinho syndrome – three years and it all starts to go wrong. When we signed him we knew his style; we knew he would fall out with players. The next manager they’ve got to make the right decision.” Television crews from the Netherlands, Germany, Portugal and elsewhere on the continent swarmed to Old Trafford to report on Mourinho’s fate. More cameras greeted the Portuguese as he arrived in a chauffeur-driven car at Salford’s high-end Lowry hotel, where he has preferred to live in an £800-a-night riverside suite – one estimate claimed the bill was more than £500,000 for his stay – instead of putting down roots in the rarefied multi-millionaire enclaves of Cheshire. Only a handful of United fans were there to wave him off.