In the crowded world of sporting fame, to be known universally by a single name lifts an athlete closer to the stars. Few have flown so far into the stratosphere – and plummeted with such Icarusian suddenness – as Tiger. History suggests his flight is far from over. The wax that bound the wings of Eldrick Tont “Tiger” Woods was never going to hold under the heat of daily scrutiny, such were his built-in frailties, and so it was that he fell to earth in 2009, chased from his secluded house by his wife wielding his golf clubs, the implements that made him famous. He confessed to his infidelities, repented and survived. But Tiger’s spirit creaked as worryingly as his body and he fell again, pulled over by cops in the small hours in Jupiter, Florida, looking like a zombified refugee from a rehab hostel, in 2017. His meds had properly kicked in. His dignity was shredded once more. Surely, we thought, he cannot rise again. Against all odds, and even his own expectations, he has. In 2018, his comeback season after four back surgeries in two years, he almost won the Open at Carnoustie. He did win the PGA Tour Championship in Atlanta, Georgia, his first success in five years. He had won the first of his 14 majors – the Masters – in his first full year as a pro, and expected to finish first every time he played. He seriously did. “Second sucks,” he said in an early interview. Yet for most of his life, Tiger has remained an enigma, hiding in full view. He allowed only a few people close to him. Those thus privileged were mostly bound by non-disclosure agreements – which is why the American sports writers Jeff Benedict and Armen Keteyian deserve our appreciation and plaudits for their mighty work, Tiger Woods (Simon & Schuster, £20). Certainly, they could have called it “Just Tiger”. But, as with their exhaustive research, they left nothing to chance. They cut through a forest of false trails and road blocks, gathering together testimonies on and off the record from scores of people to provide as comprehensive a view of Tiger as anyone could manage. The subject did not take part in the exercise but this extract is worth repeating: “‘He constantly put me down,’ Tiger recalled. ‘Then, when I really got mad, he would say, I know you want to slam down that club, but don’t you dare do it! Don’t you dare! He would push me to the breaking point, then back off. Push me to the breaking point, then back off. It was wild.’ “We may never know how Tiger really felt at age 11, 12, or 13 as he was repeatedly called those demeaning names by his father. But in 2017, at 41, Woods said this about the experience: ‘I needed him to push me to the edge of not wanting to continue, because I had to learn to block out any feeling of insecurity. We had a code word that I could use whenever I thought I couldn’t take it anymore. But I never used the code word. I was never going to give in to what he was doing. I was a quitter if I used the code word. I don’t quit.’ The code word that Tiger never uttered was … enough.” He has proved in coming back to wide acclaim and huge audiences that golf still can’t get enough of Tiger. When Doddie Weir was diagnosed with motor neurone disease, the former Scotland and Lions second-row met it head on, as if it were a ball-carrier needing to be brought down or a defender to be dumped out of the way. My Name’5 Doddie (Black & White, £20) has not a shred of self-pity, an account of a life that continues to be lived to the full. Another Scot, Ian Robertson, turned off his microphone for the final time last month after a broadcasting career spanning nearly 50 years. Capped as a centre, he has spent his life in the sport as Rugby: Talking a Good Game (Hodder & Stoughton, £20) recounts. Eddie Jones has done some talking in his coaching career and there will be a few more words from England’s head coach before next year’s World Cup. Eddie Jones: Rugby Maverick by Mike Colman (Allen & Unwin, £18.99), is a biography written by an Australian journalist that is more revealing about Jones’s time down under than his time with the team that defeated his Wallabies in the 2003 World Cup final. The publication of The Jersey: The Secrets Behind the World’s Most Successful Team by Peter Bills (Macmillan, £25) may not have been timely with the All Blacks unusually suffering two defeats this year, but they remain beyond compare in sport. Bills interviewed players and administrators past and present to find the answer to the question of how a country of less than five million people has set the pace and trend in rugby for so long. I know you’re not supposed to judge a book by its cover, but I fell in love with Berlin 1936: Sixteen Days in August (Vintage, £16.99) the moment I picked it up. The good news is the stylish image on the jacket – a female diver suspended in the air, mid-spin – is indeed matched by the elegance of its prose. Oliver Hilmes’s recreation of the 16 summer days of Hitler’s Olympics is a deeply researched and thrillingly told narrative, featuring a host of characters from the famous (Jesse Owens, Joseph Goebbels) and unexpected (Thomas Wolfe, Richard Strauss) to the everyday Berliners whose lives were being upended by the Third Reich. Nothing about this story is quite as it seems, which is appropriate for its subject matter, a shameful sham of international diplomacy that can only give us pause in today’s political climate. The writing is so pacy and compelling you’ll have finished it long before New Year. And if Father Christmas is reading this, I’d be pretty happy to see Nathan Leamon’s cricket novel, The Test (Little, Brown, £16.99), or Barney Ronay’s World Cup diary, How Football (Nearly) Came Home (HarperCollins £12.99), in my stocking. Both would, I suspect, provide perfect post-turkey entertainment. Jaded cynicism is the default setting of all football supporters over the age of 17. Everything was always that little bit better in the past: moaning, riffing and ranting about this is all part of the fun. Of course, in the wrong hands, this sort of thing could seem whiny and reactionary, but Daniel Gray’s Black Boots And Football Pinks (Bloomsbury, £9.99) is a heartwarming, occasionally emotional and often very funny meander down Memory Lane (via flattened Highfield Road, fallen Ayresome Park, razed Maine Road and the dearly departed Vetch Field). A book of considerable charm, worth the price of admission for the phrase “hair wax applied methodically and in a style that considered Charles Buchan’s Football Weekly a mirror” alone. For those who prefer their retro kicks in picture form, there’s the very pretty The Beautiful Badge (Pitch Publishing, £25) by Martyn Routledge and Elspeth Wills, which plots the evolution of the club crest in the coffee-table fashion. Yes logo! Pure design porn. Meanwhile my Observer and Guardian colleague Rob Smyth’s Kaiser! The Greatest Footballer Never To Play Football (Vintage, £9.99) is a different sort of romp, reporting the farcical antics of a mulleted chancer from Brazil who was one part Walter Mitty, one part Maurice Flitcroft, three parts Ali Dia. Hilarious. A World Cup year is a chance to live in the there and then as well as the here and now. My favourite football book of 2018 was Simon Hart’s World In Motion (deCoubertin Books, £16.99), the last word on the most divisive World Cup of all: Italia 90. Though the football often stank, no World Cup has produced such operatic drama or had quite such a cast of characters. Hart tracks down all the main players to hear the tragic, hilarious or bizarre tales behind our memories – and to demonstrate why no World Cup has had such a profound impact. David Wardale’s Wasting Your Wildcard: The Method and Madness of Fantasy Football (Vintage, £14.99) is a beautifully observed and very funny look at a game that turns intelligent people into morons. Ian Herbert’s Quiet Genius, (Bloomsbury, £9.99) released in paperback this year, is an appropriately unassuming and substantial tribute to its subject, Liverpool’s all-conquering manager Bob Paisley, while Two Tribes (Transworld, £18.99) by Tony Evans is a coruscating snapshot of football and life on Merseyside during Thatcher’s Britain. It’s probably heresy to admit a fondness for autobiographies on these pages, but I happily breezed through those by Peter Crouch, Kieron Dyer and Kevin Keegan. The best I read was Ben Thornley’s Tackled (Pitch Publishing, £19.99), the bittersweet tale of the Manchester United starlet whose career was wrecked by a hideous tackle in 1994. Finally the story of Carlos Kaiser, who faked a career as a Brazilian football superstar for 26 years, is told in the film Kaiser: The Greatest Footballer Never to Play Football. Full disclosure: I wrote a book to accompany the film. But my objective self would recommend this staggering documentary about a man whose entire life has been based on a true story. Those old enough will welcome a wonderful insight into the cricketing voices of their childhood. Arlott, Swanton and the Soul of English Cricket (Bloomsbury, £40) reflects upon two titans of cricket journalism and broadcasting. Youngsters can discover them for the first time. Stephen Fay and David Kynaston combine seamlessly to produce a gem of a book. England, The Biography (Simon & Schuster, £25) is another superbly researched piece of work by Simon Wilde. His eye for detail never wavers; he never cuts any corners. It’s a pleasure to read but also works as a reference book. Derek Pringle’s Pushing the Boundaries: Cricket in the Eighties (Hodder & Stoughton, £20) has a feast of anecdotes from an era when the mavericks were to the fore at Essex – and with England since Ian Botham was in his pomp. Cricket novels are a rare commodity but they are getting better. Nathan Leamon, England’s lead analyst, has given us The Test (Little, Brown, £16.99), set at Lord’s with England playing Australia. He draws cleverly upon his experience within the England camp. In the real dressing room resides one of the most enchanting cricketers of the era, Moeen Ali. The publication of his autobiography, Moeen (Atlantic Books, £20), coincided nicely with a resurgence of his Test career. His is a special story. The problem with books about Tiger Woods is that the greatest chapter may be left untold. Should Woods add a 15th major to his CV, one of the best comebacks in the history of sport will be complete. Publishers will be reaching for their telephones before the final putt drops. That is not to say Woods is not a compelling subject matter in the meantime. Jeff Benedict and Armen Keteyian produced as forensic an analysis of the golfer’s life and times as has ever been on the shelves in Tiger. Detail of Woods’s infidelity is striking, tales such as how his father remains in an unmarked grave and first girlfriend was ruthlessly cut off from the emerging icon desperately sad. Based on existing reports and more than 250 interviews, the writers deliver a picture of Woods that could only be more complete had the man himself fully cooperated. Needless to say, he didn’t. On another subject matter entirely, Michael Walker’s Green Shoots: Irish Football Histories (deCoubertin Books, £20) wonderfully articulates a series of themes from a nation where divides resonate in sport. From the astonishingly prolific Joe Bambrick to others perhaps forgotten in the context of Ireland and its contribution to football – domestically and internationally – this book combines insight with wonderful storytelling. We all know our trequartistas from our registas in this day and age but Tom Williams’s Do You Speak Football? (Bloomsbury, £12.99) raises the bar for anyone looking to sprinkle their chat with international footballing idioms. Williams has scoured the globe to create a compendium of the varied and often genuinely weird terms that create such a colourful, vibrant language around its most popular sport. Terms such as gol de peixinho – a flying header in Brazil – are given the full etymological treatment and the book is a reminder that there are few better means of celebrating both our differences and similarities than the game of football. England did rather well in a World Cup whose omens, at the outset, suggested a very different outcome. Barney Ronay was in Russia to see it all and How Football (Nearly) Came Home: Adventures in Putin’s World Cup captures the tournament’s wildness and wonder expertly. Part travelogue, part reportage and partly an account of the exhilaration and absurdity of covering such an extravagant spectacle in person, its striking tone is one of deep affection for a summer in which the national team managed to make everybody forget the madness unfolding in the wider world. In years to come, perhaps some of England’s 2018 stars will be the subject of “What happened next?” histories. What happened to Paul Gascoigne two years after Italia 90 was a surprising and rumbustiously eventful move to Lazio, compellingly chronicled by Daniel Storey in the lovingly told Gazza In Italy (HarperCollins, £9.99). The sports book I enjoyed most this year was A Boy in The Water (Penguin, £12.99), Tom Gregory’s charming account of how, at the age of 11, he became the youngest person to swim the English Channel fuelled largely by tomato soup and chocolate biscuits. It was a worthy co-winner of the William Hill Sports Book of the Year award, along with The Lost Soul of Eamonn Magee (The Mercier Press, £14.50), a brutally unflinching biography of the Belfast boxer by Paul D Gibson. Also excellent is Red Card (Profile Books, £16.99), Ken Bensinger’s impeccably sourced tale of how the FBI and IRS took down much of Fifa’s top brass. The level of detail is staggering, the stench of corruption overwhelming, but there are several amusing vignettes too – many of them involving the Concacaf general secretary Chuck Blazer, a 32-stone American who looked like Santa Claus and would ride around New York in a mobility scooter with a parrot on his shoulder. Tiger Woods by Jeff Benedict and Armen Keteyian is another triumph of old-school reporting, with the authors navigating numerous non-disclosure acts and legal barriers to reveal a largely unflattering picture of the greatest golfer of our age – although given what they also reveal about Woods’s upbringing you can’t help feeling some sympathy for him as well.