Prep 15 minServes 4 500g brussels sprouts2 tbsp olive oilSalt and black pepper50g butter150g good quality chorizo, sliced into 1-2cm rounds (optional)2-3 garlic cloves, peeled and finely sliced2 tsp caraway seeds Put the sprouts on a board and trim off the base. Peel away any tired-looking outer leaves and give them a rinse, if they need it. Cut any big sprouts in half. Put a large, heavy frying pan over a high heat. Add the olive oil, then the sprouts, and season. Cook, tossing regularly, for eight to 10 minutes, until golden and they can take the point of a knife with ease. Use a big spoon to lift the spouts from the pan, but leave the pan on the heat. Add the butter and, when it’s bubbling, add the chorizo (if using), cook for two minutes, then add the garlic and caraway seeds, and cook for a further two minutes, stirring regularly. Return the sprouts to the pan, and mix them through the caraway and garlic butter. Cook for a further two to three minutes, season well to taste, and serve at once. Fiona Beckett’s wine match“What wine goes with sprouts is a bit of an esoteric question admittedly – especially if you’re going to have them as a side with cold or hot turkey – but if they’re going to take centre stage, think about the other flavours in the dish. So with the roast sprouts with smoked paprika and preserved lemon I’d probably go for a Spanish Godello or Rueda.” Prep 15 min Cook 25 minServes 4 500g brussels sprouts, trimmed 1 small to medium-sized preserved lemon, quartered, flesh discarded and rind sliced into thin strips2 sprigs rosemary 2 tender sprigs thyme, leaves stripped 2 garlic cloves, bashed but with the skin still on2 tsp sweet smoked paprika2 tsp runny honey 2 tbsp olive oilSalt and black pepper 1 large handful parsley leaves, chopped 1 knob butter (about 25g) Heat the oven to 210C (190C fan)/gas 6½. Halve the larger sprouts, but leave any smaller ones whole. Put them into a large roasting tin, and scatter over the preserved lemon strips, the rosemary, thyme and garlic cloves. Sprinkle over the smoked paprika and trickle over the honey and olive oil. Season everything generously and tumble together well. Roast the sprouts for about 25 minutes, stirring once or twice, then remove from the oven and stir in the parsley and butter. Taste for seasoning, adding more salt and pepper if needed, then serve. Prep 15 minCook 30 minServes 6 350g brussels sprouts, trimmed and roughly shredded1 large or 2 small leeks, washed, trimmed, and sliced into 1cm rounds30g butter6 rashers bacon, cut into lardons2 garlic cloves, peeled and thinly sliced30g plain flour425ml whole milk, warmed1 large tsp dijon mustardSalt and black pepper For the crumble topping100g butter100g plain flour30g crumbled blue cheese (or grated cheddar)50g jumbo oats50g blanched hazelnuts, lightly bashed Leaves from 1 sprig rosemary, chopped Heat the oven to 200C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Bring a large pan of salted water to a boil, add the sprouts and leeks, simmer for three to four minutes, and drain. Return the pan to a medium heat, add the butter and, when it’s bubbling, add the bacon and stir well. When it’s colouring a little – three to four minutes – add the sliced garlic, stir, then 30 seconds later add the plain flour and stir well. Continue to cook the bacon with the flour for a minute, then pour in the warmed whole milk. Turn up the heat and use a whisk to stir the mixture as it thickens, dissolving any lumps. Add the mustard, season, fold in the sprouts and leeks, and season again to taste. Spoon the mixture into a large, shallow baking dish. Put all the crumble ingredients in a bowl, and rub together with your fingertips to form lumps and clumps. Scatter evenly over the sprout and leek mixture, then bake for 15-20 minutes, until the top is golden brown and biscuity, and the sprouts and leeks are bubbling away nicely. Leave to cool for 10 minutes before serving. Prep 15 minCook 5 minServes 4, or 8 as a side dish For the salad300g brussels sprouts, peeled and thinly sliced2 crunchy dessert apples, quartered, cored and thinly sliced200g celeriac, peeled and cut into thin matchsticksJuice of ½ lemonSalt and black pepper For the dressing2 tsp sugar 2 tsp English or dijon mustard 1 tbsp cider vinegar 2 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil2 tbsp good-quality mayonnaise 1 medium bunch tarragon, picked and finely chopped, plus extra for serving Trim the sprouts by cutting the very base off each one, then peel away any tired outer leaves. Put them on a board, slice them thinly, then transfer to a large bowl. Add the apple slices and celeriac matchsticks, squeeze over the lemon juice and season. Combine all the dressing ingredients and stir well. Trickle half the dressing over the slaw ingredients and toss together. Pile the slaw on to a serving plate, spoon over the remaining dressing and finish with a scattering of tarragon leaves. • Gill Meller’s latest book, Time: A Year & A Day in the Kitchen (Quadrille, £25), is out now.