Theresa May has made a final desperate plea to MPs to back what she called the “honourable compromise” of her Brexit deal, but faced having to open a five-day debate in the Commons with her authority further shredded by a series of defeats. The prime minister finally got to her feet just after 5.45pm, immediately after the Commons had backed an amendment giving MPs significantly more power to shape the Brexit process if her deal is defeated. Earlier, they had voted to force ministers to release legal advice on the deal. Amid a heated atmosphere in the house, May allowed repeated interventions from MPs and took a notably conciliatory line, acknowledging the doubts and worries about her deal from both remainers and those seeking a harder Brexit. But both must accept reality, she said. Some in the Commons and more widely would rather stay in the EU, “and want another referendum which they hope would overturn the decision we took in 2016”, May said. “Although I profoundly disagree, they are arguing for what they believe is right for our country, and I respect that. But the hard truth is we will not settle the issue and bring our country back together that way.” If MPs reject the deal, there are seven possible paths the country could go down next. May brings it back to MPsPerhaps with minor tweaks after a dash to Brussels. ​MPs knuckle under and vote it through. May resigns immediatelyIt is hard to imagine her surviving for long. After a rapid leadership contest, a different leader could appeal to a majority in parliament, perhaps by offering a softer deal. Tory backbenchers depose herJacob Rees-Mogg gets his way and there is a no-confidence vote. A new leader then tries to assemble a majority behind a tweaked deal. May calls a general electionMay could choose to take the ultimate gamble and hope that voters would back her deal, over the heads of squabbling MPs. Labour tries to force an electionThe opposition tables a vote of no confidence. ​If May lost​, the opposition (or a new Conservative leader) would have two weeks to form an alternative government that could win a second confidence vote. If they were unable to do so, a general election would be triggered. A second referendum gathers supportThis is most likely if Labour makes a last-ditch decision to back it. No dealThe EU (Withdrawal) Act specifies 29 March 2019 as Brexit day. Amber Rudd has said she believes parliament would stop a no deal, but it is not clear how it would do so. May repeatedly warned that if her deal were defeated, the choices would be no deal or no Brexit: “Don’t imagine that if we vote this down another deal is going to miraculously appear. The alternative is uncertainty and risk.” She urged MPs against halting or delaying Brexit, and to consider “what forces that would unleash”. She said: “This house voted to give the decision to the British people. This house promised we would honour their decision. If we betray that promise, how can we expect them to trust us again.” A sizeable section of the address involved May retrospectively justifying her approach, saying she had “faced down” the EU to secure compromises. “I have spent nearly two years negotiating this deal,” she said. “I have lost valued colleagues along the way, I have faced fierce criticism from all sides. If I had banged the table, walked out of the room, and at the end of the process delivered the very same deal that is before us today, some might say that I’d done a better job.” The prime minister ended with an acceptance that her plan would always have to be a compromise: “It speaks to the hopes and desires of our fellow citizens who voted to leave, and those who voted to stay in. And we will not bring our country together if we seek a relationship that gives everything to one side of the argument and nothing to the other.” She added: “If we put aside our differences and remember what unites us, if we broker an honourable compromise in the interests not of ourselves but of those we were sent here to serve, if we come together and do our duty for our constituents, then we will pass the test that history has set for us today.” May’s plea received a withering response from Jeremy Corbyn, who said the plan was excessively vague, meaning the planned transition period was a “bridge to nowhere”. “This has been a negotiation with the cabinet, it’s been a negotiation with Conservative MPs, it’s been a negotiation within the Conservative party, that’s where all the concentration has been,” he said. “We still don’t know what our long-term relationship with Europe would look like and that’s why so many MPs across parliament are not willing to vote for this blindfold Brexit and take a leap in the dark about Britain’s future.” The earlier drama in the chamber saw the motion of contempt presented by six opposition parties over ministers’ refusal to publish the full legal advice. The shadow Brexit secretary, Keir Starmer, portrayed the issue as a matter of parliamentary sovereignty. The government chose not to vote against an opposition “humble address” motion last month seeking the publication of the advice, as has been its recent habit. This had now, Starmer told MPs, “got them into very deep water indeed”. He said: “The government cannot now come to this house and say, ‘We took a political decision not to oppose the making of the order to publish the full and final legal advice by the attorney general and then we took a decision not to comply with that order, but somehow we are not in contempt of parliament’.” The Commons leader, Andrea Leadsom, said in response that breaking the precedent that legal advice was confidential could lead to MPs requesting material that is damaging to national security. She urged MPs to instead back a government amendment to the motion that would shift the matter to the Commons privileges committee, thus delaying the process. However, the amendment was defeated by 307 votes to 311. The opposition motion was then passed by 311 to 293.