When I started dancing salsa, I was drawn to the possibility of ageing with it. Some friends hinted at an early midlife crisis. I wanted to tell them: no, this will serve me for every crisis in every decade to come. How to explain it to them? There is a woman in the scene – if I am to call it that – who is older than 70. Her age is hard to place exactly because she is well-preserved. That’s how we describe old people who look youthful but it isn’t the right term. She isn’t well-preserved – she is present in her body in a way that some friends in their 30s have ceased to be. I once dated a guy who was a long-distance runner and he spoke of the men who ran slightly faster than him on the track as his rabbits, as though he was a greyhound chasing his meat. Really, he just wanted to be the rabbit. That woman I see on the dancefloor – she is my rabbit for life. After each salsa class the instructors perform the sequences one last time and offer us the opportunity to film them on our smartphones. I never do. I have no desire for homework, for the physicality of the class to be compressed on this device I spend my life craning into. I dance to reinhabit this body. To be reminded that I have one. That I am not a portrait of myself enveloped by a circular frame. Other aspiring salsa dancers scramble for their phones. I often wonder what they do with the minutes, hours of footage they collect. Do they replay them at home? Conjure a partner out of air and twirl before a mirror? I don’t watch my salsa class videos. I watch old people dancing salsa on YouTube. I am not interested in the choreographed performances that comprise most of the salsa corner of the internet. Not for me the even, insistent smiles and the glitter; the enthusiastic sequences of rehearsed passion. In most other situations their bodies have become invisible The old people salsa videos are different. They tend to be shakily recorded visions of elderly dancers improvising. In my favourite video, a woman at a street party in New York dances salsa using a walking frame. About halfway through the clip, she hustles in on another couple dancing and steals her man. Someone has commented in Spanish: “Vaya Abuelita ;-).” Go little Granny! We find the spectacle of old people dancing amusing – or “cute” is the word often used in comments. We are entertained by their inclination to conduct themselves as sensual beings, still. Around the time my friend died late last year, I started dancing salsa at least five nights a week. My partner tolerated this incredibly graciously. I went out alone, to dance with men. To read strangers’ bodies for cues of their next move. I sought out the single-tasking focus of the present moment and to close off all that was outside of it. It was salsa but it could have been boxing, or poker, or chess. Perhaps that’s not honest – I wanted salsa, for the bodies in it. I furiously, hungrily wanted to be assured of my own body. My friend was just a year younger than me when he died. Early 30s. Cancer. And he had been one of those people – just so alive. After a few months of learning salsa, we were encouraged to memorise choreographies for Latin events – to put on the glitter and smiles. I never would. Because I desire the opposite. To be impulsive and invisible in a crowd. I don’t want to perform, I want to feel my steps and someone else. I feel the old people in the videos because I think they want the same. They just want to move. In most other situations their bodies have become invisible. But now, in these videos, we have made them perform. Made playlists of them, slotted them in among other wrinkly bodies sliding to a salsa beat. We comment on them, post them, love them, in a way that is ironic and yet deeply earnest. They are, quite sincerely, our hashtag goals. In sharing these videos we perform our desire for what these dancers have. They give off the sense of having arrived at this destination: of apple-shaped bodies, bulging surprisingly, of wrinkles and unreliable joints. As if to say: Here we are – the incredible coincidence and luck of it all, of having made it this far. And what should we do? Why, I suppose we should dance. • Belinda Lopez is a writer and audio documentary maker