Coquilles Saint-Jacques may just be French for scallops, but over here, the name implies the classic Gallic gratin, luxuriously bubbling with butter and cream: the perfect festive starter. The great scallop, as these flat-shelled molluscs are properly and very aptly known, are mostly found in the north-west of France, from the Bay of the Somme down to the Ile d’Oléron on the wild Atlantic coast, but they’re popular nationwide – indeed, France leads the world with an impressive annual consumption of 2.5kg per person. Yet British waters also yield some very fine examples: look for dive-caught or MSC-certified fisheries for this easy recipe with gratifyingly impressive-looking results. The small amount of work involved can be done in advance, leaving you more time to have a drink with your guests, or wrestle the turkey from the dog, depending on how your Christmas is going. Richard Olney’s Simple French Food claims that, at the turn of the last century, scallops were par-boiled, “presumably to get rid of the taste”, before being poached with aromatics for 20 minutes. None of the recipes I try goes quite that far, but there is an undeniable trend to cook the shellfish for rather longer than I would generally be inclined. Some – such as Elizabeth David, Julia Child, Craig Claiborne, the Maîtres Cuisiniers de France, and Simon Hopkinson and Lindsey Bareham’s The Prawn Cocktail Years – chop up the meat, presumably so it cooks faster, as well as being more evenly distributed around the shell. Child flours and fries her scallops before grilling, while Claiborne, The Prawn Cocktail Years and the Maître Cuisiniers (the Masterchef title is no mere television plaudit across the Channel, but something bestowed by the state after official examination) all poach them before using the liquid to make a sauce. This seems to me a better idea: grill the creatures raw, as the Munchies website recommends, and they’re likely to be golden on top before they’ve even begun to warm up, whereas a quick dunk in hot liquid will at least give them a headstart. (If you prefer your scallops cooked all the way through, feel free to increase this initial cooking time.) Claiborne’s recipe for the New York Times, where he was the food editor for almost three decades, calls for the reader to remove “the tough side muscle” if using sea scallops. Possibly American scallops are put together differently, but just in case he means the orange roe, I remove it and eat it on toast – The Prawn Cocktail Years duo recommend finely dicing the corals and scattering them over the top of the sliced meat, but I’d prefer to keep the creature whole, so its softly meaty texture is easier to appreciate. Munchies offers the simplest preparation: to each scallop add a tablespoon of double cream and some grated cheese, then grill. This is, of course, utterly delicious, and if you’re after an outrageously quick and easy way with scallops, I highly recommend it. I would make sure they come to room temperature before cooking, however or, as previously mentioned, they’ll still be chilly even as the top is hovering between brown and burned. Even more popular are the wine-based recipes of Child and the Masterchefs, which supply a welcome touch of acidity to point up the sweetness of the shellfish. Child’s version, which she bills as “à la Provençale”, involves an allium-rich sauce of onions, shallots and garlic, loosened with dry white wine and vermouth, which almost moves into onion soup territory. It’s popular with testers, but the scallops do get a little bit lost, so, like the Masterchefs, I’m going to stick with just the one allium (shallots, whose sweeter flavour complements the meat perfectly). Then I am going to reduce the wine to an intensely flavoured syrup before adding a dash of double cream to mellow the flavour. It is Christmas, after all. There are grander options: The Prawn Cocktail Years showcases coquilles St Jacques à la Parisienne in all its glory, a dish that Olney recalls was all the rage in Parisian restaurants during the postwar period. It has subsequently fallen from favour, possibly because the complexity of the dish falls foul of the modern mania for allowing raw ingredients to shine. As Hopkinson and Bareham note: “Many jokes have been made at the expense of this charming way with scallops, pointed directly at its ruff of piped mashed potato around the edge of the shell. Why this should be so, when one considers that most of us are fond of a nice fish pie, is a mystery. After all, this fluffy crusted border helps to hold in the sauce surrounding the scallop meat, adds a pleasing texture and, for heaven’s sake, it pretties the dish.” The mystery to me is why critics pick on the mash as the fussy bit, when the scallop sits on a mushroom and shallot duxelles, enrobed in a béchamel made with the milk it was poached in, covered in breadcrumbs, and then – and only then – sealed with potato. After all that, I’m relieved to find they’re actually rather good, but I suspect their former ubiquity was at least partly down to the ease with which one could short-change the diner on the scallop front. With all that going on, the poor creature gets quite lost amid the clamour of glossy mushroom and buttery béchamel – it could be anything under there, from crabsticks to tofu. Hefty as they are, these scallops look like nouvelle cuisine next to Claiborne’s 1969 recipe which, as the editors of the New York Times cookbook note, he introduced as the “genuine article”: a “delicate” white wine sauce thickened merely with “butter, flour and egg yolks”, as opposed to the “mucilaginous”, cream-based numbers so often served under the name of coquilles St Jacques. As they also point out, no one born after this time could possibly think of a sauce that contains seven tablespoons of butter and two egg yolks as “light”: it’s like burying the scallop in a hollandaise grave. Not a bad way to go, but hardly what you want to kick off your dinner. As Munchies has proved, you don’t need much more than a light sprinkling of cheese – if that – to top these (Bareham and Hopkinson reckon this is “one of those rare occasions … where the combination of cheese with fish is, perhaps, no bad thing”). But even nicer, testers think, are the crunchy breadcrumbs favoured by David, Child and the Masterchefs – the former notes in French Provincial Cooking that “for those who like it, a scrap of finely chopped garlic … and a little parsley can be mixed in”, too. This suggests to me the vivid green crumbs often also found on that other festive favourite, oysters Rockefeller, making it the ideal showstopper for the Christmas table. Parmesan is optional – I don’t think it needs it, but, in the spirit of the season, I shan’t judge you for disagreeing. Prep 5 minCook 15-20 minMakes 6 6 large dive-caught scallops, on the shell, cleaned2 tbsp butter2 banana shallots or 4 round ones, peeled and finely chopped150ml white wine5 tbsp double cream For the topping2 tbsp butter1 small garlic clove, peeled and flattened10 tbsp dried breadcrumbs6 tbsp finely chopped parsley Ask the fishmonger to clean the scallops for you, leaving you just the shells, white flesh and orange corals (or do it yourself by using a sharp knife to gently detach the scallops from their shells, then pull off and discard the frill and black stomach sack). Save the corals for another use – I like them on toast – and set aside the deeper, rounded shells for later. Melt a tablespoon of the butter in a small saucepan over a medium-low heat, then add the shallots and sweat until soft. Add the wine and bring to a simmer, stir in the scallop meat and cook for a minute, turning once halfway through, then scoop out and set aside. Simmer the wine until it’s almost completely evaporated, then take off the heat, stir in the cream, and season to taste. Meanwhile, melt the remaining butter in a small pan with the garlic clove, then lift out and discard the garlic. Whizz together the breadcrumbs and parsley in a food processor until green (or vigorously chop them together with a knife), then add the butter, stir and season. Heat the grill to medium-high. Divide the creamy shallots between the reserved half-shells and put the scallops on top, followed by the breadcrumbs. Grill for about three minutes, until golden and bubbling on top, and serve at once. • Coquilles St Jacques: a retro classic, or gilding the lily? What else do you like to do with scallops, and which other seafood dishes have a place on your Christmas table? A classic French dish such as this needs an equally classic wine, white burgundy being the one to go for. Pick from the list in this week’s column, or spoil yourself with the beautifully crafted Christophe Camu Chablis 2017 – £17.25 at Yapp Brothers (who also have halves of the 2016 at £9.75), 12%. The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US.