The Italian government will be forced to cut “a few billion” across two of its flagship policies to meet the lower deficit target it has proposed to the European commission. Italian bonds rallied after the government bowed to pressure to reduce its deficit target for 2019 to stave off EU sanctions. The country’s prime minister, Giuseppe Conte, proposed cutting the target from 2.4% to 2.04%. “We have recovered some financial resources, we have been very prudent,” Conte said after meeting the European commission president, Jean Claude Juncker, in Brussels on Wednesday. “And we are now using these financial resources for this negotiation.” The yield, or effective interest rate, on Italian 10-year government bonds fell to 2.90%, the lowest level since September. Less than two months ago the yield, the price the Italian government has to pay to borrow, rose to 3.8%. The spread, the gap between Italian bonds and safe haven German bonds, dropped to 266 points, compared with more than 300 in October. Pierre Moscovici, the EU economics commissioner, said talks with Italy were progressing well, but that more work needed to be done. Italy’s industry minister, Dario Galli, said the bulk of the spending cuts needed to meet the lower deficit target would be most likely to hit the government’s proposed universal basic income, intended to give €780 (£700) a month to the unemployed, and the proposal to cut the retirement age. “A few billions compared to the original theoretical forecasts will come from the realistic implementation of the government’s most relevant measures,” Galli told the broadcaster La7. Despite the potential changes, Conte said the basic income and pension reforms would start on time, most likely early next year. “We are a government that respects the commitments made, but we are also a reasonable government,” he said. “We put a proposal on the negotiating table, and the measures will come into force as announced.” Conte had dinner with the coalition government’s deputy prime ministers - Matteo Salvini, leader of the far-right League, and Luigi Di Maio, who heads the Five Star Movement – when he returned to Rome on Thursday night. Both Salvini, whose party campaigned for the pension reforms, and Di Maio, who has said his basic income will alleviate poverty for 6 million people, had refused to compromise. The pair said in a joint statement that they had confidence in Conte, and would continue to maintain their promises with conviction. “We will maintain all the commitments made, from jobs to security, from healthcare to pensions, from compensating those who lost money in banking fraud to supporting businesses.” The government believed its original plans, which include the introduction of a flat tax, would produce economic growth of 1.5% over the coming year, despite the economy stalling in the third quarter. Italy is saddled with about €2.3tn (£2tn) of public debt and the Bank of Italy said in November that the cost of servicing the extra debt on the original deficit target of 2.4% could rise to €5bn in 2019 and €9bn in 2020. Businesses have been concerned that the budget contains little in the way of spurring investment. A survey carried out by the polling firm EMG Aqua revealed that 41% of Italians supported reducing the public debt. Lowering the retirement age was a priority for 22%, a flat tax for 10% and universal basic income for 9%.