Backbench MPs led by Dominic Grieve are hoping to seize control of what happens in the crucial days after Theresa May’s Brexit deal is voted on, by defeating the government in parliament. Crossbench MPs led by Grieve have tabled an amendment to the parliamentary motion that sets out how the government’s Brexit deal will be debated over the coming days. With the prime minister’s challenge in winning next week’s vote looking all but insurmountable, MPs in the deeply divided House of Commons are increasingly concerned about what happens next. Under the terms of the EU Withdrawal Act, the government will have 21 days to come back to parliament with a motion, setting out what it plans to do. Grieve’s amendment, which is backed by the shadow Brexit secretary, Sir Keir Starmer, is aimed at ensuring any such motion can be amended by MPs. They hope this will allow parliament to express its support for alternative approaches – and prevent the government either hurtling towards a no-deal Brexit without the backing of MPs, or imposing a plan B of its own devising. With more than a dozen Tory MPs publicly signed up to back the amendment, including Nick Boles, who is spearheading an attempt to promote a Norway-style Brexit deal, and Oliver Letwin, the government looks certain to be defeated. The Labour backbencher Chris Leslie, who is backing the amendment, said: “MPs are going to gradually assert their rights – including the right to instruct the government in future stages. It was always a nonsense that MPs, after the ‘meaningful vote’, would be somehow gagged from expressing a view. The Grieve amendment gives teeth back to the House of Commons so MPs can have some real bite.” The amendment will have to be considered before Theresa May can open five days of historic debate on her painstakingly negotiated Brexit deal. Grieve’s move is the latest in a series of procedural wrangles that have characterised the fraught process of shepherding May’s Brexit deal through a hung parliament. Supporters of a harder Brexit insisted they were relaxed about the amendment on Tuesday, saying that even if a motion was amended by MPs – to call for a second referendum, for example – it would not be binding on the government. However, Conservative whips may hope by opening up the prospect that parliament could push the government towards a softer Brexit, the amendment may convince a few Brexiters to throw their weight reluctantly behind May’s deal.