Martin Glenn has resigned as the Football Association’s chief executive and will leave his role at the end of this season. Glenn started in the job in May 2015 and departs with England having reached the semi-finals of the World Cup in Russia. His recent plan to sell Wembley to Fulham’s owner, Shahid Khan, fell through. “I was tasked with improving the effectiveness of the organisation and making it financially secure,” Glenn told the FA’s website in announcing his departure. “I also joined with the strong belief that the England team’s performance in tournaments could and should improve, and that the experience of the millions of people who play football could be a better one. I will leave feeling proud of the success of the performance of all the England teams.” The FA’s chairman, Greg Clarke, paid tribute to Glenn: “Martin leaves as his legacy an organisation that is fit for purpose, more diverse, internationally respected and ready to progress to the next level. I and the organisation will miss his effective, principled and compassionate leadership and wish him well. “The resulting commercial success has funded hugely significant change in the women’s game, St. George’s Park, the FA Cup and the national teams. Martin leaves as his legacy an organisation that is fit for purpose, more diverse, internationally respected and ready to progress to the next level.” Before joining the FA Glenn was chief executive of United Biscuits. He was a director at Leicester City from 2002 to 2006. As marketing manager of Walkers Crisps he enlisted Gary Lineker to become the face of the brand. He is a qualified FA grassroots coach and was appointed by former FA chairman Greg Dyke. Under Glenn’s leadership, Glenn has presided over a series of challenging situations in his role, including the appointment and rapid departure of England boss Sam Allardyce. He was criticised for his role in the investigation into the conduct of England women’s manager Mark Sampson, who was dismissed in September last year. And in March he was forced to apologise to the Jewish Leadership Council after referencing the Star of David during the fall-out from the Catalan yellow-ribbon row involving Pep Guardiola. But Glenn also prioritised improving the atmosphere around the men’s team, which went on to reach its first World Cup semi-final in 28 years in Russia in July. Gareth Southgate’s side have also reached the inaugural finals of the Uefa Nations League next year. Glenn’s successor will be key to the decision about linking up with Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland and Ireland to bid for the 2030 World Cup.