“World No 1 is my next big thing,” Georgia Hall says casually as she reflects on her breakthrough in 2018 and sets her targets for the new year as one of the best women golfers on the planet. At the start of this year Hall had never won an LPGA tournament as a professional. She ends it having celebrated the fact her first victory in Europe happened to be a major, when she won the British Open in August, and that she has broken into the world’s top 10. The 22-year-old from Bournemouth had to struggle to reach this point because, as the daughter of a plasterer, she did not always have the money to play in tournaments for which she had already qualified. Her life is much easier now, as she received a winner’s cheque of £375,000 after winning the Open at Royal Lytham, and the clarity of Hall’s ambition is soon apparent. “This year I set myself five targets,” she says. “I wrote them down and signed them. The first was to just win a [LPGA] tournament. The second was to do really well in the Open. I covered two ticks by winning it. I wanted to break into the top 50 and then the top 20. I thought that was maybe too big a goal. But I’ve done that [Hall is now No 8 in the world]. So that’s four big ticks. What else did I want to be?” Hall looks at her boyfriend Harry Tyrrell, her caddie, who nods when she says: “Rookie of the Year on the [US] LPGA Tour. I’ve played very well this year but what happened is fair enough.” She finished second behind Ko Jin-young, the Korean who was the leading rookie in US women’s golf, with her only failed objective resulting from a slow start as she adjusted to playing in America. “That’s OK,” Hall says. “I got all my other goals. I haven’t set out my targets for next year. I need to get that done by the end of December. But I already know that world No 1 is first on the list.” Hall responds emphatically when asked if she would prefer to become the world’s best golfer before winning another major. “Yeah, I’d take world No 1 for sure. That’s the dream.” Her previous dream, of winning the Open, has already come true. “I spent 15 years where winning the Open was pretty much my only dream. I never thought it would happen this quick but everything came together perfectly. I played with Tom Lehman two weeks before and he happened to win it at Lytham in the year I was born [1996]. He texted me good luck and I had confidence. I wasn’t nervous, or scared. I felt relaxed. It was in England and it was links golf which is the most natural golf. It’s also a really tough course, which I like. So when I was in a position to win I thought: ‘I can’t give this away now because this might be my only opportunity to win it.’” Her victory was made more special because her father, Wayne, was her caddie for the week. A golf nut who had named her Georgia in honour of Nick Faldo’s victory in the Masters at Augusta shortly before her birth in April 1996, Wayne Hall takes over from Tyrrell at every Open. “He’s always done the British and the Scottish Open. Harry doesn’t mind stepping down those two weeks. He knows it’s a big thing for my dad.” On the Sunday afternoon Hall trailed Thailand’s Pornanong Phatlum by a single shot. They were pitted against each other in the last pairing, which became a compelling shootout. Hall’s final round of 67 sealed her victory by two shots from Phatlum. “I was in a perfect position,” Hall suggests, “because I kept saying: ‘Why am I nervous? Someone else must be more nervous because she’s leading. So, Georgia, calm down.’ It helped that Pornanong smiles a lot and we both settled down to play well. I was very calm. I was beating all the boys and they used to hate that. They were quite embarrassed “It was far harder on the Saturday front nine. I was the most nervous I’ve ever been but I holed eight big putts in six holes – most were 25-footers. After that I thought: ‘This is my tournament now.’ I was trying to control my emotions all week. I knew if I got caught up in the atmosphere I would have lost the tournament. My dad was very nervous but we didn’t say one word about winning. We just talked about the next shot, which I liked.” Her dad wore the same pair of socks every day as, after the first of four successive sub-70 rounds, he did not want to change her luck. “I didn’t know that until the last day,” Hall says, wrinkling her nose. “On our way to the club he said: ‘I’ve been wearing the same socks every day, by the way. I was going to change them but you played so well the first day I didn’t.’ Hopefully he’s washed them by now.” There was a deeper family backdrop. “My grandad was really ill and I probably wouldn’t have won without playing for him. Every time I hit a bad shot or got too excited, I would think: ‘Come on, do it for grandad.’ He passed away two weeks later but I’m glad he kind of witnessed it. I phoned him up later on in the day and he was so happy I won.” Her victory came after 15 years of hard work amid challenging financial circumstances. “My dad was a plasterer and my mum a hairdresser. He played golf and took me down to the local driving range when I was seven. I then joined the kids’ club and I was the only girl. There were seven levels, and I got to the top level quickly. I was beating all the boys and they used to hate that. They were quite embarrassed. “I did cross-country and football and I was in the boys’ cricket team. I was the only girl. I was a pretty good batsman because I would swing my bat like a golf club. I used to really whack it. I didn’t know it at the time but it was tough for my parents. They didn’t tell me this until a few years ago. But they always had to sell some things for me to have enough money for golf lessons and tournaments. We lived quite far down south and so dad would drive me for four hours to get to a two-hour lesson and then drive me back – on top of working. What I won at the British Open is great but look at what the male winner gets. It’s roughly a million more than me. “Golf is one of the most expensive sports you can play. You need to pay a lot to join a club, you need golf clubs, all the equipment, lessons. It was hard and I missed three majors I’d qualified for because of a lack of funds. I was in the top three in the world as an amateur but we couldn’t afford to get to me there. I could only get to the British Open. That was frustrating but I always said I will be fine in the end.” Her life is very different now. But Hall points out the wide discrepancy between the money won on the men’s and women’s tours. “It’s getting better but it could do with more [equality]. On the LPGA our prize money’s going up every year but I don’t think it’ll ever be the same. What I won at the British Open is great but look at what the male winner gets. It’s roughly a million more than me.” Francesco Molinari, who won the 2018 Open, received a cheque for £1.42m which meant he earned £1,045,000 more than Hall. “We’re paid very well on the women’s tour, but we can’t do anything about that big difference. We work just as hard as the men and we’re very good. If you watch an LPGA tournament the standard is incredible. But the men earn so much more.” Tennis is different as women receive the same amount of prize money as the men for winning the grand slams. “Yeah, it’s happened already in tennis even though they’re playing less. Maybe they should play the same number of sets and get paid the same money. We’re playing the same amount of holes as the men.” Women’s golf needs a Serena Williams-style player on and off the course. “That would be amazing,” Hall says. “She has such an impact and represents women and tennis really well. Did you see what happened with her and the umpire [when Williams berated Carlos Ramos during the US Open final and argued later that officials were much more lenient towards male players]? I agree with what she’s saying. It seems as if men do it all the time and never get fined. It’s the same with money in golf. It’s improving, definitely, but it takes time.” Hall is taking a break after such a busy year. “I’m going to Barbados. I hope I don’t get bored because the last time I had a holiday I was six years old. We went to Spain for two weeks. So this one feels overdue. I’m purposely flying home first to drop my clubs off to make sure I don’t play on holiday. I have to make sure I don’t hit a ball otherwise my mind won’t be fresh next year.” Does she still play against Harry – who had been hoping to become a professional? “Not for a while,” Hall says, “but he can still hit a golf ball. He’s decent.” Hall smiles when I ask who has won the most over their years of golfing rivalry. “Oh, me. Harry’s won about four times.” Tyrrell shakes his head. “A long time ago.” Does he plan to try to play against a woman who aims to become world No 1? “No,” he says with a grin, “it’s too much.” Hall nods intently. “I’m just very competitive at everything. I just want to win, all the time.”