It’s perhaps unlikely that you, I or any other food-loving individual would waste a croissant, pain au chocolat or any other pastry, but it does happen, and not just in the home. As a chef, I’ve seen first-hand how bakeries, cafes and hotels waste as much as half the patisserie treats they display each day. Pastries go stale quickly, making it tricky to manage stock, but with a little tenacity, they can be upcycled into something new and luxurious. If your pastries are lifeless, simply give them a quick blast in a hot oven. Day-old croissants make a decadent toasted sandwich when filled with cheese and tomato. If croissants are two days old, try a deluxe version of eggy bread: dip the croissant in egg, then gently fry in butter, before serving sweet with icing sugar or savoury with salt, pepper and fried smoked tempeh or bacon. And if your pastries are really old and stiff as cardboard, persevere and revamp them into this dessert. You’ll be well rewarded for your thrift and culinary nimbleness. This is my all-time favourite way to revitalise a stale croissant or pastry. You can make it with fresh ones, of course, but it just isn’t as satisfying. It’s very quick to make and can turn even just half a croissant into a dainty dessert for two. Croissants, pain au chocolat or other pastries1 egg for every 1-2 pastries120ml whole milk for every 1-2 pastries½ tbsp brown sugar for every 1-2 pastriesScatter of chocolate chips (optional)1 dash brandy, or other spirit (optional)Cream or ice-cream, to serve Heat the oven to 190C (180C fan)/390F/gas 6. Choose a stoneware dish or ramekin that will accommodate your leftover pastries, then rip or cut them into it. Beat an egg with 120ml of milk and half a tablespoon of brown sugar for every one to two pastries, and add a dash of brandy (or other spirit) and a scatter of chocolate chips, if you like. Pour over the pastries and squash them down to make sure they are soaked. Bake for about 20 minutes, or until browned on top, then serve warm with cream or ice-cream. In the interests of frugality, whatever you’ve got around in the way of sweet sherry (see this week’s column) or marsala (see my recommendation for Yotam’s chestnut and clementine trifle).