America woke to day two of its third government shutdown in a year with hundreds of thousands of federal employees no closer to being paid over Christmas, national parks closed and Donald Trump obdurately refusing to accept the blame for an event he previously declared he would be “proud” to cause. The Senate adjourned without a deal, meaning the shutdown will continue until at least Thursday, after the Christmas holiday. Majority leader Mitch McConnell cited the Republican House bill that included $5bn for Trump’s border wall as he passed the ball to Democrats and the president. He told reporters: “Listen, anything can happen.” But after Vice-President Mike Pence left Capitol Hill, after more fruitless talks, Richard Shelby of Alabama, the Republican chair of the Senate appropriations committee, said a quick end to the shutdown was “not probable”. Shelby ate lunch at the White House on Saturday, with rightwingers including House Freedom Caucus chiefs Mark Meadows of North Carolina and Jim Jordan of Ohio. No Republican leaders or any Democrats, all needed for any deal, attended the meal. Trump will remain in Washington for Christmas, his Florida vacation cancelled, first lady Melania Trump forced to fly back into town. On Saturday he used Twitter to say he was “working hard”, and to repeatedly claim the Democrats were to blame for a shutdown he said last week he wanted if his demands on border security were not met. After the White House lunch, Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina said: “It’s clear to me [Trump] believes the additional funding is necessary.” The House bill that would have given him his required funds was a purely political gambit, in service of the inevitable blame game. Democrats in the Senate, sure of sentiment among the public and their political base, were never going to let it proceed. Conservative Republicans welcomed the ensuing confrontation but most of the party wanted to avoid it, because polling shows the public oppose both the wall and a shutdown over it. Senator Lamar Alexander of Tennessee said: “This is a complete failure of negotiations and a success for no one.” Democrats hold a trump card of their own – they will take control of the House in January. Nancy Pelosi of California, due to become speaker, said in a letter to colleagues on Saturday: “Until President Trump can publicly commit to a bipartisan resolution, there will be no agreement before January when the new House Democratic majority will swiftly pass legislation to re-open government.” Senate leader Chuck Schumer met Pence on Saturday at the request of the White House. Schumer’s spokesman said the two sides remained “very far apart”. Speaking on the Senate floor, the New York Democrat said the “Trump shutdown” could end immediately. “If you want to open the government, you must abandon the wall,” he said. Democrats have said they are open to budget proposals that do not include the wall, which they say would be costly and ineffective. The party has offered to keep spending at existing levels, $1.3bn, for border fencing and other security measures. On those terms, earlier in the week, senators approved a bipartisan deal to keep the government open into the new year. Trump seemed set to approve but then backtracked, apparently under the influence of rightwing media furious at his abandonment of a key campaign pledge, if disregarding his repeated vows that Mexico, not the US taxpayer, would pay for his promised wall. Meanwhile, from coast to coast, the first day of the shutdown played out. In New York City the Statue of Liberty was still open, thanks to state money. The US Post Office, an independent agency, was still delivering mail. Around 420,000 workers, deemed essential, were expected to work unpaid. An additional 380,000 were to stay home without pay. The Senate has passed legislation ensuring that workers will receive back pay. The House is likely to follow suit. Trump had already declared Monday, Christmas Eve, a federal holiday. Rather than work around the clock, as in past shutdowns, the leaders of the House and the Senate effectively closed shop. But they did not rule out action if a deal were struck.