New England Patriots wide receiver Josh Gordon has been suspended indefinitely by the NFL for a violation of the league’s drugs policy. The news came hours after Gordon himself had said he is “stepping away from the football field” to focus on his mental health. “Effective today, Josh Gordon has been returned to the Reserve/Commissioner Suspended list indefinitely for violating the terms of his conditional reinstatement under the Policy and Program for Substances of Abuse,” the league said in a statement. The mercurial wideout, who had been suspended for most of the previous four seasons including the entire 2015 and 2016 campaigns due to multiple drug violations, joined the Patriots from the Cleveland Browns in a surprise September swap that cost New England a fifth-round draft pick. Gordon spoke about his issues with addiction and anxiety in a 2017 interview with GQ, and said that in the past he had used marijuana or alcohol before “probably every game”. The 27-year-old announced on Thursday morning that he would be taking a leave of absence from the five-time Super Bowl champions in a statement on Twitter, saying: “I take my mental health very seriously at this point to ensure I remain able to perform at the highest level. I have recently felt like I could have a better grasp on things mentally. With that said, I will be stepping away from the football field for a bit to focus on my mental health.” Gordon went on to thank coach Bill Belichick and team owner Robert Kraft and his fans. His absence will hurt the Patriots’ Super Bowl hopes: he had formed a strong partnership with quarterback Tom Brady and New England are not the juggernaut they have been in recent seasons. pic.twitter.com/omiQgO8IjE Gordon had joined the Patriots two days after the Browns reached a breaking point with the Baylor University alum, who has been suspended numerous times by the NFL for drug violations since Cleveland drafted him in 2012. Gordon played in the Browns’ season opener against Pittsburgh, but the team decided to leave him behind for their Week 2 game at New Orleans, and later said they intended to release him. However, Cleveland general manager John Dorsey found there was a crowded market for him and worked out the trade with New England. Gordon, who had climbed to No 2 on the depth chart for the Patriots, caught 40 passes for 720 yards and three touchdowns for New England since the trade.