The 43-page summary of legal advice on Brexit published by the attorney general on Monday lays out the technical comfort Theresa May needed to sign the withdrawal agreement. At first glance it does not provide an A-Z of loopholes or traps that Brexiters might be expecting. If critics are looking for text that will sink the deal they may be disappointed. The attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, does spell out highly contentious issues such as the UK remaining in the single customs territory beyond the end of December 2020 in the event of no deal. But, in the main, the document is essentially a plain English translation of the 585-page legally operable withdrawal agreement published a fortnight ago. It is a world away from a court-type judgment that would set out legal “authorities” on issues of law, a specialism for Cox in his past life as a defence barrister. Here are the main points. In the absence of a future trading agreement at the end of the currently agreed transition period in December 2020, “the single customs territory still has effect”. This is the blood red line for Brexiters that they say makes a nonsense of the referendum result. The legal advice puts the relevant sections in the 585-page withdrawal agreement into plain English, setting out the rules for harmonisation of commercial policy, administrative cooperation and the scenario in which the EU could impose tariffs if the UK has not complied with its legal obligations in relation to deals with third countries. The legal advice sets out that the EU’s customs union code would apply in Northern Ireland to ensure the absence of border controls. This was known, but it spells out in understandable English something the DUP leader, Arlene Foster, said were “blood red” lines – any extra checks between Britain and Northern Ireland. Paragraph 26 in section six makes plain that the provisions in the withdrawal agreement specify sanitary and phytosanitary checks (animals and fresh produce); products and defence. The sentence “the UK is required to ensure that goods moving to Northern Ireland from Great Britain comply with those rules” is not a surprise but is still a bombshell for the DUP, which is opposed to any extra checks in the Irish Sea. The document sets out the circumstances in which references could be made to the European court of justice. The EU will have an interest in certain proceedings before UK courts where they concern the withdrawal agreement. It also goes through the mechanism in which the joint committees and specialised committees will operate to oversee the backstop arrangements, should they come into place. Key to dispute arbitration during the backstop period is a five-person panel of arbitrators, with two persons nominated each from the UK and the EU, and the chair nominated jointly. If a question of interpretation of EU law arises, the ECJ’s interpretation is binding but the panel remains competent to settle the dispute between the EU and the UK. This makes it clear that it is not the ECJ that is making the final decision. Disputes may include interpretation of EU citizens’ rights provided for in the withdrawal agreement. This would apply from the end of the implementation period. Northern Ireland cannot cease to be part of the UK without the consent of the people in the region, as set out in the Good Friday agreement. The backstop will apply unless and until it is superseded by alternative arrangements. The protocol makes clear that it is the parties’ “intention” that the backstop will only apply “temporarily” and is not the basis of a future relationship between the UK and the EU. It also notes that article 50 is not the basis for the future relationship either, but the basis for the withdrawal from the EU only. The legal advice sets out clearly what the purpose of the review is: “to address the unique circumstances on the island of Ireland, maintain the necessary conditions for continued north-south cooperation, avoid a hard border and protect the 1998 agreement in all its dimensions”. It states that these conditions “would be met” if the future trading deal “established alternative arrangements for ensuring the absence of a hard border”. It states that both parties have agreed to “use their best endeavours” to strike a deal by the end of 2020 that will avoid a need for a hard border. The document states that the UK will contribute to the EU budget in the usual way in 2019 and 2020. In return, the UK will continue to benefit from EU spending during that period. After 2020, the UK will have to pay for its share of EU liabilities, like EU pensions, which have accrued up until that point. The amount the UK owes the EU will be calculated based on the average of its share of the EU budget in the period 2014-20. The final financial settlement will be drawn up and paid in euros. The agreement allows the UK to require EU citizens to apply for residence status. They have the right to reside permanently if they have lived in the UK for five years, though they can lose that right if they leave the country for more than five years. Those who have not been in the UK for five years can apply to do so, but will lose their right to reside if they leave for a period of up to six months (and 12 months in certain circumstances, like child birth). There will be a “grace period” of at least six months from the end of the implementation period to allow people to apply for residence status, which can be extended by a year if there are technical problems. Decisions on applications for residence status will have no effect until the end of the implementation period. The implementation period will end on 31 December 2020, unless both the UK and the EU agree to an extension. This could extend the implementation period for “up to one or two years” and would involve reaching further agreement on the UK’s financial contribution. This is in line with what we knew already. “As regards participation in EU institutions and decision-making, the UK will have exited the EU and will no longer be a member state,” the paper reads, though it adds that the UK may be invited “to participate in meetings of certain representative or expert groups and committees”. During the implementation period the EU will be able to exclude the UK from having access to “security-related sensitive information” in certain exceptional circumstances.