This has been a pivotal period for Manchester City. After showing that Arsenal can be beaten last week, they backed it up by grabbing a tight win over a stingy Birmingham side. Arsenal have company at the top of the table, although they do have a game in hand. Still, this was an important victory for City, who had to work hard against Marc Skinner’s side. Birmingham are an efficient outfit and are always difficult to break down. But they like to play out from the back and City targeted that, with Nikita Parris leading their high press. It brought a reward when Birmingham’s young goalkeeper, Hannah Hampton, made the error that led to Georgia Stanway scoring the game’s only goal. City closed it out from there, making themselves solid in midfield, guarding the ball well and showing that their game management skills are maturing. They will have to keep doing that in order to keep up with Arsenal. • As it happened: Manchester City 1-0 Birmingham City Chelsea have gathered momentum. They waited late for goals against Brighton, whose habit of conceding after the hour mark is a concern from a fitness perspective. Hope Powell, the Brighton manager, has to look at why her team are fading as games wear on. Her side held Chelsea for a while, but losing 4-0 at home shows they cannot be certain of staying in the WSL. As for Chelsea, they are putting their foot down after a slow start and have risen five points off first place. Their flowing football is returning. Beth England’s double ensured that Fran Kirby was not missed and there was also some great skill from Erin Cuthbert, who showed that Scotland will be a threat at next summer’s World Cup. Chelsea, who still have to go to Arsenal and City, mean business. Chelsea's Erin Cuthbert with the 🔥🔥🔥You won't see a cleaner nutmeg all week, sensational 👌#FAWSL pic.twitter.com/fF9ohf2iCx Down in the Championship, there was a first defeat of the season for the Manchester United start-up. United have done very well so far – while they are level on points with Charlton Athletic, they remain top with a goal difference of +39 – and I still fancy them to win promotion. However Durham are an experienced side and they knew what to do against United this time. They were tight at the back and counterattacked well. United will back themselves to respond well, though, and they would be a welcome addition to the WSL given that they have had some record-breaking attendances this season. There was a crowd of 5,500 for one of their games. The honeymoon period is over for Willie Kirk, Everton’s new manager. They fell short against Bristol City, Kirk’s old side, and continue to pay for their wastefulness in front of goal. Judged on statistics alone, you would expect Everton to win more games. They create a lot of chances. But they lack ruthlessness and Kirk will need to bring in a No 9 in January. They lost Courtney Sweetman-Kirk to Liverpool last summer and Chloe Kelly, who has been asked to play up front, is more of an attacking midfielder. Everton are two points above the foot of the table and they will be in trouble without more firepower, especially as they remain too open at the back. Ella Rutherford scored a great goal for City, but she was given too much time to smash home her volley. Not a bad week for #FAWSL goals 🤩 ⚽️ @ellarutherford_ ⚽️ @Bethany_Eng15 ⚽️ @_CSK9 ⚽️ @fara_williams47 I’m not surprised that West Ham are doing well under Matt Beard. West Ham’s manager has earned respect at all his clubs and players love his coaching style. He knows the league, has gained experience in America and is the perfect person to build a new side. He has taken no time to unite a new group of players and has benefited from some good summer signings. West Ham brought in some hardy England internationals and they also recruited well from abroad. Alisha Lehmann, the Austrian forward, and the German midfielder Julia Simic each scored twice in the 5-0 away win over Yeovil Town. West Ham are clicking. BT Sport has coverage of FA Women’s Super League all season. Watch Arsenal v Chelsea on BT Sport 1 and BT Sport 4K UHD on Sunday 13 January, kick off 12.30pm.