The smell of aircraft fuel wafts on the wintry breeze as torches flit across rough grassland. A patch of derelict-looking ground beside densely packed housing and Mildenhall US airbase is an unlikely place to find one of Britain’s rarest species. But this little Suffolk meadow used mainly by dog walkers is the only known place in Britain where the wormwood moonshiner lives, an elusive beetle which emerges one hour after sunset to devour the seeds of a virtually extinct plant. “Here you go!” shouts one of a hardy band of six volunteers, scouring the raggedy Breckland wormwood plant by torchlight for a glint of the 5mm-long nocturnal black beetle. “Have you beetled?” gasps another. The beetle hunters are part of a new effort to conserve both the beetle and the rare Breckland wormwood plant upon which it depends. Volunteers are being trained to find the beetle by Back from the Brink, a £4.6m Heritage Lottery-funded project to revive the fortunes of dozens of unheralded species and overlooked habitats. Breckland wormwood is restricted to two locations in Britain: Glamorgan sand dunes and the sandy heaths of the Brecks bordering Suffolk, Norfolk and Cambridgeshire. This century, however, Breckland wormwood has disappeared from 12 sites, and now clings on in just three places in Breckland. It suffers from habitat loss and accidental mowing, and is particularly vulnerable to being grazed by burgeoning wild deer populations. Last recorded in 2011, the wormwood moonshiner beetle was only rediscovered this autumn when Phoebe Miles, a Natural England ecologist and project manager for Back from the Brink, visited College Heath Road meadows in Mildenhall with beetle expert Brian Eversham, chief executive of Bedfordshire, Cambridgeshire and Northamptonshire Wildlife Trust. Breckland wormwood had been discovered growing well on the meadow, because it was surrounded by housing and not grazed by deer. “I was worried that the beetle was extinct,” said Miles. “When this discovery of the plant was made, Brian and I raced out and discovered 19 beetles on three plants. It was really exciting.” While the small dark-brown beetle is difficult to identify by its appearance, unlike other beetles it has only ever been found at night. This means the millions of people who are not beetle experts can help locate it. According to Miles, the wormwood moonshiner could well be living – as yet undetected – on other sites in the area. She said: “Some species get ignored and will go extinct because they exist in the ‘in-between’ spaces we hardly notice and rarely value. This beautiful plant and the charming little beetle thrive in the scrappy, disturbed areas of ground these days found near people: unmown road verges and the edges of footpaths and car parks. “Nature needs us to leave some areas untidy throughout the year.” Tonight, the beetle-hunters find 17 beetles during a search of the Mildenhall site but when they scour a second possible site nearby there are none. Despite this former quarry being a site of special scientific interest (SSSI), the Breckland wormwood has been grazed by deer, particularly invasive muntjac, a Chinese species which escaped from deer parks last century. How can we save the beetle? “Eat a muntjac a day,” jokes one of the searchers. “Or bring back wolves”. Miles said: “To save the beetle, we need to look after the plant by getting that mix of no-grazing pressure, available seed and soil disturbance, which the plant needs.” Asked why saving one small beetle matters, Miles said: “As EO Wilson observed, insects are the ‘little things that run the world’. Human life on earth will not be sustained without a resilient, intact ecosystem of natural processes, plants, and animals of all sizes, at all levels in the food chain.” James Harding-Morris of Back from the Brink said: “There’s a real sense of urgency. It’s a last-chance saloon. Breckland wormwood and its beetle are now known to coexist on just one site.” In Mildenhall, the local council is making sure the rare Breckland wormwood plant is not mown by not cutting the meadows in autumn as usual but instead strimming the plants back in February, when the beetle has finished feeding on the plant’s seeds.