The UK is “indefinitely committed” to the Irish backstop if it comes into force, the attorney general, Geoffrey Cox, has told MPs as he explained to them the legal advice he gave the government on the planned Brexit deal. Answering questions from MPs in what Downing Street said was the first such appearance by an attorney general in the Commons in decades, Cox also said there was no unilateral right for the UK to pull out of the backstop, which would come into force to prevent a hard Irish border if no permanent trade deal was reached. “Let me make no bones about the Northern Ireland protocol. It will subsist, we are indefinitely committed to it if it came into force,” Cox said. “There is no point in my trying or the government trying to disguise that fact.” Cox said that the main calculation was the “political imperative” of either entering into the agreement or not. “That is a calculated risk that each member of this house is going to have to weigh up against different alternatives,” he said. He dismissed suggestions that no other similar treaty existed that would endure so permanently. “There are hundreds throughout the world ... The whole Vienna convention has entire sections on permanent treaties,” he said. But Cox told MPs there was no legal basis in article 50 for the backstop to be permanent and it would be “vulnerable to legal challenge” if it ever came to pass that Northern Ireland remained in both the EU and the UK. Rivals would “beat a path to the European commission” and would win if the backstop was permanent, he said, because it would give Northern Ireland the unique and anti-competitive position of being able to trade with the EU single market and the UK market with no strings attached. In his statement, Cox urged MPs to have patience, saying that untangling 45 years of entangled legal arrangements “will take time to work out”. “The divorce and separation of nations from long and intimate unions, just as of human beings, stirs high emotions and calls for wisdom and forbearance,” he said. “It calls also for calm and measured evaluation by the house of the terms of the separation agreement in the light of the complexity and difficulty of the task it is intended to achieve.” Cox said his statement was “intended to inform the debate”, and was a precis of “a mixture of oral and written communications at different times during fast-developing events”. He said: “This is not a question of the lawfulness of the government’s action, but of the prudence as a matter of policy and political judgment of entering into an international agreement on the terms proposed.” Responding to demands that the government should publish the advice in full, Cox said that he was offering MPs more than just the text of the legal advice, saying he was giving “a full frank and through opportunity” for him to give his direct legal opinion on MPs’ questions. “All he has to do is ask and he will receive. I will give him a frank answer,” he said. “If the questions are asked I shall answer them candidly.” Explaining the basics of the legal advice, released as a document earlier in the day, Cox went through contentious areas such as the continued role of the European court of justice, and the role of the backstop. On the latter, he said: “There is, therefore, no unilateral right for either party to terminate this arrangement,” prompting one Conservative MP to yell: “So it’s a trap!” Cox continued: “This means that if no superseding agreement can be reached within the implementation period, the protocol would be activated, and in international law would subsist even if negotiations had broken down. How likely that is to happen is a political question.” Responding to Cox, Labour’s Nick Thomas-Symonds, the shadow solicitor general, said that MPs were at a “major disadvantage” because they had not seen the full legal advice. “It is totally unacceptable to be in this position when aspects of the attorney general’s advice have been selectively leaked to the press over the weekend,” he said. Ministers earlier released a summary of the advice, which spelled out that the backstop would continue indefinitely “unless and until” the UK and the EU were able to agree alternative customs arrangements. The document said that the backstop would continue to apply “unless and until its provisions are superseded by a subsequent agreement between the UK and the EU establishing alternative arrangements”. MPs will vote on Tuesday on whether ministers are in contempt of parliament for failing to release the full legal advice, despite the government having lost a vote on 13 November by MPs demanding to see the whole document.