A contest that had looked like being a cruise for Watford ended up something of a nailbiter as Cardiff fought back from three goals down to nearly snatch a point at Vicarage Road. After the hosts had scored a series of great goals, none better than the dazzling run and finish from Gerard Deulofeu to open the scoring, Junior Hoilett and Bobby Reid clawed two back in the final 15 minutes to set up an end to end finish. With Cardiff’s goalkeeper Neil Etheridge also the man of the match, there was no shortage of drama to keep a freezing crowd warm. Deulofeu was the sole change from the Watford side that came back so strongly at Goodison Park on Monday and immediately set about proving his worth in the rain. He crafted the game’s first chance in the sixth minute, playing a cute one-two with Abdoulaye Doucouré in the Cardiff box which created enough space for a shot, but he could only curl the ball beyond Etheridge’s left-hand post. Ten minutes later and the former Barcelona man, making only his seventh league start of the season, opened the scoring. It was a beautiful goal, bringing a touch of La Masia to the awful conditions at Vicarage Road. The move was swift and began in Watford’s half, where Craig Cathcart pinched the ball off Callum Paterson’s toe. He got the ball to Doucouré who span and slipped the ball to the No 7. From there Deulofeu was clever, allowing the Cardiff defence to think his ultimate aim was to slip Troy Deeney in on the left. But as Cardiff backed off, Deulofeu kept going and entered the box where he danced past Sean Morrison and Bruno Manga before simply passing the ball into the net. It was a goal of such quality that it bred both confidence and complacency in the hosts. They had three quarters of possession and some delicious passing and movement, but no end product. Paterson, meanwhile, could have scored from two Hoilett crosses down the other end had he had an inch or two more in height. With the clock ticking towards half time however, Watford put the foot down again and Roberto Pereyra had two great chances to score only to be denied by Etheridge. Pereyra was faced down by his nemesis once again just seconds into the second half but no matter, Watford duly doubled their lead minutes later. It was left-back José Holebas who scored the goal, and again it had an imprimatur of quality. Deulofeu got the assist this time, picking up the ball on the left where Manga was beginning to look a bit ragged. Deulofeu sized up his options and simply rolled a pass to the top of the D, where Holebas hit the moving ball like a free-kick; first time left footed and into the top corner on Etheridge’s right-hand side. With four goals and three assists to his name this season, no Premier League defender has contributed to more goals this season than the Greek. Fifteen minutes later it was 3-0 and once again it was an impressive piece of work. Keeping possession on the edge of the box, Watford appeared as though they were looking for the through-ball but went for the long-range strike again, this time from Domingos Quina. The Portuguese midfielder, who only made his first start on Monday, made no mistake with his effort and hit the opposite corner from that found by Holebas. At 19 years and 27 days he became Watford’s youngest ever Premier League scorer. The jig looked up, but Neil Warnock went for it, throwing Bobby Reid into the fray. With 10 minutes remaining, the visitors had their breakthrough as Hoilett hit his own humdinger. From 25 yards out and the inside left position, the winger found the top corner, the third time in the match a player had done so. Two minutes later and Reid caused pandemonium as he poked home when Ben Foster failed to contain a Sol Bamba header.