My mother was crying on the floor, naked, except for her black velvet slippers and my daughter’s navy blazer left behind the last time Rebecca visited. The aide put a beige thermal blanket over her, the kind my mother refused to have in her house. It’s like being smothered by tissue, she said. It feels like bark, she said. “Don’t worry,” the aide said. “We’ll have your mother fixed up in no time.” “I can do it,” I said. I dressed my mother, not as well as the aide would have, but I got her covered up in navy sweatpants and a navy striped T-shirt and a navy headband for her dirty hair. I skipped the underwear. My mother snapped her waistband meaningfully and I took off her slippers, pulled down the pants, stretched my mother out on top of the blanket and put on the new style, less bulky Depends (my mother saw a commercial for these diaper-panties and said, “my people”). My mother didn’t sit up. She pulled at a thread at the bottom of her T-shirt. “Ma, don’t pull it,” I said. “You’ll ruin it.” “Ruin it,” she said. “Then I won’t have this little number for the next occasion? That’s a good one.” She pulled on the thread a little more and rolled over to sit up. She bent over, very nimbly, brought her T-shirt up to her mouth and bit the thread off. Amy Bloom is the author of four novels, two of which have appeared on the New York Times bestseller list, four collections of short stories, a children’s book and a collection of essays. She has been published in the New Yorker, the New York Times magazine and Best American Short Stories collections. Her work, which has been translated into 15 languages, has been recognised by the US National Book award and the National Book Critics Circle award. She also writes for television – her series State of Mind examined the professional life of therapists. Bloom practised as a psychotherapist for  20 years. She is professor of creative writing at Wesleyan University, Connecticut. If it’s possible not to know a lot about the person who gave birth to you and raised you for 18 years – and I think it is – I didn’t know a lot about my mother. Other mothers filled their daughters’ ears with hard times or high times, failed birth control and if only I’d married Don Dennehy, the banker. My mother never said a word about what she regretted. Once in a while, she’d remark that she was doing for me what her parents, who died before I was born, had done for her. The bottle, not the breast (It’s not sanitary, she said.). A college education. A nice wedding in a place that wasn’t vulgar. The offer of a baby nurse when Rebecca was born. I turned it down and asked for the money instead and my mother explained, like the English teacher she was, that I should not mistake “equivalent” for “fungible”. My mother taught until she was required to retire and she stayed on to help in the library, and when she couldn’t stand the kids talking and texting and not reading any more she wandered down to the elementary school and became a literacy volunteer. When my father, her biggest fan, died, she became the director of literacy volunteers of Long Island. She never complained about her loneliness or her health or whether or not we visited enough. She never criticised me. She was sad when I told her that Bill and I were getting divorced but she took my side and paid my retainer and never mentioned him again, except to say something cheerfully insulting. He wrote her a note expressing a wish to maintain their good relationship and she read it aloud to me, snorted and threw it in the trash. She went to conferences on literacy. She went to one conference for “writers and readers” and came home after the second day. (“Not for me,” she said. “Desperation at every meal.”) When she retired from the literacy volunteers, she said she’d had enough. I’ve read up on dementia, of course, and it turns out there are people so smart they can run through a lot of brain cells before anyone notices. My mother had so many intelligent, more or less appropriate, ingrained responses, along social, intellectual and political lines that most people could talk to her at length and not see that anything was wrong. Her cardiologist called me to apologise. Her internist did, too. “I’m sorry,” he said. “You said you were worried about your mother and I just thought that” – that I was one of those resentful, watchful children, keen to trumpet the signs of parental impairment at the first misplaced wallet – “you were mistaken, maybe jumping the gun. Your mother charmed me. She corrected my grammar. I didn’t see that the underpinning was gone.” Underpinning. Exactly. Le mot juste, my mother would have said. She watched the news, cursing like a sailor. If it hadn’t been for her hatred of Trump, she'd have had no reason to live I have been looking for le mot juste to describe Feliks. He is not my mother’s caregiver (that would be me and the aides), he’s not her friend and Feliks is not her boyfriend. There are several ladies here with boyfriends and Mashapee Gardens is more like the high school in which I teach than I’d imagined. Highest rung: attractive woman with attractive boyfriend. Attractive in this case, meaning some kind of teeth, some kind of mobility (well-groomed on a motorised chair is not considered infra dig), some kind of hearing and a general air, because this never changes, of self-confidence. Next rung: attractive woman, unattractive boyfriend. Still, he makes you look good and there is always the possibility that he has hidden charms and assets. Next down: unattractive woman, attractive boyfriend (because at 15 or 85, who wants to be compared to a boyfriend and found wanting, with the strong suggestion that he is just waiting for his peer, his Meghan Markle). Next to last: unattractive woman, unattractive man. Gnomes. Trolls. And even so, the lowest rung is for the woman without a man. If there are men without women, they are on another ladder, entirely, and regarded, at worst, as projects (“He’d be a good-looking man if only he’d do something about the…”) and, at best, as undiscovered gems (“Oh, Gary. Gary? Well, I guess. I see what you mean…) whom the sharper ladies do their best to hide under the nearest bushel, to be examined later, at leisure. Some men are walkers, as if this is Olde New York, and some of the ladies, dressing for dinner in brocade jackets, mine-cut diamonds and orthopaedic sneakers, expecting chairs to be pulled out, act as if it is. My mother wasn’t having any of this. My father died, my daughter read a lovely poem and went back to Brooklyn, my Uncle Jack told a few dirty jokes over drinks, my mother’s best friend, Miriam, drank martinis with her until dawn and when she went back to her apartment, across the hall, my mother sat in her kitchenette with a stack of frozen dinners. Miriam and I nagged her to start going down to the dining room. Mingle, I said, but I stepped back when I said it. After a week, my mother went downstairs. She sat at the smallest, farthest table in the room, a few feet away from the end of the buffet line. Miriam told me that when one of the single men (walking with a cane, no oxygen) sat down next to my mother, which was a major declaration, like handing her a gardenia corsage, my mother told him to find someone else. My mother suggested Miriam, who was on the other side of the table. My mother went to dinner, to make me and Miriam happy, and she mourned hard. She stayed in bed until lunchtime. Having always worn her hair in a shellacked bob, she cut it short and stopped dyeing it. She looked like a great Roman empress and her friends said she was very chic. Very bold, Miriam said to me, and I know what she meant. My mother joined the New York Times discussion group and she watched the news constantly, cursing like a sailor. If it hadn’t been for her hatred of Donald Trump, she would have had no reason to live. And then, this fall, she put on her gardening pants, found her green foam kneeling pads and went to work on a lovely, all-blue flower garden for my father, which we’ll be able to see from her apartment window in the spring. Which is where she met Feliks. Behind the Mashapee Gardens complex there are the younger, rumbling businesses of assisted living: delivery trucks, waste-removal trucks, food and medical supplies, diapers and nutritional supplements. Feliks’s brother, Fyodor (Call me Ted) runs the medical care vans. He gets people to and from doctors’ appointments, home from the hospital, home from the ER visit, if necessary, and anywhere they want to go, if they don’t drive any more and don’t have people who can take them when they need to go. He’s not cheap (according to Miriam) and he is not exactly official but, the word at the facility is that if you wait until the official Mash Gardens shuttle comes to take you to your appointment, you won’t need it. Ted is kind, in that mocking, generous Russian way (as my mother would say, Our people), giving chocolates to people who are probably diabetic, slipping mini-bottles of Absolut into sagging sport coat pockets. The people who ride with him like him. Feliks is Ted Lite. Ted, three inches shorter and without the ambition. I tell my mother Feliks is like the Chekhovian soldier in Three Sisters who keeps taking pictures and buying gifts and really, no one has time for him but that doesn’t stop him from bringing more gifts and being cheerful. I tell her this, because it pleases her when I refer to Chekhov and I want her to keep going to dinner. Feliks first walked with us, on the garden path, in September. He held a baby in his arms, wrapped in a pink-fringed blanket, white booties peeking out, tiny fingers resting on his big, smooth forearm. I saw that I didn’t know anything about Feliks, about this baby, the marriage that might have produced her, his family, his affection for this baby, and his kindness in letting my mother, who loves babies, hold her. He sat on the bench, next to my mother and I sat on the grass, in a good position to catch the baby. Feliks waved me away. “She fine,” he said. I love babies, too. My mother says it’s our secret vice. We’re both English teachers, fair but stern, furious on the subject of grammar and spelling and the attempt to understand the sublime. We love babies, because there’s no need for sternness. Sternness is stupid, with babies. Feed them when they’re hungry. Change them when they’re dirty. Love them. Sing to them. Cuddle them. Blow a few bubbles. My mother’s cut-off age is two and mine is about five. My daughter Rebecca is 26 now and the most I can do is run my hands through her long hair, when it’s loose and cup her beautiful face in my hands, when she lets me, and she does let me, when I visit her, and when she comes home. Twice, we’ve gone to London together, seeing five plays in four days and that was almost just as good as holding a baby. Almost. Since Feliks and the pink baby, his third daughter and his favourite (his words, not mine) I started looking around for a baby for my mother. She’s not ready yet but I can see how she delights in that baby, how her breathing steadies, how she stands a little taller. Not every assisted living place encourages the use of baby dolls but the ones that do “nurture therapy”, encourage them big time. I have been to every e-store and website and watched a lot of “reborn doll” videos. I couldn’t take my eyes off the sweet, sad one of the 96-year-old woman and her reborn doll, who she sleeps with and feeds with the same pretend-milk-in-the-plastic-bottle that I had when I was a little girl. The woman coos and rocks the baby and feeds it and wipes its little rosebud mouth with a napkin, or her finger. Some others are not sweet. They are long, chatty videos of women who describe themselves as collectors, or as parents, or as adoptive parents. A lot of the women talk about their miscarriages. A few women say, resentfully, that they would adopt if they could afford to. Some of the women have someone else (which daughter? what husband?) film them putting the baby in the stroller, tucking a blanket around it and taking it for a walk. On the walk, the women say things like: “Isn’t she adorable?” The doll owners put pink ribbons or flowered headbands on the girl dolls, or, if they are boys, some kind of blue knit hat. The women say, to the camera: “Everyone thinks she’s real, because she is so beautiful.” They talk about how much pleasure and joy and comfort the dolls give them. This is just as horrifying as it sounds, and when you add in the collectors who have confederate flag bunting on the shelves on which they have their seven reborn dolls and the one woman from Spokane who made a video, bragging about spending $10,000 on her dolls, while having two (visibly) jealous children, it’s worse than horrifying and my ability to be neutral – to say the way my mother and I used to: “Well, it’s a big world” – evaporates. The high-end dolls have mohair attached to the scalp. They have dewy skin. Dewy-ish. It’s many layers of paint baked on vinyl. The really good ones are weighted, to about seven pounds and they seem to breathe. (They do not breathe. There is a little automated pump inside their chests, simulating exhaling and inhaling) and they are described as having new baby smell. I would not have done all this research except for Feliks and his daughter. We’d arranged to meet on Fridays, around the middle of the day, right before he started his shift. We’d take a little walk in the garden. My mother would sit on the bench and coo at the baby. One day the baby, Sofia, shat through her diaper. Feliks was horrified. I was spattered. My mother was covered in baby shit from rib to knee and she didn’t mind. “You did that once,” she said. “Right through the cushion and the wicker. It was a tsunami of shit.” Feliks took Sophia to the staff bathroom and I took my mother back to the apartment for the 90 minutes of changing and showering and drying and dressing. My mother lay down and said: “You have to buy a new outfit for her. That one is ruined.” I said it wasn’t ruined, that he’d wash it, or his wife would, and it would be good as new. I said it wasn’t our fault that the baby shat her pants. My mother pointed her finger at me: “Do not be stingy,” she said. “It’s a horrible, horrible quality. We are not stingy people,” she said. I bought a new pink striped onesie for Sofia and I shoved a pair of little pink moccasins and pink and white lacy socks across the counter, so I wouldn’t be stingy. I showed my mother. “Rebecca will look adorable,” she said. “He’ll appreciate it. Ted.” “Feliks,” I said. I went into the kitchenette to make us tea before we walked in the garden. Feliks had made a nice edge to the big oval planting bed my mother had laid out. My mother looked at me and opened her mouth and closed it. “Tea,” I said. “English breakfast?” This is the only kind of tea she drinks any more. Years ago, she had a tea collection from masala chai to wuyi da hong pao and gave me the tins to play with. My mother opened her mouth and she closed it. “Sweetheart,” she said and I knew that she absolutely did not, at that moment, know my name. We kept up with the walks in the garden into November, my mother as wrapped up as Sofia but Feliks stopped bringing the baby, because it was too cold and when there was no baby to see, my mother stopped going outside. She refused to go to the dining room, even when Miriam came and knocked on the door, every night at 5.30. The nurse, who checks on all the residents once a week, told me that my mother’s screaming at the television was bothering her next-door neighbour during the day. I told my mother she needed to keep it down and she said, how quiet should be you at democracy’s… it was on the tip of her tongue. I opened my phone and shopped. Ashlee breathes, coos and has a heartbeat and she’s only $150.00. (Not being stingy.) Reading Ashlee’s reviews (four stars, mostly) directs me to the higher end of baby dolls. Betsy Lee is $300 and she doesn’t breathe or coo but she is hand-painted and the website emphasises the realistic marbling and the lifelike tracery of veins. How do you weight hand-painted versus breathing? Real hair versus heartbeat? I wish my real mother was still with me. We have each stood outside a thousand dressing rooms for each other, over the last 20 years, asking: chic or homeless? Summery or mutton dressed as lamb? And when she said: “Darling, even I am barely old enough for that, put it down”, I did put it down. Betsy Lee takes me back to the cleverest website, advertising the reborn dolls as therapy tools, specifically for patients with dementia. (The women in the advertisements have nicely coiffed grey hair and look deeply happy while cradling the baby. If any website shows contented old men doing the same, I missed it.) The home page is three fat paragraphs about their expertly crafted dolls re-establishing nurturing feelings, providing a sense of purpose and bringing joy to memory care individuals. So Very Real is the name of the line. Doreena does breathe, her hair is hand-rooted and her head is weighted to require support. Well, my real mother would have said, Isn’t she the whole package? I buy Doreena for $125.00 (on sale for the Christmas season) and I buy her candy-cane striped sleeper, her red hand-knit booties (hand-knit in China by actual children going blind, my real mother would have said) and her red and white reindeer sweater and a matching pom-pom hat, for when we go for walks in the garden. I decide not to wrap Doreena because her purpose is not to be a doll, or a gift, but to be a baby. I arrange her in the Moses basket I have had in the hall closet since Rebecca was a baby. I see that I need a goddamn blanket as well and I order that too, in red, green and white stripes, with one-day shipping. I read up on how to introduce the patient to the doll and when my mother comes out of her bedroom on Christmas morning, in her pink flannel bathrobe, with her matching pink slippers, looking as she always has, I’m ashamed that I ever thought this was a good idea. I sit frozen on the couch, holding Doreena as if she is having gas, face down on my lap. I pat her back. Well, my mother says, Mother and child. Merry Christmas. She picks up Doreena and stands up, holding her as she held Rebecca, and as I’m sure she held me. Steady hand on hip, into the kitchen, getting on with the day. • Amy Bloom’s most recent novel, White Houses, is published by Granta (£12.99). To order a copy for £11.43 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99