Manchester United are through to the next round of the Champions League but we knew that already. They are also not very good but then everyone knew that too. Switzerland’s Young Boys defeated Juventus 2-1 to hand United the chance to overhaul the Italian champions and take first place but they could not accept it. Instead they were beaten 2-1 by Valencia, limping into the last 16. On this evidence, and the accumulated evidence of this season it is hard to see them getting further. It was striking enough that United had got this far, securing a place in the knock-out phase already, given how poorly they have played; actually winning the group would have been too much. Yet that, unexpectedly, was a possibility. “I don’t think this result will be too important or make the difference,” Mourinho had admitted, while Sunday’s meeting with Liverpool was always going to take priority. Perhaps that lack of expectation helps justify this performance, but their failure to anticipate the opportunity to avoid Europe’s biggest teams might be one to regret now. Two goals down, United’s first shot on target did not come until the 73rd minute and, although a Marcus Rashford goal with three minutes to go revived the prospect of another late comeback that could even have been completed by Juan Mata in the final minute, it was not to be. United, thus, were defeated. Valencia, 15th in La Liga and already condemned to the Europa League, had a little joy but it was tinged with frustration, a feeling of what might have been but for their own mistakes and the Marouane Fellaini handball a fortnight ago against Young Boys that had finally put them out, neither forgiven nor forgotten here. There was some vindication, if not exactly revenge. A roar greeted the first whistle of a game whose importance had appeared more temperamental than real, a meeting of men under pressure. Jorge Mendes had insisted José Mourinho is happy at United – only for Mourinho to note his agent had said that, not him. Valencia’s manager Marcelino García Toral, meanwhile, had insisted the word surrender is not in his vocabulary, and his president pointedly, publicly embraced him, but the white hankies had been out in protest. Valencia have won only three league games, and no one in Spain has scored fewer, with Michy Batshuayi likely to be sent back to Chelsea after Christmas. Yet they scored here, and swiftly. The quarter-hour had just passed when Carlos Soler got the opening goal, with the outside of his right boot. Made, like so much of what happened in the first half, by Santi Mina and Piccini, it had fallen to him when Phil Jones attempted to head clear. United trailed yet again and Mourinho was smiling afterwards when it was suggested to him that this recurring theme must drive him mad. Mata had a shot blocked, the ball seeming to strike Mouctar Diakhaby’s arm, and Paul Pogba somehow put it wide from close range. There were occasional glimpses from United but they were brief flickers even though news came through that Juventus trailed. If United could come back they might win the group but Valencia looked the more likely to score. Batshuayi headed over Piccini’s cross and just before half-time sliced a fine opening wide. Between those two opportunities Soler was denied, Diakhaby tumbling in search of the loose ball in the six-yard box, and Dani Parejo turned inside Fellaini, who flew past, only to be stopped by Fred and Eric Bailly. The first half ended with Mina, Soler and Piccini exposing United on the left again and with Mestalla standing to applaud. The second began with them on their feet, handed a second goal that was a portrait of Mourinho’s team, Jones hapless at the heart of it. Soler’s ball was bent beyond the backline, Batshuayi chased and Jones reached out to nudge the ball past Sergio Romero and into his own net. It was United’s first Champions League own goal since 2011. Back then it was Jones, too. But this was not just him, it was all of them: collectively, individually, absolutely, United were poor until their final flurry. Mourinho watched from the bench he never left as Denis Cheryshev’s deflected shot drifted wide and Bailly thumped over. He made changes – Rashford for Fred, Jesse Lingard for Romelu Lukaku – and they had an impact but it took a while for anything truly to change, even with Young Boys adding a second against Juventus. United had been offered an opportunity there but here Valencia were comfortably superior, and Santi Mina almost added the third before Ferran Torres struck over. At the other end Rashford had a long shot which Jaume Doménech gathered easily. In this context it was noteworthy. It was their first shot on target. Their second followed soon after, again from distance, Doménech pushing over Andreas Pereira’s effort. There was a glimpse of life; suddenly there was a reaction, maybe a realisation. Rashford scored and it looked as if there might be something in this, another barely plausible escape. Then Mata had an opportunity and it was on but he could not finish. That would have been too much.