One argument against a people’s vote is that it would tear the country apart. One counterargument is that the country is hopelessly divided anyway and that quitting the EU with a Brexit deal that pleases almost nobody is a recipe for further bitterness. This counterargument is fair enough, as far as it goes. But pro-Europeans also need to show that we have learned lessons from the past three years and that a new referendum can help heal our country. What we need is a process, where we are frank about our options and commit as a society to address the legitimate reasons that led people to vote for Brexit in the first place. This has to begin with an honest debate in parliament. If MPs reject the prime minister’s deal when they return from their Christmas break, as they should, they need to determine urgently whether there are any good alternatives. The time for unicorns is over. MPs must now deal in concrete realities – and see if any viable forms of Brexit have majority support. The chances are that they won’t because the only real alternatives to the prime minister’s deal are to crash out with no deal at all, or to accept full membership of the EU’s single market along with free movement of people. This discovery process will be valuable because parliament will end up with a clearer idea of what is possible. If alternative forms of Brexit have been explored and found wanting, the case for asking the people will have even greater legitimacy than it does today. A people’s vote in 2019 would be very different from the 2016 referendum. Then, voters were promised a fantasy Brexit. A new referendum would be a choice between the reality of staying in and the reality of leaving. It would be naive to suppose that a new vote would be entirely honest. The temptation to distort facts, make unrealistic promises and even lie is always present in politics. But the scope to do so may be limited by the fact that the public has been inoculated by the dishonesty of the 2016 campaign – where, it has to be admitted, the remain camp also spun the truth, though it did not descend to the depths of the leave camp. A people’s vote would also be hard fought. After all, so much is at stake. But we must all try to treat the other side with respect, as the Queen rightly said in her Christmas Day broadcast. Voters are so fed up with bullying politicians that they may punish those who don’t behave with respect – and politicians, fearing that, should behave better. An honest debate in both parliament and a future referendum will not be enough to heal our country. We must also acknowledge that the status quo is not acceptable to many people – and that their legitimate concerns must be addressed. Many people are living in communities with proud histories that have been battered by de-industrialisation and decades of neglect. Our public services have been starved of investment. And we have not done enough to integrate migrants in our society. These are not the only reasons people voted to leave the EU – and public spending isn’t the only answer. But these problems are crying out for attention, whatever happens on Brexit. The snag is that, if we quit the EU, we will have less money to spend because the economy will be damaged. What’s more, the debate over Brexit will go on for years – because the divorce deal will not spell out our future relationship with the EU – and our politicians will have no time to think about anything else. By contrast, if we stay in the EU, MPs will be able to focus on healing our country rather than worrying about Brexit. There will also be a mega-dividend probably worth tens of billions of pounds a year that could be invested in doing just that, according to a report by CommonGround published earlier this month. The report suggests three ideas for spending this dividend: a jumpstart fund for parts of the country that have been starved of investment; a cash infusion for the NHS, above and beyond what the prime minister has promised; and a migration and communities fund for areas that have been challenged by sudden or significant population changes. These are only one set of ideas. Other people will have their own views about what to do. But there is a growing consensus in both civil society and among politicians from different parties that we need to do something along these lines. What we need now is a national debate about how to heal our country and the political will to follow through with action. A people’s vote could be the start of such a process. • Hugo Dixon is co-founder of CommonGround and deputy chair of the People’s Vote campaign