I might be biased but I’ve long held the belief that Liverpool is The Best City In The World™. Being a port city historically, it has all the multiculturalism (and variety and spice) of London, but the closeness, community and solidarity of a smaller community – one that faces challenges and adversity together. In other words, don’t mess with Liverpool; we’re feisty. For a relatively small city, Liverpool has a lot going on. If you’re planning a visit – and you should, there are affordable trains running from London, Birmingham and elsewhere with London Northwestern Railway – it’s hard to know where to start. Here are my recommendations for 24 hours in Liverpool, from the old favourites you’ve definitely heard of to a couple of things that only a local would know. Eating out, or ‘going for a scran’ in ScouseApparently, breakfast is the most important meal of the day – and there’s nowhere better to kick off your trip to Liverpool than Brasco Lounge. It’s the perfect place to start the day and start falling in love with Liverpool. Start your weekend with brunch in Brasco Lounge During the 1980s the Albert Dock was nothing more than derelict ruins, but thanks to some heavy investment it’s now the most picturesque spot in town; filled with pretty shops, exclusive bars and some of the most expensive apartments in the city. Brasco Lounge faces this and has its back to the Pier Head (home to the iconic Liver Building). Inside Brasco you’ll find an eclectic mix of antiques, vintage art and reclaimed wooden tables all bathed in natural light. And what does natural light translate to? Unreal food pictures for “the gram”, that’s what. May I recommend the eggs benedict or florentine, which are the best of either I’ve ever had. If you’re arriving for lunch, grab a bite and quick pic at Love Thy Neighbour on Bold Street, which gets my prize for most creative use of pink paint in the city. Sitting at the end of a row of shops, it boasts a huge blank wall to the side – so they painted it pink and adorned it with illustrations and mantras, the most famous of which being “Avocado is bae”. It’s loved by locals, visitors and bloggers alike for its healthy food, designed to make you feel beautiful inside and out, and its unusual cocktails – beetroot bloody mary anyone? It’s a great place for a spot of lunch, people-watching and getting those all-important holiday snaps. For something a little more eco, there’s Down the Hatch, a vegetarian and vegan restaurant with a difference: it’s not berry bowls and kale sandwiches you’ll find here, it’s kebabs and hotdogs and pulled pork – all with the absence of meat. Many a meat-eater has dined here and sworn blind they couldn’t tell the difference. SightseeingEven if you’re of the opinion that bus tours are a bit on the touristy side, you can’t deny that they’re an effective way of cramming lots of sights and interesting facts into a limited amount of time: it’s efficient travelling. Liverpool has one very special, very Liverpool and very unique bus tour, though, and that’s the Magical Mystery Tour. The Beatles phenomenon remains a huge draw to the city and we’re all very proud of the four local lads who shook the world. Roll up, roll up for the Mystery Tour, even though it’s not much of a mystery that it’ll take you around all of the famous Beatles landmarks such as Strawberry Fields and Penny Lane. You’ll also get to see some other fantastic Liverpool sights along the way all in a warm, covered, Technicolor tour bus. Around 15 minutes north of the city centre, past the (still very active) docklands you’ll find Crosby beach, which is always full of people, no matter what time of the day or night – iron people to be exact. Anthony Gormley’s Another Place art installation features 100 iron men, all staring out to sea. It was supposed to be a temporary exhibit and move on to New York, but the people of Liverpool took these figures to their hearts and we’ve kept them. The locals make sure the beach is kept clean and tidy; it’s our pride and joy. Visit here at sunset for an absolutely breathtaking view. For an architecture hit, stroll through the Georgian Quarter. There’s something about Georgian houses, particularly the windows that do things to me, and here you’ll find gorgeous windows, cobbled streets, ornate front steps and pretty blossom trees. It is without doubt the city’s most photogenic and aesthetically pleasing postcode and it’s perfect for an afternoon stroll. One of the houses on Falkner Street was recently featured on the BBC’s A House Through Time and anyone who’s into period properties and history will be in their element. Liverpool is a city that keeps on surprising you. I’ve only recently discovered the St James Gardens myself. Liverpool’s Anglican cathedral is the largest in the UK and the fifth largest in the world – you can climb the bell tower and take in the famous Liverpool skyline but what I would like to point out is actually ground level. By the main entrance you’ll find a winding path down into the cathedral gardens. Walking through a graveyard might not be for everyone, but there’s a strange sense of peace here. It’s as if the city around you stops existing. This is a wonderful place to catch your breath on your whirlwind tour of Liverpool. Added bonus: you’ll find a natural spring said to have healing properties here. ShoppingLiverpool One is the city’s beating heart of retail. Here you’ll find all your high street stores, restaurant chains and a bustling street scene. You can easily make a day of such retail therapy, grab a cocktail and unwind between stores (one of the real perks of taking the train). You certainly won’t be short of places to exercise that plastic – just don’t be alarmed if you see us Liverpool girls walking round in rollers, it’s just how we get ready for a night out, and here, hair is king. But if you’re after something a bit different, then at the edge of the Baltic Triangle you’ll find the old red-brick Cains Brewery building. It’s now a maze of vintage and antique shops and a recently opened indoor market, which is filled with local independent businesses. It’s quirky heaven – you’ll definitely find some unique souvenirs to take away with you, and maybe even some furniture. Located right next to the world famous Cavern Club is Cavern Walks, a tiny but exclusive shopping mall. This is where our Vivienne Westwood store is and of course, the footballers wives’ favourite, Cricket. You only have to Google Coleen Rooney or Alex Gerrard and one of the first pictures will no doubt be a photo of them swinging a Cricket store bag. If Balenciaga and Givenchy are your poison, then this is worth a swing by. Drinks and nightlifeI wouldn’t say Liverpool was image obsessed, but we appreciate a good aesthetic and we’re not afraid to go the extra mile to make things memorable, especially when it comes to our nightlife. Perhaps that’s why we’re host to The Florist, considered by some to be one of the most Instagramable bars in the UK. You won’t find a prettier place to sip a cocktail. There isn’t a square inch of this place that isn’t covered in some sort of floral arrangement, whether it be neon signs, spray paint or thousands of artificial flowers. Expect your cocktails to be garnished with real flowers (obviously) and make sure to try the hibiscus cooler, you’ll regret it if you don’t. Bongo’s Bingo night has become the city’s unmissable night out Alma de Cuba, meanwhile, might look like a plain, box-shaped former church on the outside, but on the inside it’s one of the most ornately decorated bars you’ve ever seen and is a Liverpool nightlife institution. Early in the evening it’s a sophisticated cocktail bar and restaurant but as it gets late on a Friday and Saturday night you’ll find yourself caught up in a storm of confetti known as the petal drop; then the atmosphere completely changes. The soul of Cuba arrives and you’ll find yourself up on stage burning calories faster than you can consume them with the sexy samba dancers and infectious Latin music. But there’s nothing more alluring than a secret bar and Liverpool has a few – the undisputed pick of the bunch being 81Ltd; hidden at the top of a darkened staircase, behind a secret door in Salt Dog Slims bar and only accessible by a secret code that changes weekly, you’ll (maybe) find the tiny speakeasy bar. With a maximum capacity of 60 people, it fills up fast. If you do manage to find it and you do manage to get in, try the Siberian truth serum cocktail. If you sample just one slice of Liverpool’s nightlife while you’re in the city, make it Bongo’s Bingo. These nights always sell out, so this is something you’d have to buy a ticket for in advance, but it is well worth the extra planning. Hosted by Johnny Bongo, this irreverent bingo night is all about the laughs generated by both the host himself and the ridiculous prizes up for grabs – you could be walking away with anything from a box of Coco Pops to a life-size cut out of Philip Schofield. Jeremy Corbyn himself was a recent guest host at Bongo’s Bingo and one lucky lady got to go home with a life-size, autographed cut out of the man himself. Expect plenty of dancing on the tables and glow sticks as well. Liverpool is a 24-hour city, so there’s plenty to keep you entertained until the first train home. Hop on board with London Northwestern Railway, and soak up the magic Liverpool, it’s a city you’ll never forget. Steph Bannister is the creator of Scouse Bird Problems, a blog and shop celebrating Liverpool lifestyle For the best value tickets, with no booking fee, visit londonnorthwesternrailway.co.uk