“I’ve been falling for years,” writes the Canadian author Katie Inglis in her memoir about grief and the death of her baby son, “scrambling up again, sorting out in fits and spurts, freshly sorted reasonings collapsing in on themselves to make space for new wrack”. The sense of loss she chronicles is both past and present. Grief is a continuum, recovering is continuous, with no identifiable moment of arrival. Is there ever? Elusive, intangible, magical, recovery is, at best, something to be hoped for, though not necessarily to be believed in. After all, you can’t see your recovery, you can’t touch it, as you can a healing wound. Recovery suggests that you can get back to where you were before, which is to say, back to your old self, your well self, your whole, unwounded self. As such, it is a dark word, as well as a magical one. It is the mythical tree in the fairytale forest that has the power to protect you, or crush you. Recovery is teamed with the verb “to recover”, and to recover means to retrieve your former self, to find what you have lost. But with recovery, you cannot go back. Instead, you need to let go of your old self or your old way of living, and to accept who, and what, you have become, and to live differently. To recover, you need to be able to see a future with you in it, you just as you are, however changed, damaged, flawed or fearful. This is what recovery looks like, and another word for it is hope. As well as hope, you need resilience because, as all the people I have spoken to have said again and again, you’re still on your own, and because the thing that took you down might come back. In order to understand how someone recovers – and the people I talked to are in recovery from alcoholism, cancer, loneliness, depression, penury and abuse – it is necessary to see what each has lost. For loss, along with an acute sense of isolation, is what takes each of them down. A sense of connection with others is what saves them. It is the key to being in recovery. Julie Powell, 58, never consciously swapped her family for alcohol. A sociable mother-of-two, she was brought up in a pub with a functioning alcoholic for a mother. She and her husband, Colin, a doctor, had a vibrant, party-filled social life themselves that “revolved around alcohol”. But when Colin secured a job in Australia in 1993, she had to give all that up. But the shock of being in an unfamiliar culture with no support network left her stranded, lonely and isolated. Having a husband and sons “wasn’t enough”, she recalls. “You have no history when you emigrate.” For the next six years, she numbed her acute homesickness with alcohol. “In the morning, I’d put the kettle on, get the milk from the fridge and have a swig of wine. Do another job. Have another swig. When it was an acceptable time to have a drink, I’d put the wine in a glass.” For me, it is very important to connect with other people in recovery. It is a reminder that I still have to work at it Acute homesickness has similar debilitating symptoms to depression. Panic attacks, grief, loss of motivation, and social withdrawal all dogged Powell, but anger, directed at her husband, was the only emotion she recognised. Her marriage unravelled. “I thought, do I stay for the sake of my husband’s job, or say what I want to say, which is: I can’t do this any more.” Her “very loving” husband agreed to return to the UK, but Powell, instead of reintegrating, became a carer to both her parents while struggling with a behaviourally challenging teenage son. Her sense of isolation intensified, and her self-esteem plummeted further. “The only thing that was there 24 hours a day when I needed it was alcohol. It became my partner. I didn’t know how to stop. I’d vomit up the wine, and have another drink straight away.” Then came the crisis point. “Vomiting blood,” she says, “was the start of my recovery. I thought, I don’t want to die like this, you know. I can’t have my children knowing that I died through doing something to myself.” A nurse told her about the Living Room, an addiction recovery centre in Cardiff. The empathy shown by her Living Room counsellor, a recovering alcoholic and “the most compassionate person ever”, was the next step in her recovery. “I was talking to someone who understood the hopelessness of my situation.” Attending group therapy corroborated this empowering sense of connection. “There was just this glimmer of hope, that yes, I can do this. I suddenly thought, I want what they’ve got.” Powell says her recovery isn’t over yet. “It is a process. You are never cured of this. The people who relapse tend to be the people who get complacent.” She attends regular group therapy and now volunteers as a receptionist one day a week for the Living Room. “For me, it is very important to connect with other people in recovery. It is a reminder that I still have to work at it. “To me, recovery means hope. It’s re-establishing my identity, a positive identity, and having meaning to my life – and taking responsibility for it.” As an introverted only child, Jaabir Ramlugon saw his father as the centre of his universe. “We were always very close. I really looked up to him. My dad’s side of the family is Hindu. My dad converted to Islam when he met my mother, so they disowned him.” Ramlugon’s parents moved to north London, from Mauritius in 1981. Ramlugon was bullied at school, and it made him believe that he was not good enough. When he was 13, his father died. “I went back to school in the September and I was just very vulnerable, still in shock. My vulnerability must have been picked up. I became even more reserved, and I was singled out even more. “That’s when I started to feel suicidal.” A year after his father’s death, Ramlugon cracked: “I just want to kill myself, I screamed at my mum.” He was sent to a psychotherapist and put in a special unit at school for pupils with behavioural issues. “Most of my bullies were in there: I was closer to them than before.” By the time he was an adult, Ramlugon had become convinced he brought the suffering on himself. “I have an internal bully now,” he says. “I felt under attack, even though I was trying to work as hard as I could. My depressive episodes started getting more intense. I cried on my way to work.” Being passed over for a promotion in 2014 was, says Ramlugon, “the straw that broke the camel’s back”. The following Saturday, he attempted suicide. “I chatted to my friends so they wouldn’t suspect anything and then I drove to Beachy Head.” He was on the cliff edge, ready to jump when he heard a man’s voice behind him. “Please step away from the edge,” he said. “I just need to talk to you.” It was the expression of concern Ramlugon had been waiting for. “I thought, someone wants to talk to me,” says Ramlugon. “The spell was broken.” Ultimately he was diagnosed with borderline personality disorder. He did therapy, but has since settled on human connection and nature as his lifebuoys. He reaches out to fellow mental health sufferers via Elefriends, the mental health charity Mind’s online support forum, and is now in a relationship with someone he met via a mental health dating website. He also leads one of Mind’s walking support groups. “Socialising is very therapeutic,” says Ramlugon, “and trees, birds, rivers, they are a distraction for me. The connection with nature just feels good, so does the act of walking and talking, having a laugh and a joke. “My anger has gone. It’s strange. I almost try to empathise with my bullies. They were probably in a really bad place and what they did to me was their only way of coping. It doesn’t make it OK.” For him, recovery hinges on letting go of the past. “It doesn’t own me or define me. It has for a long time, but I am in a place where it doesn’t any longer. Talking about it reduces my own shame; it is empowering. “I say to my younger self, ‘There is nothing wrong with you. Nothing that happened to you is your fault.’ “I am proud to use the word recovery. I don’t see darkness all the time, and I have hope. Sometimes I am able to enjoy my life, and that’s a feeling I have not had since my father passed.” When former RAF navigator John Hyde, 85, from Cambridgeshire, was growing up in south London in the 1930s, his father tuned into dance band star Victor Silvester on the radio and taught his sisters ballroom dancing. The young Hyde watched on. Some 70 years later, dancing would rescue him from acute loneliness following the sudden death of his wife on the eve of his 80th birthday in 2013. Hyde met Joan at an RAF flying course when he was 21. A year later, they married. Almost 60 years of marriage ensued, three children and a proper air force family life, sociable and lively. Retirement and civilian life came as a shock – “we met lots of people who wouldn’t invite you into their home” – and the sociable John and Joan gradually withdrew. “We had each other. We did most things together. We went shopping together, visiting the family together, weekends away together.” Sometimes I come in and I almost say: ‘I’m home.’ That’s when you expect to see her, and she’s not there Three days before his 80th birthday, the couple picked up Hyde’s birthday cake – “Joan was so excited about it. It had a model of the Victor aircraft I once flew on.” They went out for lunch and as Joan reached for the dessert menu, she had a stroke. She died later that evening. Hyde’s family offered to stay with their father in the short term but, after 40 years in the RAF navigating in Canberras, Valiants and Victors, steeliness and self-reliance were part of his makeup. “I knew that I had to get over it myself. I said: ‘No one can cure the way I feel at the moment. Only I can do that.’” But he had not bargained for how the shock of his wife’s passing would manifest itself, and how the grief and the loneliness would play tricks on him. “I couldn’t remember her, my mind shut off, my body shut down. It was as if they were protecting me by saying, we are going to shut her out of your life now.” For the next months, Hyde says he existed in a vacuum. “Sometimes I’d stand in the kitchen, crying. It sounds crazy for a man of my age. I lost a lot of weight. I wasn’t eating properly. I’d make something and not fancy it. Joan and I used to take it in turns to cook. “The bed seemed big and empty. I’d get up and go into the kitchen, and say to her, shall I put the kettle on? Men can’t do loneliness,” he says. Then one day, 18 months after his wife’s death, Hyde thought: “I’ve got to do something because, well, you either go under or you survive.” He accepted an invitation to a dance class at the University of the Third Age (U3A). “Dancing again was the start of my recovery,” says Hyde, who was then further persuaded to take up an art class and singing at U3A. He now sings for two hours a week in a choir of fellow pensioners and they perform hits from musicals in a residential home. Gigi and Oklahoma are among his favourites. He is naturally outgoing, and he likes people. He has connected to his old self, even going for a flying lesson, but his recovery has come at a price. “I feel guilty because I am doing things that, had Joan been alive, I never would have done. I think, it’s not fair. If Joan came back tomorrow, I would give it all up.” He still finds himself talking to his late wife. “Sometimes I come in and I almost say: ‘I’m home.’ That’s when you expect to see her, and she’s not there.” For Hyde, being busy and having connections and commitments to others has given him a sense of purpose. He is now an ambassador for the charity Campaign to End Loneliness, and has recently started up a men’s dining club in the village. “We go to the pub and have a coke, about 10 of us. I think we should be able to talk about being on our own, about finding it hard. We should be able to help each other. The trouble is, the men who have joined are the outgoing ones; it’s the ones that haven’t you’ve got to get to.” Amy Carr has always pushed herself to her physical limits. “I was doing Olympic weightlifting at 15. Being a goalkeeper is all about power and speed, but I wanted to be endurance fit.” By the time she graduated in sports and fitness from Northern Illinois University as an overseas student in 2014, former goalkeeper Carr had played in the Fifa U17 Women’s World Cup in New Zealand in 2008 and played for Il Sandviken, Norway’s women’s squad. She decided to retrain as an American universities women’s football coach, securing a place on a graduate assistant football coaching programme at Hastings College, Nebraska, starting in 2015. But in February 2015 she had a seizure. An MRI scan revealed she had a benign brain tumour. She was 23. There are two mes now, two extremes: upbeat me, and downer me. Cancer-me is not very sociable Pre-op surgery revealed a glioblastama, an invasive malignant tumour that affects the central nervous system. The surgery was delayed until July 2015. “I had to tell Nebraska I wasn’t coming. I was devastated.” Carr, who lives in Hemel Hempstead, Hertfordshire, trained hard for her 10-hour surgery. “They told me I was going to be paralysed, and it could last six months or it could be forever. I was awake at one stage during the surgery, for just a few seconds, and I heard the nurse say: “She’s not doing too good.” “When I woke up, I was paralysed down my right side. I couldn’t speak for eight days. My first movement was in my hand. It was probably the best feeling ever,” she says. “I took my first steps on day nine. I went home on day 12 and on day 13 my mum helped me on to my stationary road bike in my lounge. “I can’t go back to my training in the US now. I don’t know how I would get health insurance or travel insurance. I like to plan months and months in advance; I don’t like the unexpected. I’ve had to let go of everything I had planned.” But she still exercises intensively. “Today I am still not in control of the cancer – I exercise so much because I like to be in control. I would happily say I am addicted to exercise. Even if I am behind a desk, I sit on a Swiss ball; it is kind of an obsession.” This year she ran a marathon and is training for a triathlon. “The doctors told me not to do open-water swimming. I will prove them wrong, and prove to myself that I am fine.” Carr longs to recover her pre-cancer self or rather, a new one that is not defined by cancer. “I don’t know when it will stop being in my life. My doctors say I am technically cancer-free, but that I will have to go back for six-monthly tests for the rest of my life. I am always going to have this cloud over me. I am trying to live with it. “If recovery means being fitter than anyone else I train with and know, then yes, I am recovered, but mentally I don’t know if I have. There are two mes now, two extremes: upbeat me, and downer me. Cancer-me is not very sociable. If I’ve been on my own for a while, I slip into isolated, lonely me. I’m not very nice. I’m angry, frustrated. Cancer-me can appear anywhere. I will hide it for a while, and then I’ll take myself off – either to the gym or I’ll go to bed, depending on the time. The thoughts start swirling and go negative. Be sociable, Amy. Why are you on your own? I am disappointed in myself, annoyed. “I can’t say I’m not OK because I’ve just survived cancer, and how many people can say that? “People say, look at you, you’re strong, you’re fit, you’re healthy. I’ve got a good shape, but inside isn’t so great, inside I am not really healthy.” Carr now has a cancer rehab qualification and is working with people who have just been diagnosed or are in recovery. “Helping them helps me,” she says. Carr has written a book about her experiences, The Scars No One Sees: A professional footballer’s life changes when diagnosed with a brain tumour. “I want to get rid of that stigma surrounding recovery. I don’t even know what it means to be recovered. I don’t think you can be fully recovered, ever. Can you?” For Pete Moss, the debt and depression that would one day drive him to a suicide attempt were linked to a series of changes in his employment status. Over four decades, he went from being an employee of British Rail, BA and Cunard Line to being on the minimum wage and then zero-hours contracts for various call centres. Along the way, Moss was passed over for promotion, suffered job losses and once was told he could keep his job but with an increased workload on the same pay, a proposition he rejected. It felt like a degradation, says Moss, from Solihull, West Midlands. “I felt worthless.” He said: “I’d always held down good, well-paid jobs, but I always spent more than I earned.” Credit cards bought holidays, clothes for his sons, and alcohol. “I got drunk every single night.” His Sunderland house fell into negative equity and, following his legal separation in 1999, his wife had custody of their two sons. He quickly became isolated. On sick leave for anxiety and depression from a call centre, he lived “in fear of bailiffs at the door”. If he wasn’t working, he watched TV all day and, every evening, spent five or six hours on Facebook. I started volunteering, visiting people who’ve been where I’ve been. I’ve found some value He had two contacts with the outside world: a weekly coffee morning and, on a Friday, a community dinner plus a choir group provided by his housing association. “I was outgoing, gregarious. No one knew how lonely I was. I felt like a prisoner in my own flat. I thought I would be better off dead – even though I’ve got two beautiful grandkids.” Moss had had cognitive behavioural therapy, which teaches techniques for managing destructive thought patterns, following a breakdown in 2012. “But when I was isolated, the last thing I was able to do was to turn negative things into positives,” says Moss. “Everything was black. I had no hope. “I thought, I can’t bear this any more. I haven’t been a good grandad, I don’t feel worthy of being a grandad. I’ve never been able to buy them anything, not even on their birthdays and Christmas. It doesn’t make it easier, when you see other kids getting lovely gifts from their grandparents.” In February 2016 he attempted to take his own life. “I thought, to hell with it. This is it.” The first step in his recovery was talking to a counsellor at the debt counselling charity Christians Against Poverty (CAP). “They showed me it would take me 16 years to repay my £11,500 debts.” On CAP’s advice, Moss took out a debt relief order. “It was a weight off my shoulders. Somebody cared. “My zero-hours contract dried up. I now haven’t worked since November 2016. But I started volunteering for CAP, visiting people who have been where I’ve been. I’ve found some value, and I’ve broadened my social horizons and started going for walks, too. “I was doing something other than being inside four walls. Interacting with others, outside of the flat – that was the big thing – and people from CAP visited me. ” CAP has taught him how to budget. “I live off £385 a month, and I live within my means. It’s difficult. I struggle every month. I was paid four days ago and I’m skint. “I’ve started to learn to put money aside – I’m saving to see the grandkids – and I’ve got a full cupboard of food for a month.” He has not managed to buy the grandchildren any presents yet. “My son says my company is the gift.” • Genevieve Fox is the author of Milkshakes and Morphine: A Memoir of Love and Life