Why go Those with young children will welcome Newcastle’s earlier, family-friendly celebrations. Seven Stories, the National Centre for Children’s Books, is holding interactive sessions on traditions around the world on New Year’s Eve (£5pp, 11.30am and 2pm). Then the fun starts outside the Civic Centre, with a DJ at 5.30pm and fireworks set to music at 6pm. Adults can go on to one of the area’s many parties, from Sage Gateshead’s evening with the Divine Comedy (tickets from £38.20–£60) to a free bash at 97 and Social, a cocktail bar in Jesmond. Full New Year listings are at newcastlegateshead.com.Stay Grey Street Hotel is a sleek, central hotel in a Georgian building.• Doubles from £123 over New Year, greystreethotel.co.uk Why go Edinburgh hogs the headlines, but its Hogmanay celebrations come at a price (£31 for the street party, £60 for the cèilidh and £65 for the concert). Inverness’s Red Hot Highland Fling, by contrast, is free. It takes place on the banks of the River Ness, compered by comedian Craig Hill, with sets by three Scottish bands: this year the Trad Project, Blazin’ Fiddles and Tidelines. Fireworks explode over Inverness Cathedral at midnight, and there is a mass singalong of Auld Lang Syne.Stay The Glenmoriston Town House is a riverside hotel in an old merchant’s house.• Doubles over New Year from £60, glenmoristontownhouse.com Why go Llanwrtyd Wells, the smallest town in Wales, is the capital of bog-snorkelling, wife-carrying and man-versus-horse races. It is no surprise, then, that it also has an unusual New Year’s Eve celebration. At 10.30pm a torchlit procession follows the “Mari”, a decorated horse’s skull on a pole, to the Abernant Lake Hotel on the edge of town. Here there is a re-enactment of the ancient Welsh tradition of Mari Lwyd, an exchange of challenges in verse between the bearer of the Mari and the occupants of the hotel. There is time for everyone to have a quick drink before the return journey to the town square for the midnight celebrations. Stay The Neuadd Arms is a 19th-century pub and hotel in the centre of Llanwrtyd Wells.• Doubles £100 over New Year, neuaddarmshotel.co.uk Why go Britain’s prettiest seaside town hosts its biggest fancy dress party on New Year’s Eve. The roads are closed to traffic at 6pm and everyone strolls around the streets, showing off their costumes – last year nearly 30,000 joined the party. There are food carts and live music, and a local samba band leads a dancing parade through the winding streets to the harbour. At midnight, there is a huge fireworks display over the pier – with three and half tonnes of bangers, the town’s display rivals those of major cities. Tides permitting, the crowds spill on to the sands for a beach party into the early hours.Stay The Cohort is a bright, recently refurbished hostel in the town centre.• Dorms £56pp for two nights over New’s Year, private rooms (sleeping 3 but only a few left at time of going to press) £118 for two nights, stayatcohort.co.uk Why go The Vikings invaded the coastal village of Flamborough in the late eighth century, and this history is commemorated with a spectacular fire festival each New Year’s Eve. Events kick off with a short burst of fireworks at 10.30pm, followed by a Viking costume parade (everyone is welcome to dress up, join in and win prizes), a battle re-enactment, war drums, fireballs and a torchlit procession with a Viking longship, which is then ceremonially burned. The festival culminates with a big fireworks display on the village green at midnight (free, flamboroughfirefestival.org).Stay Friendly Bagshaw B&B in nearby Bridlington is just 200 yards from the beach and owner Alex is a brilliant baker.• Doubles from £65 over New Year, bagshawbandb.com Why go Nottingham’s usual New Year’s Eve party venue, the castle, is closed for redevelopment until 2020 – but the city will still be seeing 2019 in with a bang. The celebrations have relocated to Old Market Square, where the Winter Wonderland is in full swing. Revellers can start the evening on the ice rink (book ahead) or in one of the bars, which include an après-ski chalet, and sample the street food. There will be DJs playing party tunes from 10.30pm and fireworks as the clock strikes 12.Stay Hart’s, a 32-room boutique hotel near the castle, has a great view of the fireworks. The three-course New Year’s Eve dinner is £65 and the six-course dinner, including a glass of champagne and live music, is £99. • Doubles from £159 over New Year, hartsnottingham.co.uk