Newcastle took time to get going here but, after perking up in the second half, they produced the best move of the match. It led to a fine goal for Solomon Rondon and three precious points for Rafael Benitez’s team. Benitez was presented this week with the Premier League’s manager of the month award for November week but, ever the realist, suggested that avoiding relegation remained his club’s top priority for the season, describing the trip to Huddersfield, who would certainly settle for similar, as “a massive final”. Both teams were deprived of key players but Huddersfield initially adapted far better. Their fluidity from the start contrasted with the visitors’ stutters. Juninho Bacuna did well in midfield in the first without offering the influence normally provided by Aaron Mooy, who will be unavailable until February because of injury, and Chris Löwe caused problems in an advanced role on the left, discomforting Manquillo, who was operating at right wing-back for Newcastle owing to the suspension of DeAndre Yedlin. Löwe was not only dangerous from open play. In the third minute he deposited a corner on to the foot of Laurent Depoitre, who hooked over the bar from eight yards. Löwe was then given a chance to score himself in the 10th minute when Philip Billing intercepted a slack pass in midfield before threading a deft one through to Alex Pritchard, who picked out Löwe at the edge of the area. The German did not connect properly with a volley, however, and sent his shot bobbling wide. While the floodlights at the John Smith Stadium twice flickered ominously in the first half before recovering, Billing shone throughout. He carried the ball forward intelligently, sprayed passes around and helped to break up Newcastle’s play. Newcastle, mind you, frequently did that themselves in the first half, Rafael Benitez’s side unable to cobble together anything from open play. They did, at least, threaten in the first period from a pair of freekicks. The first was well-worked, Mohamed Diamé passing short to Ki Sung-Yeung, who dropped a long pass over the top of the home defence and into the path of Fabian Schär. Goalkeeper Joan Lössl blocked the Swiss defender’s shot from close-range. Later Schär tried to beat him from much farther out, catching the goalkeeper by surprise by going directly for goal with a freekick from near the halfway line. It was a cute idea but the shot flew a couple of yards over the bar. Billing produced the game’s best freekick, sending a superb effort goalwards from 25-yards but Martin Dubravka tipped it over the bar. With Federico Federez missing through injury, Newcastle’s three-man central defence looked ill-at-ease. But that did not justify the wild tackle by Jamaal Lascelles that sent Depoitre crashing into the advertising boards in the first half. Plenty of referees would have sent off the defender but Anthony Taylor decided a yellow sufficed. Benitez pulled his team together at half-time. They played with much more cohesion and sharpness after the break. Huddersfield seemed spooked, and Christian Atsu nearly profited from sloppy defending in the 51st minute, pouncing on a loose ball in the area before being denied by Lössl. Huddersfield’s reprieve was short-lived. Within four-minutes they were undone by Newcastle’s best move of the match. The visitors built from the back before Ayoze Perez slipped a pass from the left through to Manquillo, who curled a low cross to Rondon. The striker finished expertly to claim his fourth league goal since joining on loan from West Bromwich Albion. Huddersfield tried doggedly to regain the initiative but lacked precision and Newcastle, by now compact and resilient, no longer gave them hope.