Before they sit down in a conference room in a New York hotel, Tarana Burke and Steve McQueen have never met, but they share an interest in social justice, sexual violence – in particular, how the trauma of assault plays down the generations – and questions of how victim representation is policed in pop culture. Burke, 45, is the Bronx-born senior director of Girls for Gender Equality, a lifelong educator and activist and, most recognisably, the founder of the MeToo movement which, 12 years before the alleged victims of Harvey Weinstein came forward, was set up to work with survivors of sexual trauma. McQueen is the English director of 12 Years A Slave, which won best picture at the 2014 Oscars, and most recently directed Widows, starring Viola Davis. The heist movie was in production in Chicago when the MeToo story broke and, says McQueen, cast and crew “talked and talked and talked. And listened and listened, more importantly for me. Stupid to say, but I was shocked.” Together, they discuss the astonishing testimonies unleashed by MeToo, as well as the backlash, and how Burke and McQueen would like to see the movement better served by the media, particularly the racial and class implications of who gets to be a “good” victim. They talk about their families’ roots in the West Indies and disagree, very mildly, on the place held by women within Black Lives Matter. Burke is passionate, ferocious, often very humorous about the contradictions and frailties of the MeToo movement, and the vision – developed over decades of unglamorous and largely unrecognised work – underpinning it. McQueen, meanwhile, is curious, soft-spoken and deferential to the expertise of the woman before him. It is a fascinating conversation. Steve McQueen Let’s just start! I think that what you’ve done has been extraordinarily influential. You’ve shifted everything, and people are thinking about things that happened to them in the past, and unearthing things that have been suppressed. It’s incredible. Misogyny is like a vampire: you’ve got to shoot him with silver bullets and put a stake through his heart Tarana Burke Yes, and on both sides: I think survivors have suppressed things, and so have perpetrators, who now have a different understanding of consent. SM I knew there would be a backlash. [Misogyny] is like a vampire: you’ve got to wake him up at dawn, put silver pennies on his eyes, shoot him with silver bullets and put a stake through his heart. As a black person, I can’t be anything other than who I am, or be looked upon in other people’s gaze as who they think I am. But white women who come into this conversation, there’s an easy way out – TB OK, and you’re saying that versus – SM – I don’t want to mansplain, but as far as I see things with my mother and my sister, or my siblings, there’s a double – TB Whammy? SM Yes. To being a black woman. TB Oh, absolutely. I was talking the other day about a book called All The Women Are White, All The Blacks Are Men, But Some Of Us Are Brave. SM Great title. TB Right? And one of the things it deals with is the erasure, not just from the movement but in general, of black women, for whom there’s a choice: do I choose to be black first, or do I choose to be a woman? SM Wait, do you have to make a choice? Is there a choice? TB There is often a pull to make a choice. When Black Lives Matter took off, [I was involved in] Say Her Name, which is a movement about saying the names of the black women who were also subjected to police brutality. And I was told, “You’re trying to distract from these black men being killed. These black men are losing their lives.” Number one, black women also get killed – although largely sexually assaulted – by police. A lot of people when they say Black Lives Matter, they mean black men’s lives matter. SM Do you think that? I don’t know if I agree. TB I think that what the men will say is absolutely not – we’re talking about all black people. But when you see the difference in the rallying around, for example, the sister who was killed by the police in Baltimore [23-year-old Korryn Gaines, who was shot in 2016], there was nowhere near the groundswell of support there was around Trayvon Martin or Eric Garner. You cannot get black men to come out in force in the ways that we do for them, or the ways they do for black men. SM So, to go back to my convoluted question about white women coming into the debate? TB You mean, how committed are they? One of the backlashes that I’ve seen this year is a contingent of conservative white women who are saying things like, “These women are responsible for what happened to them, and you’re trying to attack my son, my husband, my brother.” Like around [Supreme Court Justice Brett] Kavanaugh: there are tons of white women who supported him, which I think is a case of them being invested in the white men in their lives’ interests more than their own. Then there are the white women on the other side who are more liberal, and who centre women’s experience – but when they say women, they mean white women. SM The irony is that the thing that made MeToo visible throughout the world was white women. I’m a 45-year-old black woman who the media tries to ignore. They are looking for other MeToo leadership TB And I have said publicly that I don’t have an issue with that. SM Whatever works. TB Right. I’ve been at this work, along with so many other women of colour, for years, and nothing that we could’ve done would’ve elevated this issue into the international spotlight. I’m a 45-year-old black woman from the Bronx who the media tries to ignore in some ways – who will acknowledge me as the person who “coined the phrase” MeToo, or as “the founder but not the leader”. They are constantly looking for other leadership. SM Yes, I’ve heard journalists say that, in MeToo and Time’s Up, there are no black leaders, and I’ve thought, what? Why is that? TB Because they can’t see us. Let me say that Alyssa Milano, who put out the first tweet [in October 2017], has spent this whole year passing the mic. She was corrected by black women largely, changed the tweet immediately [to recognise Burke], and from that time on when people call her, she passes it on to me. SM That’s good. TB But regardless, they still will erase me. Due diligence in the media is to say “Alyssa Milano, the leader of the MeToo movement” and then in parentheses “original phrase coined by Tarana Burke in 2006”. And I don’t know how to say this without it sounding like “I should be the king” – I’m not saying that. I’m saying that, because of the investment in the work, there should at least be a conversation that says there’s a bigger vision. SM That’s why racism is so huge. It’s ginormous. That’s the thing that’s deafening. TB It’s the thread that runs through. Your narrative is being erased by these public perceptions set up by the media. There’s this real conundrum, of people who celebrate me as an individual, but still won’t buy into what I’m saying because they’re inundated with headlines about who the MeToo movement’s going to take down next. SM When MeToo hit, we were in the middle of making Widows in Chicago and we just sat down and talked. I was shocked about certain things. I was like, really? Oh, wow. TB What’s interesting is that if we woke up tomorrow and 13 million people had a disease – because that’s what these people said, “Me too! I’ve got it, too!” – the whole world would stop. There would be three questions: how did we get here; how do we stop it; and how do we make sure it never happens again? Those three questions haven’t been answered in a year. It’s so commonplace that most of us don’t even think about it. SM That’s what shocked me, the normalisation of someone touching you inappropriately. It freaked me out a bit. There’s a way that black parents inundate our children with rules – girls more so TB You’re married, right? SM Yes – well, I’ve had a partner for 23 years and we have two children. TB Did you talk to your wife about it? SM Yes I did, and she said some things I don’t want to talk about, that were very – TB – eye-opening? SM Yes. Again, it’s heavy. I wish I could articulate it better, but I was also ashamed of myself, in a way – that I wasn’t sensitive enough to know about this. And maybe I’d normalised a certain behaviour. Not that I’d participated, but I never thought of it. I think what you did is wake a lot of people up to a certain pain that they had. TB In Widows, which I watched last night, there’s a scene where one of the women is regularly abused by her husband. And you see her with a black eye, and they’re sitting at breakfast, and he kind of plays around with her face and says, “Put some makeup on, that makes me uncomfortable.” And you’d think, when he died, she’d be like, “Yay!” And that’s not how it happens. She still has this loyalty to him. It’s nuanced. I thought that was a really interesting scene. SM I think there’s a kind of recklessness that comes after someone close to you has died. You realise your mortality – there’s a sort of liberation. That character, Alice, her mother hits her, too – and that’s conditioning. TB My daughter mentioned that. SM Interestingly enough, I’m from a West Indian family – TB Where are your family from? SM From Grenada and Trinidad. TB [Indicating herself] St Kitts. SM What’s interesting is that violence – I was beaten as a child – TB [Nodding vigorously] – oh yeah – SM – it’s interesting how that violence is normalised. TB I think there’s something about how, in marginalised communities, in our fervour to make sure our kids [don’t get into trouble], we overdo some stuff. There’s a way that black parents inundate our children with rules. And girls get it more so than anything. SM Absolutely. TB Things like: you don’t let anybody touch your private parts; you don’t sit on a grown man’s lap. There’s a list I could run through. We all got that, and it’s an effort to keep your children safe. What happened in my case – I was six the first time – was that you have the rules, and the number one thing kids want to accomplish is not getting into trouble. We will do anything not to get in trouble. SM Right. You don’t want to get licked. TB Right. Part of the grooming in our community is: you did something wrong, you have to protect this secret. If so-and-so finds out, you’re going to get in trouble. There are these narratives we have to undo in our community that come from… you know [bursts out laughing], 12 Years A Slave. SM [Laughing] Precisely. To state the obvious: violence self-perpetuates down the generations. A lot of healing needs to be done. TB So I have a question for you. One of the things I’m interested in is pop culture narratives around sexual violence, and the depiction of who gets to be a victim and who doesn’t. Do you feel a sense of responsibility? Do you feel a push‑pull around wanting to be a part of shifting the narrative and wanting to be super-authentic? Does that make sense? SM I think one wants to be part of shifting the narrative, absolutely. Somehow there’s got to be a way of imagining a situation where sex and the pleasures of sex are much more in balance, and much more enjoyable – where both people have equal engagement. I think that’s way more sexy. TB Yes, there’s ways to make consent sexy. SM The whole idea of men showing vulnerability is an issue. That has to be addressed – where it’s not a weakness, it’s a huge advantage. The dumbness about how this interaction has been popularised is absolutely crazy. TB To make male vulnerability sexy would be amazing. I have a friend in the BDSM world, and we had this really wonderful conversation once about what the world can learn from BDSM because it’s all based on consent. SM Yup. We are conditioned to think of healing as a hot bubble bath with candles TB It may be distasteful to people, because of our puritanical whatever, but it’s not about engaging in the acts – it’s about taking lessons from that. Although when this person told me about it, I said, ‘I don’t think the world’s ready for the MeToo movement to start pushing ideas about BDSM.’ [Both laugh]. We’re still trying to get folks to get comfortable with the idea that sexual assault is wrong. SM You’ve gone to the seed of the question. I think once people have an idea about how to talk about it, or popularise it, that’s when things will be dealt with. But it’s healing first. We can’t jump the gun. TB Healing is also something that has to be popularised. I think that folks engage from a place of pity: even the narratives you see in the media [about victimhood] are about the broken-down person. We need to see more than that. There are so many survivors who don’t understand that healing is possible, because they have been conditioned to think of someone in a hot bubble bath with candles, or meditating – these commercialised ideas that healing has a beginning, a middle and an end. This was what I realised about Dr [Christine] Blasey Ford: that many people don’t understand the lifecycle of a survivor. Those millions of people who came forward and said MeToo were not talking about things that happened the day before. This is years of stuff, and [responses to it] are highly gendered. When men come forward to say they were molested by priests when they were children, you don’t hear people push back and say, “Why did you wait so long? Why didn’t you go to the police?” But when women come forward it’s, “Oh, what were you wearing? Did you entice that person?” Same thing with race. Often I’ve said that, while sexual violence does not discriminate, our response is highly racial – around who gets to be a victim and who gets sympathy. We are all socialised to respond to the vulnerability of white women first. So you have the biggest names in Hollywood – they’re thin, beautiful, wealthy, glamorous white women, top of the food chain. We want to know everything about them; what they eat, who they’re married to, so it’s no surprise that we’d want to know about this part of their lives that was broken, too. I definitely don’t blame them, they are also survivors. It’s not their fault the world responds to them that way. But they can also use that spotlight to amplify other folks who get less visibility. SM I just wish that could also be done racially. TB You mean, around sexual violence within race? Yes. That’s another layer to peel back. When Bill Cosby happened, there was an incredible backlash within the community. “These women are lying, he’s America’s dad,” all that. Every possible reason it wasn’t true. That was painful. SM Very painful. TB It brought up this complicated conversation, because we know there’s a very real history of black men being falsely accused of sexual assault by white women. That’s not a debatable fact – we know it from Emmett Till. The other thing we know is that when any violence happens in a community, it’s at the hands mostly of the people in that community. So that means Asian men are raping Asian women; white men are raping white women; black men are raping black women. When it comes to black folks, because of that complicated history around false accusations, it becomes a shield not to deal with sexual violence at all. SM It’s also to do with the fact that Bill Cosby or Mike Tyson, [we] don’t want them taken down by a largely white media. TB [You hear people say] “Oh, Cosby has to go to jail, but Harvey Weinstein and Matt Lauer didn’t?’ And my response is, “So we should not hold any black men accountable till all the white men go to jail? That’s what we’re waiting for?” But what you said is right, we don’t want to take down our icons. We’re invested in their success in a way that is detrimental to our own. SM I understand it, in a way. But in order for us to grow, we have to deal with it. TB I don’t know what the solution is. If a group of black women actresses, or singers, came forward together, like with Weinstein, and said this thing happened – that would shift things so dramatically. They would still catch a hell of a backlash, more than white women. But I have based my work on the black women who did talk about their experiences. I would go into the classroom and say Mary J Blige, Queen Latifah, Oprah are all survivors of sexual violence, and they could connect to that. SM When there are black men [facing] sexual harassment allegations, the media just goes to town. Goes. To. Town. TB Like Ray Rice, the NFL player caught on video beating his wife. He knocked her out and dragged her out of the elevator. It was horrific. But then this thing happened where he became – SM – a monster. TB – a monster. So your point about it coming back to race, it creates these dynamics where we’re conflicted. SM It comes back to the MeToo movement and how there’s a situation where some people don’t even know you exist. It does my head in. It all comes back to perception, to stereotypes. TB I’ve talked about my personal struggle around this. If you erase me, then you erase the vision for this work, and that’s problematic. If you keep saying, “She coined the phrase” [laughs], it erases even my credibility to talk about it. SM I think the only way of doing it is to say you need more black journalists, people who have independence in the media, a bigger reach. Because right now, even making this picture [Widows] is dependent on some white person’s whim. I don’t like it. We have to find our independence. • This conversation appears in the Guardian’s Weekend magazine and has been edited and abridged for length. If you would like a comment on this piece to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).