Turning up for a Football Association coaching course with a fractured hand damaged during an ill-fated stint in goal was never going to be a good look. Luckily, the FA’s Level One coaching course was surprising enough that even the appearance of being utterly ill-suited to it did not turn out to be a massive disadvantage. There were a few preconceptions about the learning experience walking into the Douglas Eyre sports centre in Walthamstow, north-east London. Tables and chairs laid out, a learning journal and pen awaiting us, a projector and a much-needed urn of coffee heating up. It looked as if we were in for a series of lectures. But Level One has gone through a transformation. After a quick introduction it was time to get thrown in at the deep end and head straight for the pitch. You want to coach? Get out there and do it. With the potential sale of Wembley falling through, and its projected short-term windfall for grassroots, the FA must continue its quiet push to increase the number of qualified coaches working with football-mad youngsters in parks, recs and indoor halls. An estimated 17,000 new coaches will pass their Level One this season. At the turn of the millennium, less than 1% of grassroots teams had a qualified coach. In 2018 there are around 70,000 teams nationwide and 89% are led by a qualified coach. The target is 100%, and the FA recently modernised the course to try to strike more chords with people it regards as the lifeblood of grassroots. “When Level One was introduced 18 years ago, the big debate was should the resource be on VHS or DVD. Now so much is done in the digital world via mobiles and tablet – the workplace is changing all the time – and we aim to reflect that,” an FA spokesperson says. The most obvious change is taking so much of the learning on to the pitch. Absorbing practical experience is at the heart of it all. “I want you to be the coach you want to be. I don’t want you to be me. Find your coaching identity,” says our tutor Dr Colin King, a wise observer of human behaviour who filled our course with a mix of thought-provoking questions and wisecracks about Crystal Palace. Our group was a mixed bunch – 14 men and five women, with a range of accents including Sudanese, Iranian, Bulgarian, Italian and Vietnamese. Among us was a coach driver, a mortgage adviser, an IT guy, a former banker, a tennis coach, a student, a terrible stand-in five-a-side goalkeeper and one person who answered the question: “What do you do?” with a vaguely dazed: “I am still finding out.” Dr King asked how much sleep we had and whether we took on any fluids and breakfast. A smattering of hands went up. According to FA records, since 2010 it has processed 200,574 coaching qualifications from Level One to the Uefa pro licence. In terms of the ratio of players to coaches, England remains on catch-up compared with the European countries held up as the great success stories. Whether it is Iceland, which insists on at least a Uefa B standard coach to guide young footballers from the age of 10, or the production lines from the recent World Cup winners France, Germany and Spain, there is an awareness that grassroots coaching in England needs attention. So here we are half an hour into our course in Walthamstow, paired up with a partner and given a few minutes to plan a session to deliver to the rest of the group. Suddenly we are nervously laying out cones and bibs and trying to explain the aim of our game. One of the aspiring coaches came up with a drill with a warning: if you don’t reach five consecutive passes you must do 10 press-ups. Dr King’s face was a picture. Positive messaging is a big thing in the FA’s current coaching philosophy. “What does it do for a player if he is punished for making a mistake or not being able to do the task?” he asks. Over the five days, the standard of coaching and confidence levels grew. Improving players, encouraging players and prioritising their needs rather than your own fancy ideas as a would-be Pep is fundamental. The England DNA is a theme that keeps coming up. There is a strong feeling the FA wants to create a culture of coaching that starts right at the first young kicks of grassroots. The course also helps coaches with essential challenges off the pitch, with modules about safeguarding children and an introduction to first aid. There was a lot packed in and at the end, armed with a qualification, we felt ready and motivated to do our bit for a new generation who love playing football. The number of active footballers in England who play on a regular basis is 11 million. Some three million of them are youngsters. The London Leopards programme is an example of how local football associations are keen to encourage more female coaches by supporting them through the Level One and shadowing professional coaches. Our group came into Level One from a variety of places: Charlie just couldn’t let go of football once he stopped playing. Steve was helping out with his son’s under-seven team and hoped to understand how to develop players better. Kayo was there because he wanted to help young people in his community. Caroline had ambitions as a potential career path but was equally open to volunteering in the park. Stefano used to play semi-pro but had to retire through injury. Nicky gave up a high-pressure job and wanted to start a franchise. The impression Level One made was clear when Dr King asked how many of us wanted to take Level Two. A good show of hands, and a smile from our tutor, said it all.