I was on a tram recently and I heard an unmistakable sound. It was a low but loud-enough “tsk.” I would have turned around to see what had raised this woman’s ire on such a crowded Melbourne tram, but it was hard to move because I was wearing a massive backpack. The “tsk, tsk,” was right behind my ear now. Could it be … directed at me? “You shouldn’t be wearing your backpack on the tram. People can’t get past you!” the tsker told me. She looked furious. I pretended not to understand English and kept the backpack on. It happened again last week – being told off by a stranger for wearing a large backpack on a crowded tram. I wondered – had I missed the memo? Was wearing backpacks on trams now on par with leaving a voicemail instead of texting? Or reclining your seat on a short-haul flight? What are the latest things that are now considered so wrong, that strangers might call you out for doing them? You’re talking to them, and they are listening, sort of. But they are also just scrolling, maybe faving stuff, maybe checking their Instagram likes. But they are still listening because even though they aren’t looking at you when you tell them the doctor said to come in for more tests, because they don’t know what it is, your friend is going “uh huh, yeah, uh huh,” and nodding their head, which must mean they are paying attention to you, right? (This breach also applies when someone thinks it’s OK to order coffee or stand at the checkout while simultaneously speaking on their phone.) Not only has your friend tagged you on social media in a group photo without your permission – but it’s your bad side! In fact, you are all side! You look like a side of beef! Where did your neck go? When you first see the photo, you gasp and try to delete it. But you can’t delete it. Only she can delete. Then you run to the mirror to see if you actually look like that. Why would someone who claims to be your friend put such a hideous photo of you on the internet? Of course she looks hot. She looks 10kg thinner than she really is. The compliments are rolling in under the photo: “What a babe!” “Gorgeous!!!!” “You look AMAZING!!!!!” You text your friend. “Can you please take that photo down? It makes me look terrible!” “But I love it! So many people have liked it! You look great!” No. You look great. Two seemingly unrelated stories have emerged this week: millennials are rejecting canned tuna (tuna sales are down 42% in the last three decades, The Wall Street Journal reported) and office space are shrinking to their smallest square metres per person yet. (Since 2010, the average amount of floor space per employee has dropped by 33% according to the New Yorker). But of course the two are related. You are touching elbows with your coworkers in your teeny tiny open plan office, then they crack open a stinky can of tuna, which is basically cat food, and the smell makes you gag and your eyes water. Or, even worse, they COOK IT IN THE MICROWAVE and DISTRIBUTE the smell across the entire 33% less floor space as they walk back to their desks with their revolting lunch. The smell is offensive. Don’t eat tuna at work! And rethink other smelly foods – bananas and boiled eggs. Where did it say on this train carriage that we are the “Communal Listening Car”? We are in the Quiet Car FFS. Where are your headphones dude? Do you want to borrow mine? Your sound is tinny, the clip you are watching is boring. Is it the new Eminem? The sound is so bad, it could be Kylie. I get that you’re into it because you have your eyes closed and you are nodding your head in time as the sound is up to 10, but this packed train carriage is DYING as you replay over and over the same lame YouTube clip without headphones and someone would say something to you, but you have a tattoo of Carl Williams on your neck. No, don’t take my phone away from me and scroll! I only want to show you one photo – the photo of the hot air balloon, and I can show you that photo as I hold the phone myself. No! Stop scrolling – it’s not just that you’ll see the 12 rejected selfies before I got the right one, it’s that there’s screen shots on there of private messages, and a photo of a body-part thing (NO - DON’T LOOK TOO CLOSELY AT THAT! GIVE ME MY PHONE BACK!!) If I want to show you a photo, do as Sheryl Sandberg advised and Lean In, and I’ll show you just the one of the hot air balloons. That scene in Handmaid’s Tale, where they take poor one-eyed Janine to the middle of a field and everyone picks up a stone, but they don’t have the heart to throw it? At writers’ festivals now, if people in the audience make a statement, if they start talking about their (unpublished) novel – it’s stone throwing time. Such is the hatred of the audience member statement, that after a session, people will just want to talk about the terrible guy that asked the long three-pronged question, rather than anything that the author said. The plane has landed. The seatbelt sign is off. Everyone rushes to the aisle like their seats are on fire and have been told to evacuate the plane immediately … then they stand there for 10 minutes pressed uncomfortably together, while those stairs on wheels are affixed. Then they rush to get off, pushing you in the back with their bags. They must be in a real hurry … to get to the baggage carousel where they will wait for another 15 minutes. • Brigid Delaney is a Guardian Australia writer and columnist