Jessie Ware and her mother Lennie have entertained and grilled guests including Nigella Lawson, Sadiq Khan, Sam Smith and Stacey Dooley about their eating habits on their podcast Table Manners. We ask them about their food highs and lows of 2018. Lennie: My son took me for lunch at [London restaurant] Spring on my birthday and it was really exceptional. Everything is very simple but beautifully done. I didn’t know that you could deep-fry sage leaves, for example. Jessie: Best meal? It’s a toss-up between the Taste of China menu at A Wong and Brat. We had the turbot with smoked potatoes on the side and I think it’s one of the most divine things I’ve ever tasted. We had blood pudding too. I’m pregnant and craving it in such a big way. I presume it’s for iron. I’m also craving chocolate - I hear it’s because you lack in magnesium. It makes a lot of sense because I’m having bad leg cramps at night. I’ve got a hot chocolate in my hand as we speak. Lennie: Chicken soup with matzah balls. I don’t really have a signature dish but I do like cooking Jewish food. I’m a feeder. If there’s no food left on the table at the end of the meal, I think I haven’t done my job properly. There has to be at least as much again. My motto is always have more than enough. Jessie: I love doing Marbella chicken. I like cooking mediocre curries. I was ready to have a total love affair with a slow cooker when the new kitchen was going in. My poor nanny was eating this beef that had been cooking for about 15 hours so you’d have thought it would melt in your mouth but she got a bit caught in her throat and I had to do the Heimlich manoeuvre. That was me and slow-cooking done. Crock pot, you’re dead to me. Lennie: I have a little house on a tiny island called Skopelos. For me it’s the most beautiful place on earth, and I’ve become very food of Greek food. I like Middle Eastern food, Ottolenghi has changed the way we all eat now. He’s just wonderful. Jessie: Greek food is really underrated. I go every year and I adore it. Lennie: I love cheese and tomato sandwiches, really sharp cheddar with Jewish black bread. Or a roast dinner with beef, lamb or chicken. I’m not big on dessert. I’d have … what’s the thing that wobbles? Panna cotta. Jessie: Two starters. I’d go proper Friday night and have my mum’s chopped liver with sweet gherkin and grated egg, on matzah or really good halla bread. My mum’s chicken soup and my grandma’s matzah balls. I’d probably put in her gefilte fish too. For the main, I’d go for a Christmas dinner. I’d have my mum’s red cabbage and bread sauce and whole jar of cranberry sauce for myself, and copious amount of gravy. And then pudding … it’s a toss-up between tiramisu or my old favourite, Haagen Daz vanilla ice-cream with double pouring cream over the top. Sorbets are a waste of time. Lennie: On the podcast, it was when poor George Ezra came. Jessie had over-marinated short ribs and cooked them for too short a time. They were absolutely disgusting. We had to order in lamb chops. He was very good-spirited about it. Jessie: He was very enthusiastic about the Eton mess. Lennie: Marcus Rashford and Jesse Lingard together. Gary Lineker definitely. We’d love Barbra Streisand, and Bette Midler. Imagine! We’d make her sing. Jessie: My mum keeps suggesting Piers Morgan because she wants to ask him if his mum’s proud of him but I don’t know if that would be a fun dinner. Lennie: I can see why everyone is changing towards being vegan, but it’s terribly annoying to have vegetarians for dinner. But Ottolenghi has made vegetables sexy, hasn’t he? I love aubergine parmigiana. I’m not mad about quinoa though. Grainy frogspawn, isn’t it? You have to add lots of things to it otherwise it’s crap, isn’t it? Jessie: Clean-eating. I think I’ve been a victim of it and been obsessed by it and now I’m kind of over it. Lennie: Probably Jessie. I’m more experienced, she’s more inventive. Jessie: My mum, definitely. Her seasoning is always on point. My daughter has become such a fussy eater. She won’t eat my food but she’ll eat hers. I jumped for joy when I saw her dip a carrot baton into hummus today. • Listen to the Table Manners live special with John Bishop 