So, Steve Baker, Jacob Rees-Mogg and the rest of you, was that really worth it? After the day of folly it doesn’t look that way. In the end, the interminably long-discussed Conservative leadership challenge to Theresa May has come to nothing. When it came to it – even in a secret ballot where MPs could set their public protestations of loyalty to one side – it proved to be more mouth than trousers, a scary firework banger, but a one-day wonder, a brief distraction from the serious business of Brexit. Tomorrow, grownup politics, damned difficult politics, resumes after today’s hiatus. The result showed what we knew already. The Tories are a very divided party, of whom a clear majority supports May as leader even in a bad Brexit crisis. The critics went for the kill, but May’s 200-117 victory is a decisive one. It’s a better result for May than when she won the leadership against Andrea Leadsom and Michael Gove in 2016 (she got 199 back then; against their 130). To coin a phrase, nothing has changed. The echo of 1995, when the same part of the Tory party (and some of the same individuals) forced John Major to put his leadership on the line – Major won by 218-89 over John Redwood – is very strong. May will know, though, that Major’s victory was entirely pyrrhic. May’s victory could be pyrrhic too. The Tory party’s chances of winning a working majority that would last a full term were certainly not helped by today’s challenge. Many groups should learn a lesson from the non-event of 12 December. First in the queue, obviously enough, are its immediate authors, the delusional Tory backbench plotters who thought that a leadership challenge would somehow transform the politics of delivering Brexit in a hung parliament, turning an intractable national standoff into an easy shoo-in for the nationalist Tory fanatics. It was never going to happen. The Thames would be more likely to flow backwards. A period of silence would be welcome, also, from the superficial political culture of much of the wider Tory party at the grassroots level. There is no party in British politics that is so obsessed with leadership navel-gazing as the Tories. Some may argue that Labour and the Liberal Democrats each have huge reasons to worry about their own leaders too, but these parties rarely come even close to scratching their leadership itch as relentlessly as the Tories do. Tory websites such as ConservativeHome are forever conducting beauty contests about the succession, deciding who’s up and who’s down. There is something fundamentally unserious about this. The media, too, should eat some humble pie this Christmas. We tend to talk up leadership contests at the slightest excuse. They are easy journalism, low-hanging fruit. We have spent months bigging up a possible challenge to May when a few minutes’ serious reflection would have shown its strict limits. We gave so much publicity to Rees-Mogg and the rest that it went to their heads. And in the end? The truth is – and always was – that the implacable anti-Europeans were never going to muster the votes to get rid of May. The numbers were clear. So were the lack of realistic options. Above all, as Kenneth Clarke put it earlier today, a contest was “unhelpful, irrelevant and irresponsible”. May would have had to have been found drunk in the gutter before most Tory MPs would have voted her out at a difficult time like this. And May would probably have been an even-money chance to survive if that is what it took to stop Boris Johnson. So, why did it happen? One problem is that too many Tories are too easily beguiled by their own imaginary version of history. The anti-May plotters probably thought that real backbench discomfort with May’s Brexit deal – which caused her to delay the Brexit deal vote this week – would translate seamlessly into the wish to oust her. They were wrong. They looked back to 1990 and perhaps remembered that although Margaret Thatcher won enough votes to beat Michael Heseltine, they weren’t enough to save her leadership. Perhaps they thought the same would happen today. They were wrong. Perhaps they looked back to the ousting of Iain Duncan Smith in 2003 – the only other time that a confidence vote has been called against a recent Tory leader – and imagined that May could be got rid of the same way. They were wrong about that too. More profoundly – much more profoundly – this vote was a wake-up call about the terminal sterility of a certain kind of Conservative vision. It’s a kind of Conservatism that is a confluence of two different traditions, and the Tory party is too respectful to both of them. On the one hand, there is a white establishment tradition, largely English rather than British in mentality, that has not come to terms with the loss of empire, dislikes foreigners, and which somehow equates Brexit with the restoration of British superiority and power. On the other, there are Thatcher’s children, often self-made, self-confident, petit bourgeois, anti-foreigner and anti-state, flirting with Ukip, beguiled by the Great in Great Britain and irreconcilable to any European engagement. May’s critics are genuinely hopeless at politics. They can cause a lot of trouble. But they cannot, will not, take responsibility for practical action in government. They appear to believe that there is a Commons majority for their faith-based, crash-out, free-at-last, ourselves-alone Brexit if only they can install a true believer and bring the DUP back onside. The vote confirmed that is not true. The naivety is breathtaking. Such a Tory leader would lose any Brexit bill or confidence vote. Luckily for the Tory party, most MPs proved today they are not so foolish. In the end, it’s the recklessness over Ireland, an instinct that lies deep in the DNA of part of the Tory party, that is the most frightening piece of foolishness. These fanatics, playing footsie with a DUP clique that puts sectarianism above the wider needs of a Northern Ireland that voted remain, are the direct political descendants, though with half the talent, of people such as Lord Randolph Churchill in the 1890s, FE Smith in the 1910s and Enoch Powell in the 1970s. All of them tried to play the Orange card. All of them did so with awful results for Ireland and Britain alike. As Talleyrand said of the Bourbons, they have learned nothing and forgotten nothing – and they proved it again this week. It would be interesting to think that the Tory party will learn from what happened today. But that’s hard, when the retro-right has boxed in every Tory leader from Major on. May is no exception to that rule. Her leadership survived – but at a price. She had to confirm that she will not lead the Tories into the next election in order to ensure it. That makes her too weak and too preoccupied with Brexit to take the Tory party decisively away from the people who tried to bring her down. Nevertheless, these are unique times. The prime minister is a lame duck, it is true, but she remains a remarkably resilient lame duck. • Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnist