Some would say governors of the Bank of England should slip quietly into the shadows after leaving office, but at least Mervyn King offers value for money when he steps on to the stage. His attack on Theresa May’s Brexit deal was a blistering and inflammatory must-read. “There is no case whatever for giving up the benefits of remaining without obtaining the benefits of leaving,” Lord King wrote, which is a well-crafted line that remainers and leavers alike might support. Similarly, the comments about “vassalage” will chime with opponents to May’s deal from both camps. Jo Johnson, when he quit the cabinet and called for a second referendum, described the Brexit process “a failure of British statecraft on a scale unseen since the Suez crisis”. King went bigger by drawing a comparison with 1930s appeasement. But King is no remainer. He was making an elegant call for a no-deal Brexit and, as with most dispatches from that quarter, the former governor failed to offer solutions to obvious problems. Amazingly, he didn’t mention the Irish border once. You might assume, though, that he would offer a detailed economic analysis of the costs of a no-deal Brexit. Sadly, no. King was more interested in taking a pop at Threadneedle Street’s worst-case scenario. To be fair, he makes a reasonable point when he says the Bank was probably overdoing things when it talked about a potential 10% hit to GDP. US economist Paul Krugman – no friend of Brexit, as King pointed out – has made the similar argument that it’s very odd to assume the UK wouldn’t quickly hire some customs inspectors to ease bottlenecks at ports. But, equally, it is too breezy for King just to assert that “trade and contacts among the nations of Europe can and should continue much as before”. That comment takes a huge leap over the familiar and troubled waters of regulatory alignment, third country access, “equivalence” regimes for financial services and, again, the Irish border. Those issues cannot be wished away as minor technicalities. Yes, he is correct that preparations for Brexit on World Trade Organization trade terms should have started immediately after the referendum, since a fall-back position is usually useful in a negotiation. Krugman, too, has argued that it was “utter folly” not to put in back-up capacity if a hard Brexit was even a remote possibility. Almost everybody, then, can agree that the handling of Brexit has been a shambles. But King’s position, it seems, is that we should just go ahead anyway with a no-deal Brexit. If so, would he please write another column in which he gives his best estimate of the economic damage and how long it would last? Armed with that analysis, as opposed to the cake-and-eat-it fantasies of King’s fellow Brexiters, we could have a meaningful debate – and, yes, a meaningful referendum. Another day, another 4% off Thomas Cook’s share price. The final score was better than the minus 15% that was showing at one point on Tuesday, but doesn’t change the big picture. This is now a company worth £365m with net borrowings, as shareholders were shocked to learn last week, of £389m at the end of September. That debt figure will now grow substantially higher as winter, the low season for UK tour operators, bites. The share price has fallen 84% since May, and from 46p to 22.7p in the past week as the market has digested the latest profits warning, which was essentially a twofold confession. First, management admitted it was overconfident on bookings and got whacked when the hot UK summer encouraged Brits to stay at home. Second, a few items previously booked as exceptional, such as unpaid bills from Tunisian hoteliers, are now being viewed as everyday costs. At a well-capitalised company, neither piece of news would cause the share price to sink so far. Weather is a known risk, so be more prudent in future. Tighter accounting could even be deemed as encouraging. The problem, then, is the balance sheet. The chief executive, Peter Fankhauser, can whistle about how supportive lenders have reset covenants but, unless he’s happy to share the details, he has merely created fertile conditions for short-sellers. Sure enough, they are having a field day. That creates bigger dangers if customers – who book flights and holidays months in advance – or hoteliers start to doubt Thomas Cook’s financial strength. If the board is not already discussing a rights issue – and, note, Berenberg’s analysts reckon £400m of fresh equity is required – it should start talking sharpish. Just hoping that sentiment improves is not a credible strategy.