Jadon Sancho’s winning earned Borussia Dortmund all three points in their local derby at Schalke and sent Lucien Favre’s team nine points clear at the top of the Bundesliga. The 18-year-old England international decided the contest in the 74th minute, cutting in from the left and shooting beyond Ralf Fahrmann for his fifth Bundesliga goal of the season. Sancho became the youngest goalscorer for Dortmund in the Revierderby, surpassing Lars Ricken who was was 19 years and 110 days old when he scored for BVB against Schalke in October, 1995. Sancho dedicated his goal to his late grandmother who he revealed, in a post-match interview with Fox Soccer, passed away this week. He said: “Most importantly that was for my family because sadly my grandmother passed away [this week]. So that was for her. I’m sure she’d have been very proud of me. “It was hard. The coaches did say, ‘Do you want to play?’ And I thought, yeah. I really wanted to play because the team needed me and I got the winning goal. I’m just happy that the coach believes in me and lets me play.” Dortmund drew first blood through Thomas Delaney, who headed home from a Marco Reus free kick after just seven minutes. Daniel Caligiuri equalised for the hosts from a penalty, awarded by the VAR with just over half an hour to go. Schalke pressed forward in search of a winner but Sancho pounced on the break to restore the visitors’ lead. Reus and Raphaël Guerreiro missed chances for a third but Dortmund held out to tighten their grip on top spot. RB Leipzig started the day in second but slipped to a heavy defeat at mid-table Freiburg. Nils Petersen and Mike Frantz scored either side of a Luca Waldschmidt penalty as Leipzig lost 3-0. That allowed Bayern Munich to climb above them after they cruised to a 3-0 win over struggling Nuremberg. Bayern’s third straight win in all competitions will also ease the pressure on under-fire manager Niko Kovac. Mouctar Diakhaby’s stoppage-time header earned Valencia a 1-1 draw at home to Sevilla, keeping the visitors off top spot in La Liga. Pablo Sarabia’s 55th-minute strike appeared to have won the game, the striker pouncing from close range after Wissam Ben Yedder’s effort was deflected into his path. Éver Banega and André Silva hit the woodwork for Sevilla as they tried to stretch the lead before Diakhaby struck to punish their opponents’ wastefulness. Atlético Madrid drew level with Sevilla on 28 points after a 3-0 win over Alavés, who stay in fourth. Nikola Kalinic put Atlético ahead in the first half, before Antoine Griezmann and Rodri made the game safe in the final 10 minutes. In Serie A, Roma’s indifferent start to the season continued as they threw away a two-goal lead to draw 2-2 at Cagliari. Bryan Cristante and Aleksandar Kolarov put the visitors 2-0 up at half time, before late goals from Artur Ionita and Marco Sau. Napoli kept up their forlorn pursuit of Juventus with a 4-0 win over promoted Frosinone. Arkadiusz Milik scored twice as Carlo Ancelotti’s side cut the gap at the top to eight points after Juve’s 1-0 win over Internazionale on Friday evening.