The night before the Commonwealth Games netball final, English and Australian commentators went out for dinner. The conversation was all about how the world’s No 1 side, Australia, would secure the gold medal – after all England had never made a major final before. The only question was, by how many points? The following day Tracey Neville’s team were ready for change. “If not now, when?” was the slogan plastered across their dressing room wall. “If not us, who?” The captain, Ama Agbeze, had briefed them all with the answer: It’s us. It’s now. At half-time the scores were level and the Australian press were beginning to look a little ashen. In the dying seconds of the game Helen Housby popped up with the winner for England. Final score: 52-51. England’s victory in April made sporting history. A new world order, some called it. A seismic shift. In the Australian commentary box it was jaws to the floor and a deathly silence. The whole nation was in shock. The postmortem has been brutal in Australia. Akin to the debate over whether the Premier League stunts English men’s international achievements in football, Australian netball is asking itself a similar question after lifting the bar on overseas players before the Commonwealth Games. Australia has the best netball league in the world, but by opening the doors to international talent the global game has grown stronger. England’s best players are in the Super Netball league; it is a huge confidence-builder facing the best of Australian and New Zealand talent week in, week out. Jamaica and Uganda are also closing the gap. Should Australia struggle at the World Cup in Liverpool next July, a U-turn in policy could be in the offing. As the year comes to a close, inevitably the debate will begin over which team 2018 truly belongs to. England’s football World Cup semi-final run under Gareth Southgate was extraordinary. We’ve never had a more “woke” England manager or ethos around the team. From Southgate confidently discussing racism in the men’s game on Ian Wright’s extraordinary documentary which aired last week, to Danny Rose opening up about mental health issues, Fabian Delph’s celebrated request to miss a match in order to be present at the birth of his child, and Dr Pippa Grange helping to mastermind the historic victory on penalties over Colombia. The nation truly fell in love with England once more. Europe’s unfancied victory in the Ryder Cup, Thomas Bjørn’s team beating the US 17½-10½, will go down as one of the greatest of all time, the adulation for the players more akin to that received by footballers than golfers. Netball deserves all the gongs at the end of year sporting celebrations. But it also deserves a better lot in 2019 Still, Neville and her team’s victory – arguably – stands above them all. Beating Australia in their own backyard; Neville making an emotional return to the country where her father died three years earlier; England’s best shooter, Jo Harten, being so sick on the day of the final that she couldn’t keep her food down – but not telling a soul and playing her heart out on that court; or simply that a sport like netball only gets to enjoy the limelight once every four years, so miss your opportunity and you’re back to being a nobody. Arguably Neville should be in the running for coach of the year. Her team beat the best in the world, on the biggest stage in the world, having already caused an upset by beating New Zealand to reach the final – the first in Commonwealth Games history that didn’t feature an all-southern hemisphere line-up. It was Neville who, in only three years, turned the England team into winners, bringing in a sports psychologist, demanding a culture of excellence and a gruelling work ethic. She also brought much-needed charisma and profile to the game. At a sports industry breakfast this year she held court alongside Alastair Campbell; it was her stories that made the room lean in that bit closer, laughing their heads off at the punchlines. The gold medal has put the sport in rude health. England’s win has inspired over 130,000 women to take up netball since April. The long-term partner Vitality committed to a new three-year sponsorship deal in September and Nike announced a sponsorship contract before England’s victory againstwin over Uganda last week. BBC and Sky announced a deal to broadcast every minute of the World Cup. Consider, too, the context in which England’s players labour. Superstars on the world stage, these women should be household names. Housby, the daughter of Carlisle farmers – belatedly discovered at the age of 15 when plucked from Cumbrian obscurity by Manchester Thunder’s Karen Greig and then brought into the England setup by Neville – is a case in point. The iconic image of her in the Red Roses’ victory pile-up, tongue dyed blue from an energy drink, even caught David Beckham’s attention. Her last-gasp goal surprised the general public but was no shock for those who had seen her do the same for Thunder in 2014. Centre and wing defence Serena Guthrie is one of the world’s best but still earns less than her younger brother Kurtis, a striker for Stevenage in football’s League Two. Eboni Beckford-Chambers is a solicitor outside of netball. With team salaries capped at £75,000 between 10 players, being a netballer in England’s semi-professional Superleague barely pays the rent. No wonder so many play in Australia and New Zealand, a league boosted by £7m of sponsorship money and revenues of £15m where even an average player can earn £38,000 a year. Netball deserves all the gongs at the end-of-year sporting celebrations. But from media coverage to wages it also deserves better in 2019. Let’s hope last week’s TV and sponsorship announcements herald the change.