I was the sixth of seven children, so I think they lost track. I was given a lot of freedom, and I appreciate that. Acting has helped me understand myself more. That’s one reason I sought out the theatre, because it was a journey towards health. I was shy. Somehow, in acting, you can order the world. I’ve played an American president twice, and the perception of the role has certainly changed since I first did it [in 1996, in Independence Day – he also played one later in the NBC sitcom 1600 Penn]. There’s a certain kind of nostalgia now associated with Independence Day. Now, of course, if you did it again, it would be a whole different picture. I once said, “I’m always recognised as an American,” in my roles. I wish I hadn’t. I meant a dented American: someone who seems to be a prototype but has a lot of problems. David Lynch said, when we were doing publicity for Lost Highway: “I cast Bill because he looks like a guy that could get himself into a lot of trouble.” Fruit farming was something I did for many years without ever talking about it. I think a part of doing the orchard is just it being a very local way in which people remember their connection to the Earth. It’s “Act local, think global.” My wife Tamara is always challenging me to look at things I might not have looked at. She keeps me moving. I lost my sense of smell when I was young. I fell from a high place, was in a coma and came out unable to smell. I’ve tried different things to get it back, but it’s not really possible. I think it actually inspired me with the fruit: the taste of tree-ripened fruit is so pungent. It heightened my sense of taste, probably. Nobody really aspired to being an actor when I was growing up. There was no sense of: “Let’s be famous.” All this liturgy of self-promotion and dream actualisation wasn’t really part of it. Working hard comes from having enthusiasm, and that’s like a gift from the gods. If you have enthusiasm it’s a gift – and then the working hard is really easy, because you want to do it. I own a cattle ranch in Montana with my brother. It is something that has been great for our kids – they love going back and helping. And I like the fact that they go there to not just kick back or something. They go there to participate. I was lucky to do my second movie [Spaceballs] with John Candy, and I think a lot about him. He said: “Just remember the crew every time.” That’s how I remember him, and how I would like to be remembered, too. The Sinner, series 1 and 2, are now available on Netflix