Experts have warned there could be further damaging tsunamis in Indonesia as authorities step up search and rescue efforts following a volcanic eruption that caused a deadly wave in western Java. Disaster agency spokesman Sutopo Purwo Nugroho said on Monday morning that 281 deaths had been confirmed and at least 1,016 people were injured. “The number of victims and damage will continue to rise,” he said. “The military and police are searching the ruins to see if we can find more victims,” said Dody Ruswandi, a senior official at the disaster agency, adding that the rescue effort was likely to last a week. The tsunami is believed to to have been caused by the eruption of the Anak Krakatua volcano, which may have triggered underwater landslides. The death toll is expected to climb further as 28 people are still missing and rescuers are yet to reach all the affected areas. Sutopo warned locals to stay away from the coast. “People should not carry out activities on the beach and stay away from the coast for a while,” he told reporters. University of Queensland volcanologist Teresa Ubide said Anak Krakatua had been erupting for the past few months, which was not unusual. “It seems like the volcano is active at the moment and it may happen again,” Ubide told the Guardian. She said it would be difficult to predict further tsunamis and to provide timely warnings because in this case there was a lack of seismic activity or earthquakes in the lead up. “The volcano is very close to the shoreline so … there wouldn’t be much time to warn [people] because it’s close and the tsunamis can travel very fast,” she said. Richard Teeuw of the University of Portsmouth in England said sonar surveys were needed to map the seafloor around the volcano but that work usually took months. “The likelihood of further tsunamis in the Sunda Strait will remain high while Anak Krakatua volcano is going through its current active phase because that might trigger further submarine landslides,” Teeuw said. Footage filmed on mobile phones showed the moment the tsunami hit beaches and residential areas in Pandeglang, sweeping people and buildings away. Rescue efforts continued as night fell on Sunday, but workers and ambulances were prevented from reaching some areas because roads remained blocked by debris. The damage to the region became apparent after daybreak on Sunday. Nine hotels and hundreds of homes were heavily damaged by the waves. Broken chunks of concrete and splintered sticks of wood littered hard-hit coastal areas, turning beach getaways popular with Jakarta residents into near ghost towns. Debris from thatch-bamboo shacks was strewn along beaches. Yellow, orange and black body bags were laid out, and weeping relatives identified the dead. Rescue teams were using diggers and other heavy equipment to haul debris from the stricken area around the Sunda Strait on Monday, as thousands were evacuated from the affected region. Kathy Mueller from the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies told Agence France-Presse aid workers were helping evacuate injured people, bring in clean water and tarpaulins, and provide shelter. She said the group was preparing for the possibility of diseases breaking out in the tsunami zone, adding: “The situation, and the death toll, will remain fluid over the next days and even weeks.” The water washed away an outdoor stage where a local rock band, Seventeen, were performing, killing their bassist and manager. Other people who had been watching the band on the beach were missing. Azki Kurniawan, 16, said his first warning about the tsunami was when people burst into the lobby of the Patra Comfort Hotel shouting, “Sea water rising!” Kurniawan, who was undergoing vocational training with a group of 30 other students, said he was confused because he had not felt a big earthquake. He said he ran to the parking lot to try to reach his motorbike but discovered it was already flooded. “Suddenly, a 1-meter (3.3-foot) wave hit me,” he said, his eyes red and swollen from crying. “I was thrown into the fence of a building about 30 meters (100 feet) from the beach and held onto the fence as strong as I could, trying to resist the water, which felt like it would drag me back into the sea. I cried in fear ... ‘This is a tsunami?’ I was afraid I would die.” World leaders have expressed condolences to Indonesia in the aftermath of the disaster. US President Donald Trump tweeted support for Indonesia: “We are praying for recovery and healing. America is with you!” “Unthinkable devastation from the tsunami disaster in Indonesia,” he said. Pope Francis prayed for the dead, the missing and the homeless in Indonesia, telling tourists and pilgrims in St. Peter’s Square at the Vatican that his thoughts were with victims “struck by violent natural calamities.” Australian prime minister, Scott Morrison, confirmed that so far no foreigners are known to have been caught up in the disaster. “A very difficult day for our friends in Indonesia. Our thoughts go out to all those who have lost loved ones, the injured and all of their families. As always we stand ready to assist as needed,” he said. Agence France-Presse and Associated Press contributed to this report