After moving into my flat a few years ago, I was keen to meet the neighbours and make new friends. I sensed a lack of neighbourly spirit, however. The nature of the street – Victorian terraced houses, many converted into multiple flats – precludes natural neighbourliness. There are no common areas, and no play areas for children or even gardens where you can casually talk to others. But I think we should be friendly to our neighbours. We are all interconnected in our immediate environment, and we should look after and extend goodwill to one another. Benefits such as safety, sharing knowledge about reliable tradespeople, or support when sick, are some advantages of a shared community. In the first few years, I befriended my two immediate neighbours, who live in the same converted house. But after a while I was ready to meet others – so I began a social group for the road. One cold Saturday afternoon I knocked on my neighbours’ doors to find out if they would like to be part of it. As I started to meet them, I realised the extent of loneliness on a typical city street. I found that many people had been residents for a long time – one for more than 40 years. Most did not know many of their neighbours, and some knew nobody. When a neighbour opened the door, I smiled, introduced myself and stated my intention to start a street social group. The sole aim, I explained, was to allow residents to get to know each other in a pleasant environment a few times a year. Would they be interested? A few asked me what we would talk about at these gatherings. Just social talk, I said – a chance to get to know each other. One wanted to talk about rubbish collections, and another asked if there would be any discussion of philosophy. I met families with young children, single people, unemployed people, young people sharing the same house, older people, retired people – all of varying ages, financial circumstances and cultural backgrounds. One was a young Syrian refugee. Another was an Iraqi refugee working as an Uber driver, who asked me if there was any money involved. He was astounded when I said no. And it was true; I was not asking anything from my neighbours. Instead, I was giving something to them. The initial reaction was positive. Most people told me it was a great idea and thanked me for my efforts. Only three households wanted no part of it. Going by the comments, I was convinced that our social events would be successful and well attended. All that was required was an enthusiastic Aussie like me to get the ball rolling. Excitedly, I planned the first event, in our local pub, and sent out the email invitations. Arriving early, I placed a colourful notice on all the tables I’d booked. I waited. And waited. Only about seven people came along, and three of those were late and two left early. It was disappointing, of course, but a start. Since that first party, I’ve organised five more, and initially numbers were low. Maybe the neighbours did not want to meet each other after all, I began to think. I was losing heart and learning a bigger lesson about British life: many people don’t feel comfortable telling you that they don’t want to do something. Just because someone had said they thought my party idea was great, and to count them in, it didn’t necessarily mean that they would come. But then: success at last! More than 20 neighbours came to the 2017 Christmas party. It was a wonderful event. On this special night, neighbours came together and met one another for the first time, over a glass of mulled wine. I organised another Christmas party this year and 25 people came along for drinks. At times, I’ve thought that city dwellers, especially Londoners, just don’t want to meet their neighbours; they prefer the anonymity that a capital can provide. However, I feel that many are lonely and would like to meet the people around them, but are cautious. Additionally, I have been inviting a couple of people from my email list to come to my flat for wine and cheese or an afternoon tea at the weekend. These small gatherings have been more successful. Maybe this is more attractive to residents – less “threatening”. Convening a social network for the street has been a lot of work. I admit I have become despondent at times over the low turnouts. One man, however, urged me to continue. I’m glad I took his advice, because now I’m slowly making headway. My wish for a shared sense of community is slowly taking hold. But it may just take longer than I thought. • Margaret Murphy is the Pandora Road Social convener