To some, scratching a cricket ball would be innocuous rather than infamous. But when the Australian batsman Cameron Bancroft did it during a Test match in Cape Town, the cricket world lit up. At the height of a viciously tempered series he used bright yellow sandpaper to rough up the leather in an attempt to aid his bowlers. Ball-tampering is a fact of cricket, but no international player had been caught so blatantly, using a foreign object smuggled on to the field. This time the offence was caught in lush high-definition by South African television. Bancroft and his captain, Steve Smith, called a press conference to try to lie their way out of trouble, trying to make the act seem spontaneous and to hide the involvement of the vice-captain, David Warner. “It certainly won’t happen again under my leadership, I can promise you,” said Smith without grasping the incident’s magnitude; South Africa’s time zone stranded him in the early hours of the Australian morning before the news had properly broken back home. In the morning Cricket Australia’s CEO, James Sutherland, faced the media. “Australian cricket fans have every reason to wake up and not be proud of the Australian cricket team.” There were various causes of the national cri de coeur that followed. Australians from street-side to parliament expressed hurt and shame more than simple anger. For some, cricket represented goodness and fairness in a way that was fictional but comforting. For others, the team had been behaviourally ugly for decades. The news was a shock for one group, vindication for the other. This was cheating with no degrees to be debated. The intensity of the public response prompted suspensions of nine months for Bancroft, a year for the senior pair. They arrived home for tearful public apologies of varying credibility, stripped bare in front of the lens again. Other cricket countries were divided between wondering what the fuss was about and piling into an unloved opponent. Australia had long been resented for an abrasive approach on the field and a tendency to make pronouncements about the spirit of the game and opponents’ conduct. For six months a funk set in. A winter in Australia with no Test tours became a period of forced introspection about entrenched attitudes. Smith and Warner took themselves off to a sad-looking T20 league in Canada, Bancroft blocked out the noise by studying to be a yoga instructor. In the background ticked along two independent reviews into the culture of the men’s team and of Cricket Australia itself. By October the Test team were back, batting out an epic draw in Dubai and trying to show a new, respectful face under their accidental captain, Tim Paine. But at executive level the sky was black with chickens coming home to roost. The reviews had been commissioned by a board which wanted to benefit from the optics but thought it could manage the contents and ride out the consequences. Instead a slow-acting venom had worked its way through the system. Those at the head had not realised Cape Town was just the entry wound. The long-term CEO Sutherland was nudged out before the reviews arrived, with the chairman, David Peever, keen to install his nominated successor, Kevin Roberts, before any blowback. CA then delayed the review’s release until after the annual general meeting, at which Peever was given a new three-year term. But the findings – that CA was responsible for an aggressive and unaccountable corporate culture and that this had eroded good practice within the men’s team – were not survivable. “We have had a hiccup in South Africa and we’re taking the opportunity to learn the lessons of that so we can make the game even stronger,” said Peever in a television interview as he tried to justify his reappointment. He was pushed out within days. The board member and former captain Mark Taylor soon resigned. Roberts sacked the high-performance manager, Pat Howard, and head of broadcasting, Ben Amarfio, both deeply unpopular with various sectors. Roberts remained in charge by default, having stepped up from a job titled “head of people and culture” at an organisation where culture was the entire problem. That culture was reflected in the team: impunity for misdeeds, glorification of macho aggression. Players were explicitly encouraged to be confrontational or bought into the mythology that this was Australian tradition and the price of success. Smith had often said he did not care how his team was perceived as long as those within the camp deemed their own behaviour acceptable. Criticism was treated as coming from an enemy. There was no willingness to accommodate so many of the people his team supposedly represented. Now, in a new home summer, Australian cricket finds itself in an existential crisis. Supporters will welcome back Smith and Bancroft, though Warner is broadly scapegoated. At the Sydney Cricket Ground last week, Smith fielded questions for the first time since that tearful homecoming. “I walked past something and had the opportunity to stop it and I didn’t do it. That was my leadership failure.” Paine has spoken of his being a team to be proud of, but a few losses soon had former players sniping. “We might be the most-liked team in the world – we’re not gonna win shit,” offered the former captain Michael Clarke. “We won’t win a game.” This movement may gain momentum with a World Cup and an Ashes tour facing a struggling team. The movement’s catchphrase is “good hard cricket”, a euphemism which has superseded “the line”. Those employing it won’t quite admit that it means verbal abuse and intimidation, but of course it does. Those who employed that method as players see a threat to their legacy and legitimacy. What remains lost on all of them is how many great cricketers became great without these methods. Audiences do enjoy conflict: as soon as Paine and Virat Kohli began verbally sparring in Perth last week, people loved it. But there is also a broad awareness that Australia’s past contained excesses that should not recur. This particular internal wrestle, you suspect, has a long time yet to run.