Stop us if you have heard this one before: “One of them is black; one’s white. How are they going to get along when they’re thrown together by fate?” To be fair, new movie Green Book is based on the true story of a road trip through the early-60s deep south, taken by a refined African-American pianist Don Shirley (Mahershala Ali) and his Italian-American bouncer-turned-chauffeur (Viggo Mortensen). Although the film’s message is ultimately uplifting, its execution has drawn criticism. Shirley’s niece, Carole Shirley Kimble, has disowned the project as “a depiction of a white man’s version of a black man’s life”. Even by the early 1960s, the interracial odd-couple set-up would have been familiar. In Stanley Kramer’s 1958 drama The Defiant Ones, escaped convicts Tony Curtis and Sidney Poitier are literally shackled together. The plot contrivance is almost elegant in its bluntness, but it enabled a mainstream movie to broach race issues in ways that were hitherto unimaginable. The Defiant Ones has been remade literally or figuratively many times since, most entertainingly in the trashy Black Mama White Mama, with Pam Grier as a prostitute handcuffed to a white revolutionary (Margaret Markov). But the same sentiment runs through Driving Miss Daisy, also set in the Jim Crow-era south, and whose key couple (Morgan Freeman and Jessica Tandy) bond in a way that does nothing to upset prevailing power structures. This is so often the operating principle of the biracial buddy movie: the two sides overcome their prejudices and recognise each other’s humanity, and the audience can go home temporarily satisfied that racism has been fixed. Or at least that we’re a bit less racist than we used to be. By the 1970s and 80s, the set-ups became vaguely more equitable, with pairings such as Richard Pryor and Gene Wilder, although their film The Silver Streak has a toe-curling scene where Wilder blacks up. Still, black-white buddies were now commonplace: Eddie Murphy and Nick Nolte in 48 Hrs; Mel Gibson and Danny Glover in the Lethal Weapons; Will Smith and Tommy Lee Jones in Men in Black. By the time of Pulp Fiction, race was barely an issue in the partnership of John Travolta and Samuel L Jackson, although Tarantino undid his good work with Django Unchained, in which Christoph Waltz and Jamie Foxx team up to fix racism. Green Book does not sanitise history, nor does it have much to offer the present. It is possible to do better. Spike Lee’s BlacKkKlansman, starring Adam Driver and John David Washington, for example, confronts the institutional racism of its 70s setting head-on. And with its closing footage of white supremacists in modern-day Charlottesville, BlackKkKlansman is also unafraid to point out that America’s race problems are by no means a thing of the past.