It’s the year of the artificial Christmas tree, according to John Lewis. It says its in-store “forest” of fakes in London’s Oxford Street has been hugely successful, with shoppers abandoning real trees for ever more lifelike plastic ones. This weekend is likely to be the peak sales period for the 8m trees chopped down every year for Christmas. It can be a palaver: the trip to a layby vendor, seeking out a not-too-wonky, not-too-straggly tree, nervously driving home with it tied to the top of the car, crawling into the loft to find that last year’s lights are broken, trying to get rid of the tree on a wet weekend in January – and still vacuuming up needles in May. If all that puts you off, then maybe artificial is the way to go. Fake trees used to be little better than a wire with tinsel attached. But tree technology has leapt forward: even close up, the pricier artificial ones will fool most people into thinking they are real. “This year is a record for artificial trees – currently they are up 30% compared with last year,” says Dan Cooper, the head of Christmas buying at John Lewis. “Over the years, artificial trees have become increasingly realistic, to the extent that many models now have ‘tips’ moulded from real fir branches.” Are the ersatz ones an environmental nightmare? Opposite, our environment correspondent, Sandra Laville, assesses the pros and cons of fake vs real. Meanwhile, we went shopping to find the best artificial tree from a look-and-feel perspective. Our verdict? You can find an almost totally authentic-looking fake tree, if you’re willing to fork out a hefty £250, but drop down to around £150 and there are still some very good fakes. The White Company’s £260 tree is top choice at the luxury end, closely followed by similarly-priced artificial trees at John Lewis. B&Q’s Thetford at £165 is a great alternative and comes with 400 LEDs to boot. In the £50 to £100 range sadly most trees are tacky and probably destined for landfill in a couple of years. But for £25, M&S has a 7ft fake that, while scoring low on the “bushiness” test, makes for a cheap and cheerful alternative. John Lewis Easily the biggest choice on the high street. When we visited, we found 39 different models of artificial tree on display, from £79 to £499. The price will reflect height, bushiness, and whether it’s pre-lit, with the expensive models boasting multiple needle shades to give a more authentic look. The cheapest in-store, the Slender Spruce at £79, is short, almost pencil-thin, with crude-looking papery needles. The priciest, the £499 Cotswold Snowy, a pre-lit 7ft model, ticks lots of boxes but somehow lacks character. Our personal favourite was the Kensington range. It’s Nordmann fir-style, with the main attraction that it looks uneven yet bushy, avoiding the perfect triangular look of many artificial trees that screams fake. But it’s a pricey option – the 7ft pre-lit Slimline Sage was priced at £249. Sadly, we’re not the only ones to like this tree: John Lewis’s website said it had sold out. A close alternative is the Newington pre-lit 7ft tree at £199 – but it, too, had sold out online. A good tree still in stock (as we went to press) was the St Petersburg Blue, a 7ft tree at £249 which in real life is a lot less blue than the images on John Lewis’s site, with lots of colour variation in the needles and branches and a look of frostiness without ladles of fake snow. A nearby Serbian Blue at £179 looked rubbish in comparison. It’s worth nothing that the trees tend to come with a metal tripod base. But if you want a natural willow base, that’s another £28 to £35 on the bill. The White Company Prices at this store are usually pretty breathtaking. But it has scored a big hit with its 7.5ft Grand Spruce artificial tree, priced at £260. It is easily the most authentic and realistic of the fakes we viewed, scoring well on bushiness, colour, variation, height and branch bendability. Unfortunately we were not the only ones to spot how good this one is – it has come top on many other tests as well, and it’s sold out online, so may be one to mark down for next year. There was still one on sale in its Marylebone branch in London, but you might have to wrestle it out of the window display. The White Company also has a £495 Symons Nordmann on sale, but it was poor value in comparison, with a relatively gappy look. Amazon The reason we visited the high street was that you just can’t tell how authentic or plain nasty the artificial trees are without checking them out in-store. Amazon has heaps of cheap trees – from just £7.99 – but you get what you pay for. There is almost a comedy value to many of the reviews from unhappy buyers. One, from someone who bought a Kaemingk 6ft “realistic natural branches pine tree”, included a hilarious image of what it really looked like once assembled. B&Q B&Q’s top-of-the-range £165 Thetford 6ft artificial tree is its most authentic – once decorated you’d be hard pressed to know it’s a fake – and comes with 400 LED lights. It’s a little gappy in places but it’s a perfectly decent halfway house between the £250 luxury end of the market and the tinselly cheapies. Selfridges The mummy and daddy of fakes is Selfridges’ Rocky Ridge, a super-realistic, tastefully pre-lit tree with incredibly authentic branches and needles, but at an incredible price – £750 – and maybe a bit too perfect-looking for its own good. Its other trees on display – a £295 Frasier 5ft at £295 and the Bayberry 7.5ft at £575 – were gappy and relatively cheap-looking for the price. Marks & Spencer A rather limited range of artificial trees on display, but its £25 7ft tree is a bargain-basement pick. Yes, the needles are papery, you can see the wire of the branches and it looks undeniably cheap, but it’s nowhere near as rubbish as the price suggests. In the Marble Arch store it was standing next to a £175 Fraser Slim tree, that was narrow indeed and characterless. M&S’s 6ft Noble fake fir is £95, gappy and with no colour variation, but OK for the price point. Debenhams A limited range of trees to view, and they have to be bought online. The one we were able to examine was a £98 Kaemingk 6ft Green Watson Slim Fir. It was neither one thing nor t’other – not especially realistic, but not tacky either. At this price, maybe it will fit the bill for some people, but we felt it was just a bit “meh”. Oddly, Debenhams had lots of other, better artificial trees around the store, but for display purposes only and not for sale. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.