The police interview room is not an unfamiliar location for TV drama: for as long as cop shows have existed, they have had the option of tying up their story with the extraction of a confession down at the station. When crime drama started to become more psychologically astute in the 1990s, shows such as Prime Suspect, and particularly Cracker, dug deeper into the dynamics of a masterly investigator facing down a criminal who is not quite cunning enough to hide what they have done. Now, though, interrogations are everywhere, to the point where Netflix has announced Criminal, a 12-episode anthology drama in which the police interview room is the one and only setting. Why are programme-makers so interested in them? On British TV at least, the high watermark of the modern police interview scene is Line of Duty. The show as we know it now was born near the end of its second season, when writer Jed Mercurio unleashed 17 minutes of anti-corruption officers interrogating a suspect. Mercurio had realised that, in a series where bent cops hide in plain sight, trapping them in a room with the good guys to see who won was his whole show, powerfully distilled. In so doing, he revived the interview scene as a pure form of drama itself, with total focus on what is revealed both by the words people use and – magnified by screen fiction’s ability to zoom right in on faces – how they look when they say them. The cops in interview scenes are on a desperate quest for the whole truth and, in recent years, programme-makers have been too. The present wave of exhaustive true-crime documentaries, starting with Netflix’s smash hit Making a Murderer – and including the streaming service’s latest documentary The Innocent Man, which drops next week and mirrors a lot of Making a Murderer’s themes – major on police interviews as the pivotal moment when the force of the law, justly or otherwise, weighs directly on a citizen. So has a new breed of all-access police docs on regular British telly, such as 24 Hours in Police Custody and BBC Three’s Car Crash: Who’s Lying? Audiences now are hungry for every detail, so extensive footage of real police interviews is fine. Our demand to know absolutely everything has also led to an odd micro-trend that cross-pollinates drama with documentary: last month on Channel 4, The Interrogation of Tony Martin, starring Steve Pemberton, took as its dialogue the verbatim transcript of Martin’s police interviews after he shot two burglars in his house in 1999. ITV went a step further than 2011’s Appropriate Adult, in which a lot of what Dominic West said while playing serial killer Fred West was precisely what the real Fred West had told police in 1994. The Interrogation of Tony Martin included pauses, stumbles and conversational dead ends that a traditional drama would omit – telling us exactly what that encounter was like, putting us there in the room as authentically as possible, took precedence. We are now fully invested in that battle of wills, in a confined arena, between somebody righteous and somebody heinous. The most memorable scenes in Netflix’s Mindhunter are not strictly speaking police interviews, but its long, talky two-ways between serial killers and Jonathan Groff’s criminal profiler rely on us relishing every subtle moment of push and pull. So we come to Criminal, overseen by Stag writing/directing duo George Kay (also a writer on Killing Eve) and Jim Field Smith (director of The Wrong Mans). Spread across four countries contributing three stand-alone episodes each, it has attracted talent including German director Oliver Hirschbiegel who, as the director of Downfall, knows something about the power of dialogue in small rooms. TV drama is not ready to stop the interview tape any time soon.