Theresa May has finally given a date: her Brexit deal will be voted on by MPs in the week beginning 14 January. But a lot could happen between now and then, and even more so before Brexit day at the end of March. Here are some factors to consider: It is hard to say. The main threat hanging over the prime minister before she announced the vote – Labour’s promise of a no-confidence motion against her if she did not timetable it – was lifted before Jeremy Corbyn could even formally announce it, even if the Labour leader did then renew the pledge. But either way, a number of MPs on all sides of the house are furious with May for giving them little more than 10 weeks between the vote and the stated departure date from the EU. It is because they are accusing May of “running the clock down” – of seeking to delay the moment of truth for her Brexit plan for as long as possible, to leave them with the effective choice of approving her deal or, given the lack of time, running the risk of leaving a no-deal departure as the only option. The signs are not good that, even with such metaphorical thumbscrews attached, MPs will give in. Nigel Dodds, the Brexit spokesman for the Democratic Unionist party – on whom May must rely if she is to prevail – made it plain in the Commons that his party was not reassured by her efforts in Brussels at the end of last week to seek new guarantees on the Irish backstop. In theory it could, not least after the European court of justice ruled that the UK can suspend the process without seeking EU approval. Even some Conservatives think this might be sensible – the former international development secretary Andrew Mitchell raised the idea in the Commons on Monday. But while logistically quite straightforward, it would be a huge political leap for May, who has repeatedly promised that 29 March will be the day Brexit happens – even if it is initially into a two-year, near-identical transition period. This is the big issue. With ministerial discipline having more or less broken down, we can expect more briefings in the days and weeks ahead. Essentially, there seem to be two camps forming, with distinct plan Bs for when May’s proposal is defeated. On the strongly pro-leave side is a contingent informally headed by the international development secretary, Penny Mordaunt, who want to focus on what they call a “managed no deal” – something experts have warned does not actually exist. Remainers in the cabinet seem to be coalescing around the idea of breaking the impasse by allowing MPs to have a series of indicative votes on various options. In theory, yes – and if May’s plan is defeated, that, by default, would be the next step. But such would be the possible repercussions of this, especially for more vulnerable people, that it seems very likely that a majority of MPs would resist it. A number of senior cabinet ministers are also extremely worried at the prospect, with at least one, the justice secretary, David Gauke, having threatened to resign if it becomes policy. May is still set against it, as officially is her cabinet. A lot would depend on whether Labour decided to formally throw its support behind the idea, which Corbyn seems wary of doing so far. Again, it could happen, but much depends on Labour. Corbyn has frustrated the Scottish National party and others by declining to formally seek a no-confidence motion against the government, which could trigger an election. Even if he wins the no confidence vote against May, this would have no constitutional force and would only be symbolic. Officially, after surviving last week’s vote among Tory MPs, she is safe from a new challenge for a year, and her pledge to step down before a 2022 election has been deliberately vague. But if her deal falls and events begin to spiral, her political fate could become caught up in the crisis very quickly indeed.