The ancient Egyptians mummified their pharaohs and sealed them in pyramids. Russian revolutionaries pickled Lenin and displayed him in a mausoleum on Red Square, where he lies to this day. Now Brexit Britain has taken that macabre tradition to the next level, embalming its leader while she is still alive. A waxen Theresa May is entombed in office, still performing basic functions of a prime minister although the last animating breath of her authority has expired. To survive a confidence vote among Conservative MPs last week, May promised not to lead her party into a general election. The result of the ballot was still close enough to be perfectly disabling. She won enough support to continue as leader, but not enough to regain control of the agenda. An astringent European summit then bleached away hope of improvements to her Brexit deal. That document, like its sponsor, is trapped in parliamentary limbo. Labour ambivalence over Brexit is another chemical element in the embalming fluid. Jeremy Corbyn’s motion to censure the prime minister, tabled on Monday night, was a deliberately futile gesture. It avoided the specific wording required by law for a no-confidence vote to count as a trigger for bringing down a government. That meant May could ignore it. Corbyn is not ready to pull the proper no-confidence trigger because he expects the mechanism would misfire. A general election would then be ruled out, forcing the Labour leader to declare what he wants to happen next. And he doesn’t know. Labour’s activist base and a solid chunk of its MPs want a referendum. The shadow cabinet is split, and influential voices in the leader’s office insist that Brexit must go ahead, partly in fulfilment of hard‑left Eurosceptic doctrine and partly in the belief that Corbyn’s best route to No 10 passes through leave-voting constituencies. It is true that May would pass a Commons test of confidence. Jacob Rees-Mogg’s hardline Brexiteer groupuscule has said it would back her, despite orchestrating the failed putsch only a week ago. (So Rees-Mogg and friends think May is not good enough to lead their party but is still adequate enough as a prime minister for the rest of us.) That leaves parliament sliding towards the Christmas recess in a state of presumed confidence in May and presumed rejection of her Brexit deal, but without either proposition having been tested in the voting lobbies. Meanwhile, the leaders of the two main English parties are running out of ways to look busy when in fact they are just biding their time. Various factions of their parties clamour around them competing for attention, offering alleged routes out of the impasse. It is like watching owners trying to coax a pair of cats down from a tree, knowing they are stranded even when they show little sign of wanting to be rescued. In the country, leave and remain identity are superseding traditional Labour and Tory loyalties Parliamentary deadlock reflects irreconcilable divisions in the country, which could, I suppose, be celebrated as representative democracy in action. But the stalemate also exposes a different tension – between the whole Brexit process and the Westminster party system. Leave and remain opinion is not conveniently distributed between government and opposition, yet MPs are used to seeing issues in terms of neatly arranged rows of benches facing each other across the Commons floor. Everyone is struggling to map a new political geography of the chamber where, on the biggest issue, pro-European Tory cabinet ministers are closer in natural sympathy with Labour backbenchers than either group is with its own leader. One attempt to navigate this strange terrain brought a delegation of Labour MPs into Downing Street last week to meet David Lidington, cabinet office minister (effectively May’s deputy) and Gavin Barwell, the prime minister’s chief of staff. The encounter was denounced by Tory Brexiteers as a treasonous plot to arrange a referendum. Accounts I have heard of the meeting sound a lot more circumspect than that. May’s lieutenants are far from enthusiastic about a plebiscite. But they also need a sense of where the numbers in parliament are on various plan B ideas, and how well thought-through those plans are. As one pro-referendum MP puts it: “They have this Brexit mess tangled around their legs, and they just want to be free of it.” Corbyn can probably relate to that. He is also tangled in European questions that interest him little and put an emotional barrier between him and his fan base. He wants to get across the turbulent Brexit water to a safer shore where familiar campaigns on austerity and the NHS can resume. But how? On that question, John McDonnell is a key figure. The shadow chancellor has no affection for the EU, but he is also alert to the role that remainers will play in any pro-Corbyn electoral coalition. Above all, he craves power and seems at least open to persuasion that a referendum, which would split the Tories and energise Labour activists, could get him there. Neither May nor Corbyn want to be the one to say aloud that the best package available from the menu of EU relationships is the one labelled full membership. It is a little easier for the Labour leader, but he still needs a ladder to climb down with dignity from past assertions that the 2016 result is irreversible. That ladder might be a formal consultation with Labour members. Corbyn’s licence to U-turn comes in an envelope labelled “party democracy”. The climbdown is harder for May, but she could yield to parliamentary pressure for a referendum. As long as her deal is then on the ballot paper, she can truthfully say she never stopped believing in Brexit. Those scenarios depend on the meaningful vote being held and lost – and, for now, the prime minister insists it can be won. Unlikely, but not impossible. The more discussion there is of no Brexit and no deal, the more middle-ground Tories find things to like about May’s withdrawal agreement. It bundles Britain into a miserable tunnel of endless negotiation with Brussels, but many Conservative MPs would swallow that pill just to get out of the current mess without a referendum. So would a few Labour ones. The blurring of party lines makes the coming weeks especially hard to predict. The options cannot all be branded in red or blue colours. In the country, leave and remain identity are superseding traditional Labour and Tory loyalties. In parliament, the whips are clueless. Neither May nor Corbyn is capable of dictating a position to their MPs. They look more like passive objects of lobbying and manoeuvring. Politics is now driven by informal Commons coalitions trying to beat paths for the so-called leaders to follow. Whatever happens in 2019, wherever Britain ends up in its relations with Europe, 2018 will be remembered as the year that Brexit fought the old Westminster party system – and won. • Rafael Behr is a Guardian columnist