The far-right activist Milo Yiannopoulos has suffered a setback in his attempts to relaunch his career after being banned by the crowdfunding site Patreon. Yiannopoulos, recently revealed to be more than A$2m (£1.1m) in debt, according to Australian court documents, had been hoping to recruit people to regularly contribute funds to a planned comeback. He wrote on his Patreon page: “I’ve had a miserable year or two, banned and de-platformed and censored and blacklisted … and now I need your help. I want to get back on my feet and come roaring back in 2019. “I am one of the most censored and most lied-about people in the world. Even my fans sometimes believe things about me that aren’t true, because journalists lie more about me than perhaps anyone else in America.” Yiannopoulos said he required the funds to “support my family, pay essential staff and service providers” and said he planned to “assemble the greatest TV show in history”. Patreon posted on Twitter: Hi there, thanks for the tweet. Milo Yiannopoulos was removed from Patreon as we don't allow association with or supporting hate groups on Patreon. For more info, please see our Community Guidelines. https://t.co/L7737I1ENi The site, which describes itself as a “membership platform that makes it easy for artists and creators to get paid”, allows users to offer rewards to subscribers in different tiers depending on how much money they agree to regularly contribute. For $2.50 (£1.90) a month or more, supporters of Yiannopoulos were invited to join “Milo’s Big Gay Army”. Additional tiers for those donating more cash included “Sassy Bitch”, “Cheerleader” and “Trigger Squad”. Archived copies of the deleted profile show that at the top level of support, for those donating over $750 a month, benefits offered included an “elite-tier” coffee mug, a handwritten thank you letter and “exclusive invitations to drinks when Milo is in your city (you’re buying)”. Yiannopoulos appeared to have gained the support of about 250 users offering an unknown amount of money before Patreon removed his page. The former Telegraph blogger and Breitbart editor has repeatedly been associated with the far right. He was seen in one video singing karaoke while the audience, which included Richard Spencer, gave Nazi salutes. Yiannopoulos left his job at Breitbart after another video surfaced in which he appeared to endorse sex between “younger boys” and older men. The publisher Simon & Schuster cancelled a book deal, leading to a court hearing that revealed the editor’s notes on his book Dangerous. Speaking about his debts to the Guardian via email, Yiannopoulos claimed they were “company debts, not personal” and that he was “doing fine and bringing in $40k US a month.” His Patreon appeal said: “After two years of relentless, dishonest attacks on me by the press, I got roughed up and lost my way. I’ve never asked for money like this before. But I need you to help me get back to work. Thanks for considering it, and God bless.”