The Guardian reporter Amelia Gentleman was named the journalist of the year at the Press Gazette awards in London for her work on the Windrush scandal. The Observer journalist Carole Cadwalladr was also honoured at the ceremony in London on Monday night, winning in the technology journalism category for her investigations into Cambridge Analytica and the use of personal data in political campaigning. The Guardian’s relationship funding strategy was also highly commended in the innovation of the year category, which was won by the Financial Times’ Uber Game. The judges said that Gentleman’s “work exposing the scandalous treatment of Windrush immigrants was astonishing”, adding: “It set the agenda for weeks and brought down a home secretary (even though the policy came straight from Mrs May). The detail and the case studies were brilliant and everyone followed this story up.” Cadwalladr was praised for a “first-class piece of investigative journalism”. The judges said it combined “high-quality writing with revelation on a matter of real public interest”. The judges added: “She used the resources of the paper to challenge non-disclosure agreements’ legal restrictions and pushed the envelope more than anyone else on this story. It raised a crucial issue for democracy in the digital age, the ramifications of which are still rumbling on.” Cadwalladr also shared the investigation of the year prize with Channel 4 News’ Andy Davies and Kylie Morris. The judges chose Cadwalladr’s Observer story Revealed: 50m Facebook files taken in record data breach and the Channel 4 News piece Data, Democracy and Dirty Tricks: Cambridge Analytica Uncovered. They said: “Carole Cadwalladr secured the tell-all interview with whistleblower Christopher Wylie in defiance of a non-disclosure agreement. Channel 4 News went undercover to reveal how Cambridge Analytica secretly campaigns in elections across the world.” The awards are the latest in a run of recent honours for the pair. Last month they shared the joint journalist of the year award from the Political Studies Association and Cadwalladr took the print and web story of the year from the Foreign Press Association for her exposés on Trump and Brexit.