The 1980 conversation aboard the small campaign plane was off the record, but I wish I had written up some notes afterwards. Shuttling from Iowa to New Hampshire during the Republican primary season, a wary George Bush found himself seated across a table from his entire traveling press corps – a network correspondent and me. Like many men of his generation, Bush filled the gaps in what he regarded as an awkward conversation with second world war stories. Never mentioning his own ordeal as a pilot shot down over the Pacific in 1944, Bush told grisly tales of mishaps aboard the aircraft carrier San Jacinto, illustrating the position of the planes on the deck with salt and pepper shakers, pens and a napkin. These macabre wartime memories were at odds with Bush’s manic persona as a candidate in 1980. Before the Iowa caucuses, I recall the 55-year-old Bush frenetically doing pushups at a YMCA in Des Moines to demonstrate that he was “up for the 80s” and his 68-year-old rival, Ronald Reagan, was not. After Bush won a major upset in Iowa (soon to be erased by the verdict from New Hampshire), he uncharacteristically began bragging about having “the Big Mo”, an odd shorthand for “momentum”. When Bush again ran for president in 1988 – after two terms as Reagan’s sometimes neglected Sancho Panza – he had only won two political races in his life, both in an overwhelmingly Republican House district in Houston during the 1960s. This might explain why Bush approached campaigning with a level of what-it-takes cynicism unmatched by any modern president between Richard Nixon and Donald Trump. Bush’s scorched-earth 1988 race against Democrat Michael Dukakis is often summarised by the name Willie Horton. Horton was a convicted murderer who raped a woman and killed her fiance while briefly released from prison under a furlough program for good behaviour that Dukakis supported as Massachusetts governor. The Bush campaign, directed by 37-year-old Lee Atwater, never showed Horton’s face in a campaign commercial, although it did use a jailhouse revolving door to symbolise the furlough program. But a closely aligned Republican group directly played on racial fears by highlighting a frightening image of the African-American murderer. As he was dying from a brain tumour in 1991, Atwater apologised for the vicious tenor of the campaign in a Life magazine article: “Fighting Dukakis, I said that I ‘would strip the bark off the little bastard’ and ‘make Willie Horton his running mate’. I am sorry for both statements: the first for its naked cruelty, the second because it makes me sound racist, which I am not.” This was not a case of Bush’s reputation being tarred by overzealous underlings like Atwater. The candidate personally excoriated Dukakis for vetoing state legislation that would have required teachers to preside over mandated patriotism. “What is it about the Pledge of Allegiance that upsets him so much?” Bush asked with a sneer at a Los Angeles rally. Then to drive home the theme that Dukakis was less than a red-blooded American, Bush campaigned at a New Jersey flag factory. Until Trump, Bush presided over the most dispiriting low-road campaign that I had ever covered. With his disdain for politics and, by extension, the voters, Bush governed from the Oval Office with an amnesiac’s confusion over how he got there. He had pandered to conservatives with the famous line in his 1988 convention speech: “Read my lips. No new taxes.” Then Bush, the prudent president, repudiated that pledge in 1990 giving rise to the angry rightwing populism of Pat Buchanan, who won a stunning 40% of the vote against the incumbent president in the 1992 New Hampshire primary. Much of the torrent of praise for Bush’s one-term presidency is justified. His determination and caution during the Gulf war were exemplary, from patiently assembling a true international coalition to resisting the heedless war cry “On to Baghdad” when Saddam Hussein retreated from Kuwait. Adroit statecraft and public understatement by Bush during the breakup of the Soviet Union helped manage the transition to freedom with an exquisite sensitivity to Russian feelings. However, parades and some dramatic Reagan-esque oratory might have inspired Americans with the shimmering significance of victory in the cold war. George Bush’s virtues like competence, kindness, dignity and modesty trigger a wave of justified nostalgia in the Trump era. But part of the Bush legacy is also how his guttersnipe 1988 campaign helped hasten the downward slide of American politics. Walter Shapiro is a contributor to the Guardian US