The results of the Guardian’s investigation into discrimination in the property rental market echo the findings of similar studies in recent years. The approach of submitting applications using different names more likely to belong either to a white or black or minority ethnic person has been used most commonly in the jobs arena to illustrate employer prejudice. The correspondence approach was pioneered in the UK by Social and Community Planning Research in 1960, which sent matching application letters for white-collar jobs, mostly advertised in local papers. Similar studies were carried out by Political and Economic Planning in 1973/74 and the Commission for Racial Equality (CRE) with Nottingham and district community relations council, specifically looking at Nottingham. A 1977/78 experiment focused on positions for accountants, and a 1997 one on posts for doctors. The latter originally commenced in 1992 but was abandoned when the researchers were arrested for making fraudulent applications. In 1992 Mike Noon, from Cardiff business school, sent speculative applications to the top 100 UK companies, and in 1996 the CRE carried out another study on white-collar workers. More recently, in 2009 the government carried out its own exercise, sending out nearly 3,000 job applications under three false identities – Nazia Mahmood, Mariam Namagembe and Alison Taylor, designed to represent Asian, African and white applicants respectively. The study – the first to move largely to online applications – found that an applicant who appeared to be white would send nine applications before receiving a positive response of either an invitation to an interview or an encouraging telephone call. Minority candidates with the same qualifications and experience had to send 16 applications before receiving a similar response. Unconscious or implicit bias is one part of the explanation for why, despite equalities being enshrined in law, minority groups are still at a disadvantage in many parts of life. The term was popularised after US social psychologists devised a way of measuring the prejudices that we are not necessarily aware of – the Implicit Association Test. They published a paper in 1998 claiming that their tool for measuring "the unconscious roots of prejudice" showed that 90-95% of people were susceptible. While the reliability of that test is now contested, there is overwhelming wider evidence that unconscious bias seeps into decisions that affect recruitment, access to healthcare and outcomes in criminal justice in ways that can disadvantage black and minority ethnic people. One study found that university professors were far more likely to respond to emails from students with white-sounding names. Another showed that white people perceived black faces as more threatening than white faces with the same expression. In this series, Bias in Britain, we're exploring some of the ways unconscious bias plays out in the real world. For example, we conducted a poll which found that ethnic minorities are much more likely to report being suspected of shoplifting, refused entry to bars and clubs or being unfairly overlooked for promotion at work. While some of our biases may begin on an unconscious level, experts caution that the concept of unconscious bias should not absolve people of discriminatory behaviour. “If you’re aware of these associations then you can bring to bear all of your critical skills and intelligence to see it’s wrong to think like that,” says Lasana Harris, a neuroscientist who studies prejudice and social learning at University College London. “We all have the ability to control that.” Last year the BBC’s Inside Out London sent out CVs from two candidates, Adam and Mohamed, who had identical skills and experience, in response to 100 job opportunities. Adam was offered 12 interviews and Mohamed four. Similar studies have been carried out overseas, yielding similar results. In a 2016 study, 1,600 CVs were sent to employers in 16 metropolitan areas in the US. Among African American candidates, 25% of résumés that were “whitened” to remove any indication of minority ethnicity received callbacks, compared with 10% of those left unaltered. Among Asian applicants, 21% heard back after they had changed their résumé and 11% if not. A study by researchers at Northwestern University and Harvard in the US and the Institute for Social Research in Norway looked at the results of every available field experiment on hiring discrimination in the US from 1989 to 2015 – 24 studies in total, using CVs and/or in-person applications. It concluded that on average white applicants received 36% more callbacks than equally qualified African Americans and 24% more callbacks than Latinos. It said anti-black racism in hiring was unchanged since at least 1989. In France in 2016, a consulting firm commissioned by the labour ministry sent out 3,000 applications for 1,500 jobs advertised by 40 companies in six cities. It found that 47% of candidates with “traditional” French names got interviews, compared with 36% of those with north African names. In the UK, such investigations have had an impact. In 2016, the CBI called for name-blind recruitment, whereby candidates’ names are removed from job applications before they are assessed. Name-blind recruitment has been standard practice across the civil service since November 2015, although there are exceptions for some senior roles. Exercises to identify discrimination based on name only have not been limited to the job market. The proliferation of price comparison websites has made it easier to explore other areas. This year the Sun said it had found that a car insurance applicant named Mohammed was quoted hundreds of pounds more than one called John. It identified five insurance companies that it said quoted Mohammed between £205 and £919 more, although the insurance companies claimed the comparisons were not like for like. In Germany, a study by journalists from Bayerischer Rundfunk and Der Spiegel found that people with “foreign” names were clearly discriminated against in the property rental market. In a blogpost last year, David Isaac, the chair of the UK’s Equality and Human Rights Commission, successor to the CRE, offered an endorsement of such methodology, saying “mystery shopping” offered a way “to make sure business are complying with the law in a swift, light-touch and relatively inexpensive way”.