A Georgia Stanway double and a tactical masterclass from Nick Cushing led to Manchester City becoming the first side to take points off an injury-hit Arsenal and close the gap at the top of the Women’s Super League to three points. Weakened Arsenal struggled to assert themselves with the same swagger they had so far this season. With midfield architects Kim Little and Jordan Nobbs out with a fractured tibia and ruptured ACL respectively Joe Montemurro was forced to drop Danielle van de Donk much deeper and hand a full debut to the 17-year-old Paige Bailey-Gayle. The warning signs were there early on; Stanway raced through the middle in the sixth minute but Leah Williamson recovered enough to put her off and her tame shot went safely into the arms of Pauline Peyraud-Magnin. Tessa Wullaert and Jill Scott were combining neatly on the right for City’s brightest play and it felt like a breakthrough would come from there. Instead a testing Demi Stokes cross from a rare break on the right landed at the feet of Stanway who fired the home side in front from point-blank range. City continued to stretch their legs, with Wullaert, Nikita Parris and Stanway outpacing the Arsenal backline time and time again. The Gunners began to claw their way into the game with about 15 minutes left of the half; the league’s top scorer, Viv Miedema, playing deeper and deeper, won the ball on the edge of the City box and slipped it to Beth Mead, Arsenal’s brightest outlet. She twisted past two blue shirts before laying off to Katie McCabe who rattled the crossbar from a tight angle. Shortly afterwards Mead cut inside and shot from 30 yards, forcing Ellie Roebuck to tip the ball over the bar. With Arsenal chasing the game and the City captain, Steph Houghton, and Jen Beattie nullifying the threat of Miedema, who has scored or assisted 14 goals in her last six games, Arsenal got scrappy and complacent. Peyraud-Magnin was left breathing a sign of relief as her poor clearance went straight to Parris who fired inches wide of the gaping net. The Dutch forward Miedema, who was cutting a frustrated figure, tried her chances on the left and evaded two opponents before handing over to Mead. She hit the ball from an acute angle, forcing Roebuck to push it into the air before catching it ahead of an incoming Van de Donk. Sitting deep, and with Arsenal playing a high line, City continued their defensive dominance, marshalled by England Houghton, after the break. A rare slip from Wullaert gifted the ball to Miedema but Beattie, who owned the Dutchwoman throughout, made a last-ditch tackle before the shot came. Van de Donk then curled wide of the post from the edge of the D. It was then time for City to punish Arsenal’s complacency up front. A wonderful ball from Keira Walsh, making her 100th appearance for City, sent Stanway away on a solo run on the right; she cut inside and beat two defenders before slotting into the bottom corner to trigger rapturous celebrations in the stands and on the pitch. Lacking creativity Arsenal continued to struggle and Miedema, up alone against three of City’s back four, managed to beat off multiple challenges but she lacked options. A angry shout and gesture urging her teammate to offer more support followed. With the absences starting to count Montemurro will be praying Little returns in January as expected and will undoubtedly have to look to the transfer window to help stabilise his side, while Cushing will be sensing blood.