The Kurdish-led force that has done most of the ground fighting against Islamic State in its strongholds in Syria has condemned the White House decision to withdraw US troops from the country. The decision will allow an Islamic State revival and threaten the battle in eastern Syria, with “dangerous implications for international stability,” the Syrian Democratic Forces said. The SDF, the US-led coalition’s main military partner on the ground, are being threatened with a cross-border offensive from Turkey, which sees them as indistinguishable from Kurdish Workers’ party militants inside Turkey. US support for the SDF has strained ties between the two allies. “The war against Islamic state has not ended and the Islamic State has not been defeated,” the SDF statement said. Any withdrawal would also “create a political and military vacuum in the area, leaving its people between the claws of hostile parties”, it added. Kurds in northern Syria said commanders and fighters met into the night, discussing their response to Wednesday’s surprise announcement, widely seen as an abandonment of a loyal ally. “We have every right to be afraid,” Arin Sheikmos, a Kurdish journalist and commentator, told Associated Press. “If the Americans pull out and leave us to the Turks or the [Syrian] regime, our destiny will be like the Kurds of Iraqi Kurdistan in 1991. Neither the regime, nor Iran nor Turkey, will accept our presence here.” Donald Trump’s order on Wednesday for a full, rapid withdrawal of over 2,000 US troops in Syria, and his declaration of victory over Isis, left Pentagon and state department officials scrambling to interpret an abrupt change in course from the US policy decided over the summer. At that point the policy was to keep forces in Syria to ensure the “enduring defeat of Isis” and act as a bulwark against Iranian influence. On Wednesday morning, Trump tweeted “We have defeated ISIS in Syria, my only reason for being there during the Trump Presidency” – a claim at odds with his own administration’s assessments. In August this year, the Pentagon assessed there were still as many as 14,500 Isis fighters still in Syria. Both the UK and France have troops in Syria and the UK’s junior defence minister, Tobias Ellwood, rejected Trump’s claim that Isis had been defeated in Syria. “I strongly disagree. It has morphed into other forms of extremism and the threat is very much alive,” Ellwood said in a tweet. Later on Wednesday morning, the White House spokeswoman, Sarah Sanders, put out a more nuanced statement saying that troop withdrawal marked the start of the “next phase” in the struggle with Isis, and suggested they could return if necessary. After the Trump tweet and the White House statement, the state department cancelled a scheduled press briefing. After initially insisting that nothing had changed, the Pentagon put out its own statement echoing the White House language about the “next phase of the campaign” against Isis, but saying it had only “started the process” of withdrawal, and giving no timetable. Reuters quoted a US official as saying the troop pullout would take between 60 and 100 days. Behind the scenes, the Pentagon leadership was still trying to persuade the president to accept a managed, more gradual withdrawal, according to sources familiar with the discussions. An abrupt US withdrawal would mean abandoning the Syrian Democratic Forces, Washington’s closest ally inside Syria. Last week, the Turkish president Recep Tayyip Erdoğan said that Turkey was on the verge of launching a military operation against the Kurds in northern Syria. Long frustrated by US support for Kurdish militias that Turkey views as terrorists, Erdoğan has threatened to push deeper into north-eastern Syria since sending Turkish forces into the Kurdish enclave of Afrin in February. Paramount for Turkey is countering any claims by the Kurds for autonomy and stopping any momentum stemming from their successful campaign against Isis, which it fears may amplify the Kurdish insurgency inside its own borders. Washington and Ankara have been at odds throughout the US partnership with the Kurds, and Erdoğan has repeatedly threatened to send his forces to confront its Nato ally. Ties have been further strained by Donald Trump’s firm backing of Saudi Arabia’s Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, whom Turkey accuses of ordering the murder of dissident journalist Jamal Khashoggi inside the Saudi consulate in Istanbul.