This year’s awards season peaks here with the publication of the “Braddies” – that is, my personal 10-strong best-of lists for films released this calendar year. These are distinct from the paper’s top 50, and come in the categories best film, best director, best actor, best actress, best supporting actor and actress, best screenplay, best cinematography and best documentary. There are also two new categories this year: best directorial debut and the special Braddie award for the quirkiest film overlooked by the complacent MSM gatekeeper-establishment that may be a future cult classic. (Last year it went unofficially to Gore Verbinski’s A Cure for Wellness, and I am standardising the award this year). As ever, I invite readers to peruse this list and comment on omissions etc below. Roma (dir. Alfonso Cuarón) A Star Is Born (dir. Bradley Cooper) Cold War (dir. Paweł Pawlikowski) Leave No Trace (dir. Debra Granik) Western (dir. Valeska Grisebach) Zama (dir. Lucrecia Martel) Hereditary (dir. Ari Aster) Coco (dirs. Lee Unkrich, Adrian Molina) Widows (dir. Steve McQueen) Phantom Thread (dir. Paul Thomas Anderson) Alfonso Cuarón for Roma Bradley Cooper for A Star Is Born Mike Leigh for Peterloo Bart Layton for American Animals Andrey Zvyagintsev for Loveless Greta Gerwig for Lady Bird Ryan Coogler for Black Panther Nuri Bilge Ceylan for The Wild Pear Tree Hirokazu Kore-eda for Shoplifters Chloé Zhao for The Rider Rupert Everett for The Happy Prince (dir. Rupert Everett) Marcello Fonte for Dogman (dir. Matteo Garrone) Justin Salinger for Crowhurst (dir. Simon Rumley) Daniel Day Lewis for Phantom Thread (dir. Paul Thomas Anderson) Joaquin Phoenix for You Were Never Really Here (dir. Lynne Ramsay) Ethan Hawke for First Reformed (dir. Paul Schrader) John David Washington for BlacKkKlansman (dir. Spike Lee) Lakeith Stanfield for Sorry to Bother You (dir. Boots Riley) Steve Coogan for Stan & Ollie (dir. Jon S Baird) John C Reilly for Stan & Ollie (dir Jon S Baird) Tim Blake Nelson for The Ballad of Buster Scruggs (dirs. Joel Coen, Ethan Coen) Nahuel Pérez Biscayart for BPM: 120 Beats Per Minute (dir. Robin Campillo) Sam Elliott for A Star Is Born (dir. Bradley Cooper) Craig Robinson for An Evening With Beverly Luff Lin (dir. Jim Hosking) Brian Tyree Henry for Widows (dir. Steve McQueen) Daniel Kaluuya for Widows (dir. Steve McQueen) Gérard Depardieu for Let the Sunshine In (dir. Claire Denis) Jonathan Pryce for The Wife (dir. Björn Runge) Paul Bettany for Journey’s End (dir. Saul Dibb) Benicio Del Toro for Sicario 2: Soldado (dir. Stefano Sollima) Yalitza Aparicio for Roma (dir. Alfonso Cuarón) Toni Collette for Hereditary (dir. Ari Aster) Glenn Close for The Wife (dir. Björn Junge) Lady Gaga for A Star Is Born (dir. Bradley Cooper) Viola Davis for Widows (dir. Steve McQueen) Carey Mulligan for Wildlife (dir. Paul Dano) Daniela Vega for A Fantastic Woman (dir. Sebastián Lelio) Joanna Scanlan for Pin Cushion (dir. Deborah Haywood) Frances McDormand for Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri (dir. Martin McDonagh) Juliette Binoche for Let the Sunshine In (dir. Claire Denis) Cynthia Erivo for Widows (dir. Steve McQueen) and Bad Times at the El Royale (dir. Drew Goddard) Allison Janney for I, Tonya (dir. Craig Gillespie) Elisabeth Moss for The Square (dir. Ruben Östlund) Michelle Yeoh for Crazy Rich Asians (dir. Jon M Chu) Siobhan Finneran for Apostasy (dir. Daniel Kokotajlo) Michelle Pfeiffer for Ant-Man and the Wasp (dir. Peyton Reed) Ana Ivanova for The Heiresses (dir. Marcelo Martinessi) Kirin Kiki for Shoplifters (dir. Hirokazu Kore-eda) Adele Haenel for BPM: 120 Beats Per Minute (dir. Robin Campillo) Zoe Kazan for The Ballad of Buster Scruggs (dirs. Joel Coen, Ethan Coen) Joel Coen and Ethan Coen for The Ballad of Buster Scruggs (dirs. Joel Coen, Ethan Coen) Hirokazu Kore-eda for Shoplifters (dir. Hirokazu Kore-eda) Nick Park, Mark Burton and James Higginson for Early Man (dir. Nick Park) Brian Kehoe and Jim Kehoe for Blockers (dir. Kay Cannon) Liz Hannah for The Post (dir. Steven Spielberg) Carla Simón for Summer 1993 (dir. Carla Simón) Lucinda Coxon for The Little Stranger (dir. Lenny Abrahamson) Lucrecia Martel for Zama (dir. Lucrecia Martel) Jim Hosking and David Wike for An Evening With Beverly Luff Lin (dir. Jim Hosking) Greta Gerwig for Lady Bird (dir. Greta Gerwig) The Shall Not Grow Old (dir. Peter Jackson) Faces Places (dirs. Agnès Varda, JR) Bombshell: The Hedy Lamarr Story (dir. Alexandra Dean) The Rape of Recy Taylor (dir. Nancy Buirski) The Eyes of Orson Welles (dir. Mark Cousins) A Northern Soul (dir. Sean McAllister) Nothing Like a Dame (dir. Roger Michell) That Summer (dir. Göran Hugo Olsson) Arcadia (dir. Paul Wright) Voyageuse (dir. May Miles Thomas) Alfonso Cuarón for Roma (dir. Alfonso Cuarón) Benjamin Loeb for Mandy (dir. Panos Cosmatos) Benoît Debie for Climax (dir. Gaspar Noé) Laurie Rose for The Escape (dir. Dominic Savage) and Journey’s End (dir. Saul Dibb) Rachel Morrison for Black Panther (dir. Ryan Coogler) Agnès Godard for Let the Sunshine In (dir. Claire Denis) Charlotte Bruus Christensen for A Quiet Place (dir. John Krasinski) Linus Sandgren for First Man (dir. Damien Chazelle) Rui Poças for Zama (dir. Lucrecia Martel) Andrew Dunn for The Children Act (dir. Richard Eyre) Paul Dano for Wildlife Nelson Carlo De Los Santos Arias for Cocote Marcelo Martinessi for The Heiresses Michael Pearce for Beast John Trengove for The Wound Coralie Fargeat for Revenge Léonor Serraille for Jeune Femme Carla Simón for Summer 1993 Daniel Kokotajlo for Apostasy Kogonada for Columbus … for the quirky film overlooked by the complacent MSM gatekeeper-establishment which might be a future cult classic: Every Day (dir. Michael Sucsy) 