Saudi Arabia has ruled out extraditing suspects held over the killing of Jamal Khashoggi, as alleged details giving the fullest picture of the journalist’s last moments yet emerged. In Riyadh on Sunday, the Saudi foreign minister, Adel al-Jubeir, reiterated that the kingdom had no extradition policy for citizens, after fresh arrest warrants were issued by Turkey last week for two top Saudi officials since sacked over their alleged role in the dissident writer’s killing at the Saudi consulate in Istanbul on 2 October. He also criticised Turkey’s handling of the investigation into Khashoggi’s death, saying the authorities in Ankara had “not been as forthcoming as we believe they should have been”. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, says the operation to kill Khashoggi was ordered at the highest levels of the Saudi establishment, and has strongly suggested that the crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, was involved, steadily leaking information from the investigation to pressure his rival in Riyadh. Riyadh has maintained the killing was a rogue operation carried out without the powerful crown prince’s knowledge. More than two months since Khashoggi’s disappearance, Saudi Arabia is still facing international condemnation over his brutal murder and alleged dismemberment at the hands of a Saudi hit team. The 61-year-old’s body has still not been found and is thought by Turkish investigators to have been dissolved in acid. According to a purported transcript of an audio recording of Khashoggi’s killing central to Turkey’s case against Saudi Arabia and shared with CNN, the journalist recognises someone whom CNN identifies as Maher Abdulaziz Mutreb, a former Saudi diplomat and intelligence official working for Prince Mohammed. After an exchange in which Mutreb allegedly says, “You’re coming back” and Khashoggi replies, “You can’t do that, there are people waiting outside for me”, the transcript describes noises consistent with a scuffle and Khashoggi says, “I can’t breathe” several times. The recording then captures the sounds of screams and gasps and then noises identified as “sawing” and “cutting”. A voice that Turkish authorities have previously identified as Dr Salah Mohammed al-Tubaigy, the head of forensic medicine at Saudi Arabia’s interior ministry, says, “If you don’t like the noise, put your earphones in or listen to music like me” during the dismemberment. Mutreb makes several phone calls, including one Turkey says was made to a member of the Saudi royal court, in which he says “tell yours”, believed to mean Prince Mohammed, “The thing is done, it is done.” Turkey has refused to say how the audio recording was obtained, although its existence has been confirmed by Erdoğan and western officials, who also say they have listened to it. The office of a US senator briefed on the ongoing investigation by the CIA director, Gina Haspel, told CNN the transcript was consistent with that briefing. Monday’s revelations came after a Republican senator rebuked the White House over its handling of the affair, after reports that Jared Kushner had counselled Prince Mohammed over the fallout from the journalist’s murder. “We don’t need direct evidence that [the Saudi crown prince] ordered the code red on this thing,” Marco Rubio said. “The bottom line is that there is no way that 17 people close to [Prince Mohammed] got a charter plane, flew to a third country, went into a consulate, killed and chopped up a man and flew back, and he didn’t know about it, much less order it.” He added: “[Saudi Arabia] is not a de-centralised country. That in a country like that, a man with his power, his influence and his control did not know it and did not order, it’s just not believable.” On Saturday, a New York Times report said Kushner, senior adviser to his father-in-law, the president, had become “the prince’s most important defender inside the White House”. The administration has acknowledged one call between the two men since Khashoggi’s disappearance, on 9 October, joined by the national security adviser, John Bolton. Citing “American officials and a Saudi briefed on their conversations”, the NYT said Kushner and Prince Mohammed have “continued to chat informally”. Citing the unnamed Saudi source, the paper said, “Kushner has offered the crown prince advice about how to weather the storm, urging him to resolve his conflicts around the region and avoid further embarrassments”. The US Senate is due to vote on Monday on a resolution to direct the removal of American forces from the Saudi-led war in Yemen, unless authorised by Congress. A resolution condemning Prince Mohammed is also expected to be voted on.