Name: Barry DeaconAge: 39Income: £16,000Occupation: Nightshift support worker for youth housing programme When I was 18 I started drinking alcohol because all my friends did. I started drinking on weekends, then weekends turned to days. When my mother died of cancer, I started drinking more. If I didn’t drink, I felt physically unwell. I ended up in hospital a couple of times. I was bingeing on cocaine at the weekends, drinking alcohol every day, and I started to get into debt. When I got a bill, I would put it in a drawer and forget about it. I stopped paying my rent and ended up in arrears of about £3,000. I also owed about £5,000 on my credit cards and for bills such as council tax. Bailiffs came round. It was horrible: they’d threaten me, and were really manipulative. At the time I was working in a factory but I became the master of telling everyone I was OK. Nobody knew. The alcohol addiction was just a reality suppressant. I was in a lot of pain. My mother had died, my sister had moved to Australia. I felt so alone. I told my uncle I was in a dark place and he started taking me to church. This Christian faith turned out to be a pivotal point for me. One day at church someone mentioned a Christians Against Poverty (CAP) course. There was a session on budgeting and we went through my finances and documented everything I spent. I realised I could start to pay off some of the debt. I called the creditors and paid a little bit. A lot were great; they said, “you’ve picked up the phone, let’s work on this”. I felt hopeful. I started paying off a little bit more each month until last year when, after seven years, I became debt-free. It’s funny as it turned out that I’d paid too much and I was owed £300 from overpaying my rent. Now I budget quite well. I live in a two-bedroom council house in Bradford, which costs me £353 a month. I have a housemate who pays me £200 for his share of the rent and bills. We’ve been friends for years. Living together is like being in a comedy show sometimes. He doesn’t agree with my religious beliefs. I spend quite a bit on travel – £69 a month – as I have to catch two buses to work. I spend about £30 a week on food and toiletries. I always try to find bargains. One of the things I learnt through CAP was to only withdraw a certain amount of money each week, so now I just take £30 out of the ATM and try to make it last until Friday. I earn £16,000 a year working night shifts for a youth housing programme. I’ve been there for two years and I love the team. There’s a strong positive atmosphere and I feel passionate about helping people. Through managing my debt I have more money to spend on my hobbies. I’m a comic book geek. I used to get bullied about it at school but now I embrace it. I buy about two comic books a month, which might cost anywhere between £25 and £40 in total. I also go to comic book conventions with my friends. I dress up as Judge Dredd and wear a customised badge called Judge Bazz. Through these events I’ve met famous people such as David Hasselhoff. Because he’s struggled with alcohol addiction, I mentioned my past problems and how I was inspired by how he turned things around after a YouTube clip of him under the influence went viral. He was open and honest and said that was a turning point. He asked how I got off the alcohol and I simply said that it was Jesus, my Christian faith, and changing things in my life. Apart from comics, I’ll also spend about £50 every few months on a new video game. At the moment, I’m taking a Christian counselling course that sets me back £88 a month. Next year, I plan to start putting away savings. I now feel in charge of my finances. I want people to know that if you’re struggling, there’s no shame in asking for help. The CAP Money Course is a free course that teaches budgeting skills with a simple cash-based system. Visit capuk.org/capmoneycourse