Late-night hosts addressed Stephen Miller’s new hairstyle and Trump’s pick to replace the outgoing White House chief of staff, John Kelly. On The Daily Show, Trevor Noah noted that though “everything Trump has ever been involved in is being investigated”, he did have one positive development over the weekend: hiring budget director Mick Mulvaney to replace John Kelly as White House chief of staff. We shouldn’t let the recent W.H. staff changes distract us from the most startling development: Stephen Miller’s new hair. pic.twitter.com/jkiMI2b9ja Trump allegedly offered Mulvaney the job during a previously scheduled budget meeting. “That is incredible,” Noah remarked. “Mick Mulvaney, the budget director and mid-life crisis Harry Potter, comes into the Oval Office for a meeting about the budget, and then Trump just ambushed him with another job offer.” The reports made Trump sound so frustrated with the stalled replacement search, Noah continued, that “he just decided he’d hire whoever came through the door next”. He added: “I’m just saying, we should be grateful that Mick Mulvaney got the job and not the White House Roomba.” With the departure of Kelly and, over the weekend, the interior secretary, Ryan Zinke, the White House has become, according to Noah, “like the club after midnight – for every guy that comes in, someone else has to leave”. One of the few remaining stalwarts? Senior adviser Stephen Miller, who appeared on Face the Nation on Monday with a noticeably filled-in hairline. “Bit of a migration happening,” Noah joked about the advancing dark point of hair on Miller’s head. “I don’t think we should be going after Miller. I think we should be going after his Barber, Sherwin Williams,” said Noah over a graphic of a black can from the famous paint company. Stephen Colbert also took shots at Miller’s updated look over at the Late Show, but first agreed with him on one point. When Miller, one of the architects of Trump’s family separation policy, claimed that “one of the great tragedies in this country … [are] leftwing activist judicial rulings that incentivize the most vulnerable populations to come to our country”, Colbert chimed in. “It’s true, he’s right, there’s one leftwing activist who spends all day incentivizing the vulnerable in New York Harbor. I don’t know if she’s a judge but she has a robe and a gavel,” Colbert said over a picture of the Statue of Liberty. Regardless, Colbert continued: “You can’t really hear a word [Miller is] saying over the sound of you looking at his sprayed-on hair. He looks like Eddie Munster and the Count from Sesame Street had a baby, and then the baby went bald.” Reading through Trump’s recent tweets, Colbert remarked that they seemed increasingly erratic and desperate, particularly a stream in which he wondered if Saturday Night Live’s mockery of him was “illegal”. “Are they going to put their jokes on trial or does he think the Saturday Night Live is news?” Colbert asked. “What are Donald Trump’s Yelp reviews like?” he wondered before mimicking the president’s voice: “The service was slow and the minestrone was too salty. Murder?” Over at Late Night, Seth Meyers observed that Miller’s new hairstyle is particularly notable given that he’s been quiet recently, “although he occasionally lurks in the background of photos like the White House janitor who’s been dead for 30 years”. The new look, Meyers joked, brought up an important question: “Does Stephen Miller get a hair hard-on when he talks about the wall? “Look at that thing! It would have been more believable if he had just Charlie Brown-ed it,” Meyers said in reference to the cartoon character’s trademark pencil swirl of hair. Meyers went on to explain how Miller’s appearance on Face the Nation underscored an ongoing trend in Washington: “Even Trump’s closest friends and advisers are getting as far away from him as they possibly can. “The only people he has left to defend him are Rudy Giuliani and Stephen Miller,” he said. “And that’s because people are starting to realize a fundamental truth about working for Donald Trump: you can keep your job or you can keep your dignity,” but to quote Miller: “You can’t have both.”