Move over Lionel Messi and Cristiano Ronaldo, we have a new winner. After six years of supremacy by the Argentinian and the Portuguese, Luka Modric has been voted the Guardian’s best male footballer of the year in 2018. The Croat, who also won the Ballon d’Or in early December, finished 246 points ahead of Ronaldo and 284 ahead of Messi, not an inconsiderable amount after our 225 judges from around the world had cast their votes. Every judge had Modric among their top 40 players for the year, with 79 placing the Real Madrid midfielder in first place. It is clear that the World Cup played a big part in the outcome of this year’s Guardian list. Modric led Croatia to the final, whereas Messi’s Argentina were uninspiring before being eliminated in the last 16 by France and Ronaldo never built on his incredible opening hat-trick against Spain. The World Cup had had a huge influence on the rest of our list too. It is almost inconceivable to think that players such as Harry Maguire, Jordan Pickford and Denis Cheryshev would have made the list without that month in Russia and Paul Pogba would never have ended up at No 16 or Romelu Lukaku at No 41 if this list had been based only on club form. But I don’t have a problem with that. The World Cup is by far the most important football tournament on the planet. Many players will have their careers defined by that competition and therefore the performances there should play a big part when it comes to ranking the best players for 2018. Last summer I met one of the judges, Jaime F. Macias, and he described his tactic of dividing the year into three parts before deciding on his top 40 players: the end of the 2017-18 season, the World Cup and then the start of the 2018-19 season. Having done that, you then go through player after player to give them ratings for those three sections before coming up with your final list. So for Mohamed Salah, who finished fifth on our list, that would probably be: unstoppable, average, quite good. For Kevin De Bruyne, who finished eighth, that would be extremely good, very good, injury-hit. And so on. But it is probably fair to say that those players who were outstanding at the beginning of the year suffer in comparison with those who have excelled towards the end of the year. What can be said for certain is that there were 12 players who were deemed to be way ahead of everyone else in the world this year: Modric, Ronaldo, Messi, Kylian Mbappé, Salah, Antoine Griezmann, Eden Hazard, De Bruyne, Harry Kane, N’Golo Kanté, Neymar and Raphaël Varane were each awarded more than 5,000 points. The gap between Varane in 12th and Ivan Rakitic in 13th was a huge 1,181 points. More proof of the World Cup being decisive in 2018 was the fact that France overtook Spain as the country with the most players on our top 100. France had 13 players on the list, with Spain and Brazil joint second with 11. Last year Spain had an incredible 17 players on the list, with France second with five players fewer. It is, as always, also exciting to see new names on the list, including the brilliant Ajax pair Matthijs de Ligt, at 89, and Frenkie de Jong, three places lower. They have been rewarded for their outstanding performances throughout the year, culminating in the Champions League, where they were instrumental as Ajax reached the last 16 and drew twice with Bayern Munich. Allan, Douglas Costa, Jadon Sancho and Marcelo Brozovic and Andrés Iniesta were the unlucky five who finished 101st to 105th, with Barcelona’s young midfielder Arthur picking up 11 votes to finish 110th. Arthur and Sancho are only two of many, many young players who look certain to move up the list in the coming years. All in all, 275 players received votes, and you can see the complete breakdown of how every judge voted here as well as where players such as Zlatan Ibrahimovic and Ousmane Dembélé – who did not make the top 100 – finished.