We’re near the training nets at the famous old Sydney Cricket Ground and a bevy of journalists, photographers and sundry lanyard-wearers has come to tell us the news. There are fourteen cameras trained upon a big group of fuzzy microphones as coiffed talent waits to present a press conference – and their take on what it can all possibly mean – out to their respective media. And the news is this: former Australia captain Steve Smith is poking his head above the parapets for the first time since the sandpaper-in-the-pants imbroglio of Cape Town nine months ago. It’s all part of the plan to finesse Smith back into the greater public good books. He’s played grade cricket. He’s done charity work. He’s been central to a thousand selfies. Yet like fellow Sandpapergate alumni David Warner and Cameron Bancroft, Smith hasn’t been allowed to speak to media without Cricket Australia approval. And thus we’ve heard nothing from him until now. A couple of photographers get jiggy and look for angles for there in the distance is the familiar figure of SPD Smith, dressed in white T-shirt and black shorts, loping along, escorted by a Cricket Australia media type, a serious person with a serious job: protect the brand. Protect the money. CA was rocked after Cape Town when sponsors hopped off. The rivers of gold were threatened. CA wants the spigot back on, and is crawling back to Australia just as Smith is. You wonder will Warner get a presser as well. Up close Smith has a boyish look about him. Almost cherubic, though not quite. He faces the many lenses and faces that look at him, and he does his best to maintain a half-smile and present well. Back of his mind he doesn’t want to say anything the CA burghers might not like. The first question is quite Australian. Effectively, How you goin’? Smith says he’s going okay though he hasn’t always. “Initially after South Africa I was going through a bit. I had some tough days. I still have ups and downs but they’re few and far between now. So I’m going okay.” Asked if he forgives himself, Smith says that there’s been “dark days” when he didn’t want to get out of bed. He says he still has his moments of regret. “But I’m fortunate to have a close group of people around me who’ve said it’s okay that I made a mistake. It was a big mistake. But I’m moving on now and trying to be a better person.” Smith’s mistake, he says, was to notice Warner conspiring with Bancroft to sandpaper the cricket ball (and thus produce reverse swing for their bowlers), and to say only “I don’t want to know about it”. He then allowed it to go on on the field. He effectively gave it the okay by looking the other way and lacking the leadership to knock it on the head. “I walked past something that I had the opportunity to stop and didn’t do it. It was going on on the field, and I didn’t do anything about it. It was a failure of leadership.” Was it the first time it happened? “As far as I know, that was the first time it happened.” Really? Just that one time? “That one time - that’s correct, yes.” Eyebrows may remain raised yet it’s clear Smith means what he’s saying. There’s an honest quality about him, a transparency. Others like former CA chairman David Peever could come across with a tin ear, talking down to people. Smith though seems a bloke who’s open and honest and copping everything sweet. He’s been chastened. His humility is genuine. He wants to do whatever it takes to get back doing what he most loves, with the respect of Australia. Public relations stuff is part of it. And so it goes and Smith answers questions as best he can. He’s fine with Warner - reports of a fall-out are off the mark. The Longstaff Review into Australian cricket culture proved that CA was big enough to have an independent review into itself. He’ll keep playing and training, as he’s always done, and if a World Cup and Ashes tour comes from that, great. He’ll play under Tim Paine and Aaron Finch and help as much as he can. He’s sure the Barmy Army will be “incredibly hostile” but has always been good at blocking things out. He says he’s learned a lot. “Most people in the street have been really positive and kind,” he says. “They’ve been slightly forgiving too. But I still have a lot of work to do to get back trust and respect of the Australian public.”