Born in London, Hayley Atwell, 36, went to the Guildhall School of Music and Drama and, within months of graduating, was cast in Woody Allen’s film Cassandra’s Dream. Her roles include Agent Peggy Carter in the Avengers films, and Margaret in Howards End. She stars in BBC1 drama The Long Song on 18 December at 9pm. When were you happiest? My best mate had a healthy baby girl about 45 minutes ago and named her after me. My heart is bursting. What is your earliest memory?My dad coming to pick me up from creche. I saw him through the window and he’d shaved off his moustache. I’d never seen him without it, so my brain exploded. What is your greatest fear? Missing out or wasting time by sitting still for a minute. I’ve got a restless spirit. Which living person do you most admire, and why?Moyra Samuels, Nicole Belfon, Yvette Williams, Judy Bolton and Tasha Brade from Justice4Grenfell, for turning grief into action. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?Overthinking. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Apathy. What was your most embarrassing moment?[US TV show] Lip Sync Battle – I overcommitted. My face is way too animated and rubbery. Property aside, what’s the most expensive thing you’ve bought?Legal advice. It was worth it. Know your rights. What did you want to be when you were growing up?An adult, as quickly as possible. I wasn’t built for the psychological warfare of the playground. What would your superpower be?I have one – I can nap anywhere, any time. Like a cat. What do you most dislike about your appearance?I shall not give my body dysmorphia a voice today. What is your favourite smell?My dog’s warm paws after a nap. What is your favourite word?Liberty. The sound and meaning. Is it better to give or to receive?I struggle with receiving anything unless I’ve given it to myself. What is your guiltiest pleasure?Eating cereal late at night in the kitchen, leaning against the fridge door and chatting on the phone to a long-distance friend. What does love feel like?Being lit from within. Have you ever said ‘I love you’ and not meant it?Yeah, on stage last night: “Plainly conceive, I love you.” I don’t, but they’re paying me. What has been your biggest disappointment?Everything’s disappointing when it loses its shine. I’ve lowered my expectations. When did you last cry, and why?On stage. It was cathartic. It takes a lot for me to cry in real life. How would you like to be remembered?That’s not my business. Where would you most like to be right now?In Canada, cuddling my namesake.