Chaat, for the uninitiated, translates as ‘to lick’, but means that sort of lip-smacking street food for which you would travel across a city, over a masjid and under an elephant . In today’s recipe, the base is made up of leftover roast vegetables, which is practically incidental, because every Indian knows that the best chaat is all about the chutneys. I’ve topped mine with a quick tamarind chutney, a sprightly herb number and some crunchy chickpea noodles. All very lickable. This needs a special ingredient – chaat masala – which can be found in any Indian food shop and online, or make your own with my recipe. Those stores are also where you’ll find tiny chickpea noodles called sev, or nylon sev. Roast potatoes work especially well in this chaat, but it’s also great with leftover parsnips, carrots and sprouts. If you don’t have 800g leftover veg, roast around 1.2kg raw vegetables in a little oil first. Prep 15 minCook 20 minServes 4 40g mint leaves (from 100g sprigs)40g coriander leaves, plus 1 small handful extra, to garnish, roughly chopped200ml plain non-dairy yoghurt1 ½ green finger chillies, finely chopped1¼ tbsp lemon juiceRapeseed oilSalt2 tbsp tamarind paste – I use Waitrose’s own-label2 tbsp date syrup¼ tsp red chilli powder800g leftover roast vegetables 1 red onion, peeled and very finely chopped – set aside 1 tbsp for garnish2cm piece fresh ginger, peeled and very finely chopped2 tsp chaat masala – I like MDH’s Chunky Chat MasalaSev (chickpea noodles), to serve First make the chutneys. For the mint chutney, put the mint, coriander, 100ml yoghurt, one chilli (save the remaining half for later) and lemon juice in a blender with a tablespoon of rapeseed oil and a third of a teaspoon of salt, then blend smooth. For the tamarind chutney, put the date syrup, tamarind paste and chilli powder in a pretty serving bowl, and mix to combine. Put the remaining 100ml yoghurt in another small bowl, add just enough water to make it drizzle-able, then stir in two pinches of salt. Put the roast veg in a bowl, lightly mash with a masher or fork, then stir in the onion, ginger, and remaining chilli. Heat two tablespoons of oil in a large, nonstick frying pan and, when hot, add the vegetable mash and cook, undisturbed, for five minutes, save for pressing it into the pan to get some char on the base. Stir after five minutes, then cook for five minutes more, pressing down again, before stirring in the chaat masala and tipping out on to a serving plate. Drizzle over the green chutney, followed by the yoghurt and then the tamarind chutney – you won’t use all of it, so leave some for guests to add extra to taste. Sprinkle a very generous handful of sev on top, scatter over the remaining chopped coriander and onion, and serve. Fiona Beckett’s wine match”There are two great options for fried foods – beer or sparkling wine so either crack open your favourite lager, a bottle of cava or – a bit more upmarket – the almost champagne-like La Cave des Hautes Côtes Crémant de Bourgogne (12%) which is on offer at £10 at Marks & Spencer.” This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.