The tree is up. The holly is hanging from its hook on the front door. The house smells deliciously of the season. There has been much anticipation – and more than a little planning – for the major feasts of Christmas Eve and the following day, but Christmas cooking is always about more than the main feasts. The whole season is punctuated with smaller, simpler, but equally significant dinners for friends and family which still demand to be just that little bit special. If I’m honest I look forward to cooking these “other dinners”. They allow you do something slightly out of the ordinary – no one wants the full turkey dinner the week before Christmas – but have, at their heart, all the flavours and ingredients that we associate with this time of year. In many ways, these little meals are the best of both worlds. Straightforward to cook – they are family suppers – but drenched in everything we love about yuletide. The recipes that follow – a platter of meatballs with pistachios and lipstick-red pomegranates; a tangle of roasted parsnips with a porcini gravy and soft, fresh cheese; brussels sprouts with Japanese pickles; a smoky fish and rice dish – feel special to me. They are not something I would cook every day, but all have enough seasonal spirit about them to fit the occasion. Any one of them would do nicely in the run-up to Christmas Day and right through to New Year. As with so much of what I cook, a dish can be served as a side dish or given the principal role. I find such flexible recipes invaluable. Informal, simple food that fits neatly in wherever you need it to. I don’t eat pudding on a daily basis, but at this time of year it seems appropriate to bring something out for everyone to coo over. I have been known to send out a jug of warm chocolate sauce to the table, spiced with ground cardamom or cinnamon, for pouring over vanilla ice-cream or slices of soft-crumbed almond sponge cake. You can use it as a sweet fondue too, with a plate of sliced pear or clementines for dipping. This is also the only time of year when you can bring out the sticky dates, balsawood caskets of Turkish delight and boxes of crystalised fruit in lieu of a pudding without it looking like you don’t care. After Christmas Day, of course, there are leftovers to plunder. I probably enjoy these more than I do on their first outing. Potatoes mashed into bubble and squeak with chopped brussels; a frittata of kale and bacon; and, if there could ever be such a thing, leftover pigs in blankets. The latter make a fine pasta sauce once chopped up, fried lightly and tossed with a little mustard and cream. The roast bird is a treasure chest all of its own. Every piece of burnished skin, juicy little nugget of flesh and the bones themselves offer endless possibilities for informal eating. My favourite of all being the “big soup” I make with the leftover roast, its bones, meat and that gorgeous jelly that hides under the carcass, simmered with the usual aromatics then finished with tiny pasta such orzo, shredded greens and some fat slices of slightly tired bread I have toasted and rubbed with garlic. I find the informality of such meals a welcome breath of fresh air. No one minds having a collection of sweet leftovers scattered around the table. Boxes of Carlsbad plums and marrons glacés that have already been started, boxes of chocolates with as many empty paper cases as full ones, or a collection of edible Christmas-tree decorations will all find takers. I do tend to use the last bits of cheeses in the kitchen, though. I’m not sure anyone really wants to be presented with the hollowed-out crust of a ripe but drying stilton. Fried in a little oil and butter, the miso paste forms a fine crust on the outside of the sprouts. Serve them as an accompaniment if you wish, but I like them as the star of the show, tucked into a bowl of sticky rice and scattered with salty Japanese pickles. I serve this as it is, but also as a side dish for slices of cold roast pork and its crackling. This is sticky rice, my favourite, but you don’t want it in lumps, so running the tines of a fork through the cooked grain is a good idea. Serves 2-3brown sushi rice 190gbrussels sprouts 750ggroundnut oil 2 tbsplight miso paste 1 tbspJapanese pickles (tsukemono) 2 tbsp Put the rice in a bowl, cover with warm water, then run your fingers through the rice. Drain, repeat, then tip into a saucepan, cover with cold water and set aside for half an hour. Trim the sprouts, then cut each in half. Bring the soaked rice to the boil, add half a teaspoon of salt, cover and lower the heat so the water simmers. Leave for 40 minutes or until the rice is approaching tenderness. Remove the pan from the heat and leave to rest for 10 minutes before removing the lid. Warm the oil in a shallow pan. Wash and dry the sprouts. Toss them with the miso paste then transfer to the hot oil, moving them round the pan as they become crisp and pale golden brown. Remove the lid from the rice, run a fork thought the grains to separate them, then divide between two bowls. Spoon the miso sprouts into the rice, then add some of the Japanese pickles. A calming recipe for when the Christmas preparations get the better of us. A dish of smoky flavours and soft textures, made by continually stirring the rice, risotto style, an activity that soothes as successfully as the dish sustains. We serve this at the table, in the pan in which it was cooked, together with a salad of chicory, watercress and some of the Christmas walnuts. Serves 4smoked haddock 450gmilk 500mlwater 500mlblack peppercorns 8bay leaves 3green lentils 125gbutter 40garborio rice 250gdill a handfulbutter to finish 20g Place the haddock, skin side down, in a large shallow pan, pour over the milk and water, then add the peppercorns and bay leaves. Bring to the boil, then lower the heat and simmer for 10 minutes or until the fish can easily be separated from its skin. Reserve the cooking liquid. Peel the skin from the haddock, break the flesh into large flakes, then cover and set aside. In another, deeper pan, simmer the lentils in deep water for 15-20 minutes till buttery and tender. Drain and set aside. Wipe the pan the lentils were cooked in and place over a moderate heat. Melt the butter in the pan then add the rice. Ladle 800ml of the cooking liquid from the fish into the rice, ladle by ladle, stirring almost continually, as if you were making a risotto. Season with salt and a little pepper. Chop the dill. As soon as the rice is tender and to your liking (probably about 15-20 minutes) stir in the cooked lentils, the chopped dill, the butter and then, lastly, the flaked haddock. Sweet, crisp and chewy roast parsnips with a thick and glossy mushroom gravy and soft, light cheese. I put this on the table with a bowl of lightly dressed lettuce leaves so everyone can mop the gravy from their plates with the soft leaves. Serves 4parsnips 6, mediumolive oil 160mlrosemary 6 sprigswater 1 litredried porcini 15gbanana shallots 4 largeplain flour 2 tbspthyme 10 sprigsgoat’s curd 100g Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Peel the parsnips, then cut them in half lengthways, then in half again. Put them into a roasting tin with 100ml of the olive oil, rosemary sprigs, and a little salt and black pepper. Let the parsnips roast for 1 hour, turning them halfway through. Bring the water to the boil in a deep saucepan. Add the porcini, cover with a lid and continue cooking on a very low heat for 20 minutes. Peel the shallots and cut them into thick slices, then cook them in the remaining oil for 10 minutes over a moderate heat till soft. As they start to turn pale gold, add the flour and continue to cook, stirring regularly, for 3 minutes. Pour the porcini and their broth into the onions, a little at a time, stirring almost continuously. Remove the leaves from the thyme and stir in. Turn up the heat and let the sauce bubble until you have a rich, quite thick gravy. Remove the parsnips when they are golden and lightly crisp, spoon over the shallot and porcini gravy, then serve with the goat’s curd. If you find a good sausage, one that has been generously filled and thoughtfully seasoned, it is a doddle to peel off its skin and use the meat as a base for a stuffing, a filling for a sausage roll or for meatballs. I use my butcher’s breakfast sausages as something to toss with ribbons of pasta for a midweek dinner. It saves the hassle of making your own very fine mince and breadcrumb mixture. The recipe for merguez sausages hails from North Africa, and involves minced lamb or beef often seasoned with paprika, cumin and ground coriander seeds with a casing usually made from lamb intestines. Peeled from their skins – it takes but a minute or two – the stuffing is something to which you can add other ingredients such as finely chopped dried fruits or nuts. Dates or figs would make the recipe feel particularly at home. This Christmas I have been using mint and chopped pistachios in my meatballs to add a note of freshness to the earthy spicing. Once cooked (slowly, in a little olive oil) until they are glossy and sticky, I finish them with crunchy, ruby red pomegranate seeds. The sharpness of the fruit is a wake-up call for the sleepy spices. Serves 4banana shallots 2olive oil 3 tbspmerguez sausages 500gparsley 10gmint 20 leavespistachios 30golive or groundnut oil for frying 3 tbsp To finishpistachios 20gparsley a handful of leavespomegranate seeds from ½ Peel and finely chop the shallots. Warm the olive oil in a shallow pan over a moderate heat, add the shallots then leave them to cook for 10-15 minutes until soft and turning golden. The occasional stir will ensure even cooking. While the shallots soften, remove the skins from the sausages, putting the meat into a mixing bowl. Keep the shallots cooking for a few minutes longer till they turn pale bronze then transfer them to a mixing bowl. Chop the parsley, mint leaves and pistachios and stir into the sausage meat, then add the shallots and combine. Form the mixture into 12 balls, setting them on a small tray as you go. Refrigerate for at least 30 minutes. Warm a shallow layer of oil in a sauté pan then add the balls and fry till nicely browned, turning them occasionally so they colour evenly. While they cook, roughly chop the pistachios and the parsley leaves. When the meatballs are dark and glossy, remove from the pan, place on a serving dish then finish with a scattering of the chopped nuts, herbs and pomegranate seeds. Serves 4dark chocolate 100ggreen cardamom 12 podsdouble cream 250mlvanilla ice-cream 4 scoopsnougat 100g Bring a pan of water to the boil, then balance a heatproof bowl above the water. Lower the heat to a simmer, then break the chocolate into small pieces, drop into the bowl and leave to melt. Do not stir. Crack the cardamom pods open, extract the black seeds within and crush them to a very fine powder in a spice mill or pestle and mortar. Pour the cream into a small saucepan, add the ground cardamom and bring to the boil. Immediately remove from the heat, cover and set aside for the spice to infuse the cream. Pour the cream into the chocolate and stir gently. Scoop the ice-cream into bowls then pour over the warm chocolate and cardamom sauce. Slice the nougat and scatter over the ice cream. Nigel Slater’s Christmas Chronicles podcast is currently available on Spotify and iTunes, with new episodes released every Thursday and Monday until 25 December. The bestselling book The Christmas Chronicles: Notes, Stories and Essential Recipes For Midwinter is out now (4th Estate, £26) The Guardian and Observer aim to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US.