Arsenal were able to inhale the sweet taste of a late victory thanks to the inspirational force of Lucas Torreira. The waspish presence who has breathed such effervescence into Arsenal’s midfield was the difference to break a tight, tense deadlock with an improvised overhead kick. Huddersfield’s unrelenting efforts meant Arsenal needed to extend themselves, to persevere, to keep plugging away to prise all three points out of this game. That kind of attitude seems to come naturally to Torreira. “We want to break every expectation with players and he is improving and works every day with good commitment and behaviour,” Unai Emery said. “He has the hunger we need. He can do very good work in defensive moments and he can get into the box and score.” The last time these teams met was an occasion that marked the curtain coming down on the Arsène Wenger era and Emery has proved himself a man unafraid to reshape the team as he did again here, and eager to recharge the energy levels. At the end of a demanding week his players found enough to scrap it out. In the seven minutes of stoppage time he was so engrossed as to wander all the way across into David Wagner’s technical area to beckon Sead Kolasinac over for a quick instruction. Huddersfield, like all of Arsenal’s Premier League opponents this season, got themselves safely to half-time. But a 0-0 scoreline did not reflect the nature of an increasingly feisty and complicated game, with tempers heating up and the yellow card count veering out of control – five dished out over a five-minute spell set an intense tone. Huddersfield competed diligently, rising the challenge set by Wagner to prove they could restrict Arsenal and give themselves a platform. There were chances, including a piledriver from Torreira that was parried brilliantly by Jonas Lössl and when Alexandre Lacazette found the net he was aghast to be penalised for a tight offside decision earlier in the move. Emery wasted no time in shaking it up. While his instinct was to push for the breakthrough, there were growing concerns at the back. Sokratis and Shkodran Mustafi picked up their fifth bookings of the season and will serve a suspension at a time when the squad are very short of fit and match-sharp centre-backs. Mustafi then hobbled off injured with what Emery described as a “small” hamstring. Laurent Koscielny’s appearance on the bench after a seven-month absence was timely but Arsenal have to use him cautiously after such a bad injury so Nacho Monreal came on instead. The defensive trio for the closing stages comprised Granit Xhaka flanked by Monreal (nominally a left-back) and Sokratis. Remarkably, they held it together for a first clean sheet in the Premier League since September. Huddersfield contributed wholeheartedly, even if they missed some cutting edge. Alex Pritchard scooped one effort over and later on appealed in vain for a penalty. Arsenal’s increasing desperation showed as Mattéo Guendouzi was booked for diving (a third for simulation in the game). The teenager was more productive in the 83rd minute prising Huddersfield open with a well crafted ball for Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang. The Gabonese found room to chip over a cross and Torreira was there to deliver another big moment for his new club. Wagner felt his team deserved something. “Because of defensive shift and effort and tactical quality we limited Arsenal and kept them away from our goal. That’s enough if you are Huddersfield Town to deserve a point,” he said. “Unfortunately we don’t have it. I can see the positives.” Now 21 games unbeaten for Arsenal, on they go. “The injuries and yellow cards are coming with matches,” Emery said. He will need to keep shuffling to find solutions. Having bustled around all game long, he is looking forward to a couple of days off to clear his busy head.