The stars of Doctor Who have rejected claims that the programme has become too politically correct, defending its storylines as an “entertaining reminder” of important issues. Recent episodes of the sci-fi show, which the actors recognised have provoked “extreme opinions” among some viewers commenting online, have covered issues including the US civil rights movement and the bloody 1947 partition of India – understood by many to have been entirely mismanaged by Britain, costing hundreds of thousands of lives and displacing more than 10 million people. Mandip Gill and Tosin Cole, who play the Doctor’s companions Yaz and Ryan, told the Radio Times that broaching these topics could prompt viewers in an entertaining way to think about broader issues. “Everyone’s going to have their own opinion – it is what it is,” Cole said. “The fact that we can give everyone a little friendly, entertaining reminder of these issues is great.” Responding to the accusation of being too politically correct, Gill said: “It makes me laugh, because having the words ‘too’ and ‘correct’ in the same sentence is really bizarre to me. How can you be too correct about something? “You do see some extreme comments under news articles. I’m only human, and I do check and read them. But they don’t bother me and actually they’re creating conversation.” This series of Doctor Who is the first to have a female lead, with Jodie Whittaker receiving glowing reviews since assuming the role of the Doctor. The programme generates the most revenue for BBC Worldwide of all its properties, once merchandise and syndication is accounted for, with a global audience of around 70 million people. In recent years, it has attracted criticism for backstory-heavy plots which leave the casual viewer struggling to make sense of complex storylines. The latest series, however, has been more concerned with pursuing standalone adventures and delving into historical events, dumping the more protracted story arcs of the past. There will be no Doctor Who Christmas special this year, with an episode set to air on New Year’s Day instead.