Alisson Gifted United hope with his first punished mistake at Anfield. Unemployed otherwise 6 Nathaniel Clyne Unsurprisingly short of match fitness on his first league start since May but contained Rashford all game 7 Dejan Lovren United’s system gave him a comfortable run-out. Missed a good chance to double the lead 7 Virgil van Dijk Nudged Lukaku aside in the opening minute and bossed their physical duel. One of his easier shifts 7 Andy Robertson Had the beating of Dalot in defence and attack, prompting the youngster’s half-time withdrawal 8 Georginio Wijnaldum Kept it simple and tidy in a more defensive role than he was given against Napoli in midweek. Effective 7 Fabinho Justified his inclusion over Henderson. Destructive and creative. Lovely ball for Mané’s opener 8 Naby Keïta A big game for the £52.75m signing. Drove his team forward but lacked the final ball 6 Mohamed Salah More combative than clinical as focal point of attack. Often crowded out by three centre-halves 7 Roberto Firmino Aggressive, creative, tireless. Prospered behind Salah to give his best display in a long time 8 Sadio Mané Caused United all manner of problems on their right flank and took his goal superbly 8 Subs Xherdan Shaqiri (for Naby Keïta 70) 8 Jordan Henderson (for Sadio Mané 83) 6 David de Gea Poor with his feet but handling impressive. Fine save from Firmino before being beaten by two deflections 6 Matteo Darmian Had scant protection from Dalot in the first half and was ineffective for first two Liverpool goals. 6 Eric Bailly Late replacement for Smalling and imposed himself quickly on Salah. Unlucky with Shaqiri’s second 6 Victor Lindelöf Recovered from an early mistake to lead the rearguard action but a thankless task against this team 7 Diogo Dalot The full-back was handed an awkward role on the right of midfield and was lost in it 5 Ander Herrera Lightweight in the tackle and careless on the few occasions he had time on the ball to build an attack 5 Nemanja Matic Employed to protect his defence but struggled in midfield. Offered nothing to his front line 6 Ashley Young Operated more as a full-back than a wing-back. Lost Mané for opener and deflected the second 6 Jesse Lingard Created and took his goal well but that was a rare moment. Caught in no-man’s land positionally 7 Marcus Rashford Anonymous, though not his fault. Body language betrayed misery of playing for this Mourinho team 5 Romelu Lukaku Completed one pass in the first half and was just as ineffective in the second. Contained so easily 5 Subs Marouane Fellaini (for Dalot h-t) 6 Anthony Martial (for Herrera 79) 5 Juan Mata (for Lingard 85) n/a