The greatest asset a performer can have is that people want to work with them. From her Frankie Howerd spoof song to her bad gran in Absolutely Fabulous and playing God, June Whitfield reflected this quality to a rare degree. Whitfield, who has died aged 93, had an extraordinarily long CV (she became a radio star in 1953 on Take It from Here and was still shooting movies in 2016) and remarkable range – her wireless fame was followed by roles in both one of the most conventional and unconventional sitcoms of the 20th century: Terry and June and Absolutely Fabulous. The children of those who listened to her in Take It from Here, on what was then the Light Programme (now BBC Radio 2), watched her as an uber middle-class housewife in Terry and June. Those children were also among the audience for her portrait of a bad granny in Ab Fab – a rare example of an actor achieving transformational casting late in their career. Whitfield’s longevity and versatility were rooted in an unwavering professionalism and long training. Growing up in London in the late 1920s, she first appeared on stage at the age of three. By the time she graduated from Rada in 1944 at the age of 19, she had been performing for 16 years. Her acting, singing and dancing talents, combined with a celebrated good nature, brought bookings from big names in successive generations. She also fulfilled every actor’s dream of finding work that suited her perfectly at every stage of her life. Aged 28, she played the long-frustrated fiancee Ethel in The Glums, a family sitcom written by Frank Muir and Denis Norden that became a favourite on Take It from Here. In 1974, she landed one of her defining parts, as commuter-belt wife June Fletcher opposite Terry Scott as her golfing Tory husband in the BBC sitcom Happy Ever After. Whitfield’s character was reborn as June Medford and the show was renamed Terry and June in 1979, following a disagreement with the writers. Spending 13 years playing a character whose idea of a crisis was hubby’s boss coming unexpectedly for dinner could have led to permanent association with cosy peak-time crowdpleasers, especially as casting directors often called on her to play posh, morally uptight matriarchs. In Carry on Abroad (1972), she was a prudish cruise passenger and, in Carry on Girls (1973) she played Augusta Prodworthy, a local councillor trying to ban a beauty pageant. Typically, when Whitfield appeared in EastEnders, it was as a nun. And in the 2015 series You, Me and the Apocalypse, she went on to even higher ground by playing God. Two of her major roles, however, gave Whitfield a harder edge. Although she played the lead in Happy Ever After and Terry and June, she was especially effective as part of an ensemble, and became a valuable player on the Radio 2 series The News Huddlines, joining in 1984 and continuing until its end in 2001. Fronted by Roy Hudd, the show was satire of a mild kind (less Spitting Image than Tut-Tut Image), but it gave Whitfield useful balance to a sitcom that had become shorthand for TV blandness. This was also during a period when women politicians were becoming increasingly prominent in Britain, giving Whitfield frequent airtime as Margaret Thatcher, Virginia Bottomley, Edwina Currie and Betty Boothroyd. The Queen was also in her arsenal. If The News Huddlines chipped the mould of Ethel Glum and June Fletcher-Medford, Whitfield’s next most memorable character smashed it completely. There is an honourable tradition in British comedy of younger players prolonging the careers of the elders who influenced them: Clive Anderson coaxed a final TV show out of the unwell Peter Cook, Paul Merton sought to appear alongside Bruce Forsyth. Whitfield’s turn came with Absolutely Fabulous. Dawn French and Jennifer Saunders admired Whitfield – partly because, shamefully, she was one of few successful role models for female comedians at the time – and invited her to guest-star on their sketch show French & Saunders. This led to Saunders giving Whitfield, in her late 60s, what became her most critically acclaimed TV role, as Mother in Absolutely Fabulous, for a decade from 1992, with a lap of honour in three 2012 specials and a 2016 movie. Ab Fab subverted the traditions of English middle-class domestic sitcom: a middle-aged woman, Edina (Saunders), still behaved like a teenager, while her teenage daughter, Saffy (Julia Sawalha), was prissily conformist. In a similar flip, Whitfield’s character was not a sweet old granny but a sharp-tongued, sharp-practiced harridan. The scenes between the three generations of actors were driven by a clear mutual respect, and the sense that Whitfield’s presence was a nod from Saunders to a pioneer of her trade. Whitfield was a sort of walking history of English comedy, having worked with central figures such as Wilfred Pickles, Arthur Askey, Dick Emery, Tony Hancock (she was the nurse who emptied his arm in the famous Hancock’s Half Hour episode The Blood Donor), Benny Hill, and Frankie Howerd, with whom she recorded a comedy version of the pornographic love song Je T’aime. Whitfield’s image was about as far as it was possible to imagine from Jane Birkin, the woman on the original heavy-breathing song. But if Birkin radiated sex, thoughts of Whitfield keep coming back to love: in her happy private life with husband Tim (who died in 2001) and their daughter, Suzy; and through the deep affection in which she was held by colleagues and audiences throughout her 70-year career.