Ten autumns ago, I started writing the Guardian’s advice column. The leaf-fall of letters and emails quickly settled into distinctive piles, the largest of which I hardly dared give a name to. By spring, I had a thick folder that I couldn’t ignore, labelled: Mum love gone bad. There were other piles, too, other recurring themes – dysfunctional sibling relationships, dealing with teenagers and lots about sex in long-term relationships. So when I was asked to contribute to a conversation special, I thought about the questions I am asked most often, and the conversations – or lack of – behind them. These are the conversations I wish the people who write in could have with those causing them pain. This is the most popular question, and it scares me. (Sure, there are letters saying people hate their father, but mothers are number one.) It seems to affect daughters more than sons. In the most extreme cases, beyond mere annoyance, anger burns through dissertation-length letters, full of self-recrimination, confusion and sadness. I was fairly new to motherhood myself when I started, and had a mother of my own. It frightened me: is this what happens, I thought? I learned that, sometimes, yes, it is. Maybe you had a chaotic mother, or a neglectful, abusive or controlling one. Maybe she over-enmeshed you, and you were trapped. You grew up thinking your childhood was normal, because you didn’t know any different. That’s the way it usually goes. Then you get to your “safe place”: you’re in the job you always wanted, in a good relationship, maybe have children. And this triggers something, and you start to wonder: was my upbringing normal; was it right; am I being unfair? And then, inevitably: I could never imagine doing that to my kids. With each revelation comes an overwhelming emotion. I’ve seen adults in their 40s floored by this realisation. Conversation? They are desperate for it. But with whom? The very person you should be talking with here is the very person who doesn’t, maybe can’t, listen. My readers’ letters show that these mothers only like to transmit, not receive. Let’s face it, if they could have conversations that healed, they wouldn’t be writing those letters. You could try. I have seen people try: they ask questions around their own mother’s upbringing, which can provide vital clues as to where things went wrong. With a really extraordinary mother, someone who can do work on herself, resolution can be found with time and talk. But often, sadly, it can’t. Conversation is seen as confrontation. So then what? If you are a mother yourself, the question can become a taunt: will I become like my mother? The answer is – always – no. But some family patterns can repeat. In the most simplistic terms, it’s like a knitting pattern (I often use wool and knitting as analogies for complex emotional problems). You have only one pattern, so you knit that because that’s all you know, until someone shows you a different pattern and, suddenly, your jumper is transformed. Talking to a neutral person can help with this. You can try to discover what your place in it all is – what behaviours you contribute that you can control. But then you have to remember the golden rule: you will never change your mother, and you can’t control how she behaves. Have that conversation with yourself. The word I find myself writing most often in talking about this subject (these letters on my keyboard must be worn down) is “boundaries”. Build some, reinforce them, keep to them. Your mother made her choices, now you must make yours. “Teenager” is a potent word. I wish I’d know that when I was that age, but, like almost all teens at some point, powerful was the last thing I felt. Readers often write about being confused and alienated by their teen children and, really, conversation is the last thing they feel they can have with them. “What happened to my baby?” is a common refrain. Actually, your baby is still there. The best way to start a conversation with a child who has hit the 13-plus mark is when you are both doing something else. Teens can find direct eye contact confrontational and it can make them panic. So instead of tackling them face-to-face, come at them with a side-by-side approach. But be prepared for the fact that children – of all ages – like to save their most important conversations for when you can least have them: when you are about to go to bed, on a deadline or changing a tyre on the side of a four-lane motorway. I think it’s a test. And the one thing I will say straight away is that if you have any work to do on your own psychological problems, having a teen will shine a keen, harsh light on them. So if you fear rejection, your teen not wanting to answer your questions will impact you more profoundly. Be aware of this. If your reaction is extreme, it’s more about you than them. After all, you don’t want your child writing to me about topic number one: see above. Teens often don’t want to answer a question straight away. They are masters of hiding their emotions at school. So keep asking, but not in machine-gun fashion. Give it time; I’m talking days, not minutes. Don’t overreact, because if you do, you are sowing the seeds for them not telling you something next time. If you panic, good things to say are: “And then what happened?”, “What do you mean by that?”, “How does that make you feel?” Those phrases can buy time. But don’t be afraid to just say, “That sounds hard for you.” Children often crave empathy more than problem solving. Every child and adolescent therapist I’ve spoken to (and in 10 years, that’s a lot) has said that teens are basically giant toddlers. They need boundaries, they need hugs. Be kind. Don’t be afraid of the conversation descending into a (constructive) argument, either, but possibly not while driving. “The car is often when we can really say what we want, because everyone is already shouting,” teens often tell me. But as a parent, don’t make it about you. Listen. They will be: anyone who thinks teenagers don’t listen has mistaken listening for following orders. And if you get it wrong, don’t worry too much (but apologise), because various studies now show adolescence continues until the age of 26. You’ve got time for plenty more conversation. The sibling relationship is completely fascinating, because it often reveals the secrets of the family dynamic. How you got/get on with your siblings can mirror what’s going on further up – with your parents. But it can also dictate the way you interact with others outside the family. So if you find yourself avoiding confrontation, or behave a certain way with specific personalities, it’s worth looking at whether they emulate, in some way, your sibling interactions. Whenever someone writes to me with issues to do with their brothers or sisters, I look for clues further back in their early lives, when frictions were usually set up. It’s not a given that children don’t get on. Sure, some general “I hate her/him” is normal; but if my column is anything to go by, really dysfunctional sibling relationships are nearly always shaped by parental influence. Some parents like to divide and rule. They may have one golden child who is favoured, and one may, sometimes quite literally, be the whipping boy. An older child can visit the rejection they feel from the parent on a younger child. Children often grow up blaming their sibling(s) entirely. It’s only when they leave home and learn to forge these relationships outside of the family umbrella (if it’s not too late) that people have any hope of healing these wounds – and often realise what happened to cause them. All effective communication has to start from a point of empathy and reconciliation. So before speaking to them, it’s worth trying to imagine life from your sibling’s point of view. If you speak to a family of, say, five adult brothers/sisters, each will have a different take on the same occasion, and all are valid. A really good film that illustrates this is Hilary And Jackie, in which the same scenes are played from each sister’s point of view. I often think of that film when I need to look at things from another person’s perspective: how must it seem to them? If you need to have a conversation about a tricky sibling relationship, it’s always best to start with a question such as, “What was that *insert an occasion* like for you?” A really revealing question to ask an older sibling you don’t get on with is what it was like for them when you arrived. How was that handled? I’ve seen whole relationships transformed after a conversation predicated on just that one question. Instead of saying, “You were horrible to me” (you can get into the specifics when your relationship is more robust), it’s best to start with, “We were pretty vile to one another, weren’t we?”; saying, “That must have been tough for you” can heal years of hurt, if it’s heartfelt. And it’s really worth trying, because the sibling relationship is often the longest-lasting of your life. Obviously no one writes to me to say they are happy with their sex life: that’s not the nature of the transaction. And although the letters may vary in detail, all have one thing at their core: a lack of communication, and a failure to keep the sex conversation going, especially in a long-term relationship. The conversation may be needed due to many things: a dissonance in libido; dealing with infidelity; or, usually, sex waning in the long term. The irony seems to be that the better you get to know someone and the longer you spend with them, the less able you are to talk about sex with them. I think this is often because, in long-term relationships, you are trying to balance out paradoxes such as the desire for security and excitement. In new relationships it’s mostly about the latter. I speak to a lot of sex and relationship counsellors and they all say the same thing about “how often”: it doesn’t matter how much or how little you have sex as long as both partners agree. And you can’t agree if you don’t talk about it. Unfortunately, if resentment has built up, it’s often difficult to keep the negative emotion out of a conversation, and recriminations never bring resolution. Picking your moment to start these conversations is pretty key. Obviously it depends on the couple, but it’s often better to build up to talking about sex rather than just diving straight in with something like, “I never reach orgasm when I’m with you.” Making the other person defensive doesn’t ease communication and often blocks it. A really good starter is to begin talking about a happy time you spent together: “Do you remember when?” and build from there. You may not get there on the first attempt, but keep trying. Even talking about “you both” builds intimacy – which isn’t the same as sex. A counsellor once told me intimacy was when both of you knew absolutely what was going on emotionally with the other person. If you need to talk about a specific problem, try opening with something like, “I shut down when you…” instead of, “You make me sick when you…” “I feel like this…” instead of, “You make me feel…” Language can make or break this. It’s also easy to look at people who have a lot of sex and think, “Sorted.” But that doesn’t always mean there’s not a problem, or that the relationship is happy. “We have sex several times a week,” said one reader recently (married for 20 years, three children, no, I don’t know how they do it, either) “but my partner has no idea what I like, never asks and doesn’t want to know.” If sex is communication, then selfish sex is a monologue. • Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article. If you would like a comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).