We don’t call it shiny, we call it “dewy”, we call it “fresh”, we call it any word, really, to avoid connotations of sweat. Shiny skin (as seen at Off-White) must be meant, which means potions and powders must be applied liberally, but with caution. Start with moisturiser and build up highlighter across the eyes and cheekbones. Finish with high gloss lips. 1. Becca Cosmetics Skin Love Glow Glaze Stick £24, cultbeauty.co.uk 2. Laura Mercier Face Illuminator in Devotion £32, feelunique.com 3. Benefit Sunbeam Illuminating Liquid £22, benefitcosmetics.com 4. Bio-Oil Dry Skin Gel £1.99, boots.com 5. Tata Harper Illuminating Moisturiser £96, tataharperskincare.com 6. Fresh Instant Face Glow Luminizer £26.50, johnlewis.com 7. MUA Pro/Base Primer Oil Tea Tree Oil £4, muastore.co.uk 8. RMS Beauty Magic Luminizer £36, selfridges.co.uk 9. Kevyn Aucoin the Neo Elixir Weightless Beauty Oil £39, spacenk.com 10. Peter Thomas Roth 24K Gold Pure Luxury Lift & Firm Prism Highlighter £33.60, harveynichols.com 11. Tom Ford Soleil Glow Drops in Liquid Sun £33, debenhams.com Pantone’s official Colour of the Year for 2019 is a jolly pinky-orange named ‘Living Coral’. Or, as Pantone describes it, ‘An animating coral hue with a golden undertone that with a softer edge.’ Happily, it works well on your nails. Micellar water, that genius make-up remover, is evolving. As well as water (try Kiehl’s for sensitive skin) there’s a new wave of alternatives: Medik8’s Micellar Mousse, Garnier’s new milky micellar, Clinique’s gel formula, and Manuka Doctor’s pads. Haircare brand Ouai is as famous for how good its products smell as how soft they make your hair. So it makes perfect sense that they are now releasing a range of four eau de parfums, based on the scents of the products themselves (£46, theouai.co.uk). Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.uk or follow her on Twitter @EvaWiseman This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.