It’s ranked as one of the least festive Christmas cards ever sent: pipe-smoking men in suits milling around on the immaculately mowed lawn of an English country house. But the recipients were some of the most secretive people in the country, and only they understood the true message of the card. Historians at Bletchley Park have announced the rediscovery of the top-secret Christmas card sent to early codebreakers by Lady Evelyn Sinclair, the wife of Admiral Sir Hugh Sinclair, the chief of MI6, known as “C”. A photograph was stuck to a blue sheet of writing paper headed with the Sinclairs’ Westminster address, 3 Carlisle Mansions, on which she had handwritten: “Wishing you a very happy Christmas & New Year, Evelyn Sinclair.” It shows a September 1938 gathering of spies and codebreakers that is known today as “Captain Ridley’s shooting party”, the cover they used. In reality, around 150 men and women from MI6 and the Government Code & Cypher School (GC&CS) were working for a month at the Buckinghamshire mansion to activate the top-secret war station at a time when conflict seemed imminent. The work of codebreakers at Bletchley Park is estimated to have shortened the second world war by two years and saved thousands of lives. One of the team was Joan Wingfield, who worked on breaking Italian naval codes. The existence of the photograph was known but it was only thanks to Wingfield’s daughter Judie Hodsdon that historians recently discovered it was used as the 1938 boss’s Christmas card. “My mother didn’t keep many things really but she did keep this so it must have been quite special,” Hodsdon said. “It was sent by Lady Sinclair … I think it was probably the custom of the time for the wife of the head of something to send out the Christmas cards. She may well have been doing this for years.” Most of the team were at Bletchley Park in September and many, presumably, would have received the card. “It isn’t very festive,” agreed Hodsdon. “They are out in the September sunshine. But it does have a Christmas message, which is what counts.” Wingfield, who met her husband at Bletchley Park, worked on Italian naval communications at the secret service headquarters near St James’s Park tube station in London. “She was quite a good cryptographer, although she never spoke to us about it. She lived in Italy for a while in the 1930s, so had learned Italian, and she loved doing crosswords and things, so she probably had just the right skills for the job.” Wingfield was encouraged into her job by her uncle Claude Henderson, a spy who was also at Bletchley Park in September. Hodsdon also has his copy of the photograph, which he put in his album without the writing paper. David Kenyon, a research historian at Bletchley Park, said: “It is exciting to have a photograph of what was such a secret event. One of the problems we have here at Bletchley, because of the nature of the work, is that very few photographs of what was going on survive. So any information we can find out about the ones we have is very exciting.” There is, perhaps, something peculiarly British about sending such a card that none of its recipients could talk about. “It is very much sent with a wink to the people who know its significance, without giving anything away to those who don’t,” said Kenyon. “It is the way the British intelligence services have always worked. Whether it’s speaking or writing, they’ve always been indirect so if you know what’s going on you’ll understand. If you don’t, nothing has been given away.”