Hollywood may be making inroads into creating bigger and better roles for women and black and minority ethnic actors – but there is one taboo that the film world stubbornly fails to address, according to one of its most prominent female directors. “Looks are more a taboo than gender and race,” said Susanne Bier, who kept audiences gripped with her espionage thriller The Night Manager, and is among the few female directors to have received an Oscar, a Golden Globe and an Emmy. She struggled to convince studio heads when she wanted to cast actors who differed from Hollywood’s idealised image of beauty, she told the Observer. “If I suggest actors or actresses with unusual looks, I have a much harder time getting them through than anyone else.” She added: “It’s difficult to talk about because you don’t get a straight answer. You’re not going to get a studio head that says ‘We don’t think this person is beautiful enough’. You get all sorts of strange answers. But that is the reason. There’s no doubt that that is the one taboo which is very hard to overcome.” She accepts that most audience members enjoy beauty. “I’m embracing that,” she said. “But I do think that the world consists of many elements – and I don’t necessarily think that beauty is the only interesting thing.” Bier, who is Danish, won the Oscar for best foreign language film for In a Better World, about a doctor grappling with the horrors of a refugee camp and his own disintegrating family. Her other award-winning films include Things We Lost in the Fire, a drama starring Halle Berry and The Night Manager, based on John le Carré’s novel. Her latest film, a Netflix production released in cinemas on 21 December, is Bird Box, a dystopian thriller with a controversial depiction of motherhood. Bier predicts that in a post-Weinstein world, where the industry is actively promoting female film-makers, women will be portrayed very differently. “We are going to see a more complex description of humanity with more female directors,” she said. “Female characters have been for too long a sort of love interest, a function of a main male character, whether a mother, a daughter, a girlfriend.” She added: “There’s no doubt that male characters are way more nuanced and complex than female characters.” Hollywood realises the need for change, she said: “It isn’t just from a feminist, political point of view. It’s purely from an artistic point of view. It’s just plain boring that women are not allowed to be more exciting [on screen]. They can be less likable, as long as they’re more interesting.” In Bird Box, Bier portrays raw human emotion in an epic, apocalyptic story about a mysterious force or virus that is driving people to suicide. They must be blindfolded to keep the unseen horror out of their eyes. Sandra Bullock, one of Hollywood’s most sought-after actresses, is cast in a role that is a far cry from cinema’s stock male fantasy of women, Bier said. She plays a reluctant mother who does not even bother to name her children, forbidding herself to succumb to the weakness of emotion in an effort to survive. Bier said: “Motherhood has been described by males for hundreds of years as warm and natural, and that survival is caring and soft. It’s not. Anybody who is a mother has that animalistic force inside. I have with my kids. Anybody coming near them, I’m going to kill them. “That sense of fierce protectiveness is not pleasant or kind. It’s about trying to get rid of the glorified, unreal and, for my taste, boring view of motherhood which has been part of general western culture.” In portraying a world engulfed by fear and mistrust, the film was a metaphor for our dystopian times, she said. While she has been tipped to become the first woman to direct a Bond film, she begins filming next year on The Undoing, a six-part thriller about betrayal, starring Nicole Kidman and Hugh Grant.