An American aquarium immortalised in the film Finding Dory has apologised for a foray into social media in which it called a large otter a “thicc girl” and an “absolute unit” in a meme-filled tweet. California’s Monterey Bay Aquarium said sorry for using memes with “connotations we were unaware of” on its official Twitter account. The overzealous tweet contained a slew of internet memes that commonly refer to amusingly large animals. However, some were more confusing, controversial and potentially insensitive than others. “Abby is a thicc girl,” the tweet read. “What an absolute unit. She c h o n k. Look at the size of this lady. OH LAWD SHE COMIN. Another Internetism!” Twenty four hours later, the aquarium apologised. “It has come to our attention that some of the references in this tweet are problematic and insensitive,” it said. “If you follow our feed, we often reference popular memes to talk about the ocean. In this case, the memes used had connotations we were unaware of until now.” Abby is a thicc girl What an absolute unit She c h o n k Look at the size of this lady OH LAWD SHE COMIN Another Internetism ! pic.twitter.com/s5fav2gu09 Hey everyone. It has come to our attention that some of the references in this tweet are problematic and insensitive. We're posting here in the thread so that people who have engaged with this tweet will join us in our learning moment. 1/4 “Thicc” (a variation of “thick”) is a positive adjective for a curvy body type that originated in African-American slang. “Absolute unit” is a phrase applied to abnormally large people or animals, usually in the formulation: “In awe of the size of this lad. Absolute unit”. look at this absolute unit. pic.twitter.com/LzcQ4x0q38 Though coined by Twitter user @mrreptoid, it was widely publicised this year in a tweet from the Museum of English Rural Life. Also, in this year’s New Zealand bird of the year competition, the official announcement described the winner (the kererū pigeon) as “the absolute unit, the roundest boi”. Finally, “She chonk” and “OH LAWD SHE COMIN” both originate from the same source – a widely shared size chart that coined new names for different levels of cat fatness. It’s Friday and I’ve been laughing at OH LAWD HE COMIN for hours pic.twitter.com/Dg1hq4MIX3 As an example, all three large animal memes frequently appeared last month when Knickers the big cow emerged. There are absolute units looking at this guy thinking “look at this absolute unit”. https://t.co/tZv8ds1oPX OH LAWD HE COMIN pic.twitter.com/ujcd6Dgd5v But on Wednesday, Monterey Bay Aquarium apologised for its careless use of potentially insensitive phrases. Critics pointed out that many of the memes originated from African-American slang about women, and were inappropriate when applied to animals. “Several terms referenced originated from African American Vernacular English (AAVE) and specifically reference black women’s bodies,” the aquarium said. “Using them in a sea otter meme without that background makes insinuations we never intended. We need to do better.” “We’re posting here in the thread so that people who have engaged with this tweet will join us in our learning moment.” If our tweet alienated you, please know that we are deeply sorry, and that we offer our sincerest apologies. If you follow our feed, we often reference popular memes to talk about the ocean. In this case, the memes used had connotations we were unaware of until now. 2/4 Our mission is to inspire conservation of the ocean, and we're thankful for your support as we try to advance that mission on social media. We're also thankful for those of you out there pointing out our blindspots and how we can improve. Thanks everyone. 4/4 The not-for-profit aquarium was the first in the world to reintroduce sea otter pups to the wild. Abby, the otter in question, arrived at Monterey Bay in 2012.