Uh oh. Things have always moved fast in showbusiness and in the age of the web complaint and the infuriating “non-apology” they move faster still. It’s what John Sutherland calls the “hyper-instantaneous” response of contemporary media. At the beginning of the week, the Academy announced that comedy megastar Kevin Hart would be hosting the 2019 Oscars. Today, Hart is standing down, bruised and battered by a tsunami of online rage about his homophobic gags of 10 years ago, material that he has for some time said were in fact satiric comments about his own heterosexual anxiety. Many were unconvinced by that explanation and Hart made things considerably worse with a video posted on Instagram on Thursday in which he announced the Academy had asked him to apologise or quit: “I chose to pass on the apology. The reason why I passed is because I’ve addressed this several times.” Announcing you’re “passing on an apology” is petrol on the flames. Hart’s final apology in the tweet announcing his resignation was more fulsome: “I sincerely apologize to the LGBTQ community for my insensitive words from my past” — although that “my past” remark shows that he is still not ready to swallow every morsel of pride. What does this mean? Well, at least Hart did not at any stage insult everyone’s intelligence with the classic “non-apology” wording, mock-sorry about “any” offence caused and/or faux-concern about “anyone who was offended”, the “any” clearly signalling a haughty refusal to see what was wrong and implying that the complainants are hysterical. My colleague Marina Hyde has recently skewered the French DJ Martin Solveig for precisely this dishonesty after he insulted the Ballon d’Or winner Ada Hegerberg. But the awful truth is that if Hart had moved fast enough and with enough vehement sincerity, ersatz or otherwise, he might have saved the gig. And now he may well be brooding on the fact that Mel Gibson, though guilty of outrageous racism, homophobia, misogyny and violence has returned to the fold despite not being convincingly apologetic. Hart could be thinking to himself: where was the web tsunami about his Oscar nomination? The Academy hired me because of the showbiz-prestige capital I have accrued as someone hip and edgy, partly because of the stuff that’s now got me fired. Well, it’s a lesson in the way that power works. There was a time when Oscar night was so prestigious and as social media did not exist, announcements about who was hosting naturally went unchallenged. There is clearly now an unacknowledged lack of consensus about levels and types of offensiveness in Hollywood. But it’s clear at any rate that homophobic remarks cannot be regarded as normal. And that is a very good thing.