Wilf who? After 14 consecutive defeats in matches played without their star player, Wilfried Zaha, in their starting line-up, Crystal Palace have finally won. It wasn’t pretty, but Roy Hodgson won’t care a jot on a day when a stunning Luka Milivojevic strike lit up an often scrappy game on a damp, dirty afternoon at Selhurst Park. It was a goal that was as well timed as it was well struck, coming during an awful first half just as Leicester were beginning to take control of the game. Both managers had rung the changes – many of them forced – after respective defeats last weekend. With Zaha and James Tomkins sitting this one out on the naughty step, Jordan Ayew and Martin Kelly were asked to step up by Roy Hodgson, while Vicente Guaita made his first Premier League start for the club in place of Wayne Hennessey, who was absent from the match-day squad. The Spaniard had an early scare when Jamie Vardy barged him off the ball and poked into an empty net, only for referee Michael Oliver to correctly adjudge the goalkeeper had been illegally shouldered in the back. For Leicester, Christian Fuchs got a rare start at full-back in the absence of the injured Ben Chilwell, while Jamie Vardy and Harry Maguire were welcomed back from the treatment room. Winger Marc Albrighton got the nod ahead of Vicente Iborra. The winner came out of nowhere. With the ball at his feet near the right touchline, Andros Townsend played it five or six yards inside to Milivojevic. Surveying his options, the Palace captain took a couple of touches before sending a rasping 25-yard drive curling away from the diving Kasper Schmeichel with the inside of his right foot. With Palace tails up, Max Meyer pulled a low drive from similar distance narrowly wide of the upright just a few moments later. An otherwise dire first half began in conditions so filthy even Kayla, the fearsome Crystal Palace eagle, dug in her talons and refused to perform more than one of her traditional pre-match crossbar to crossbar swoops, choosing instead to sit dripping miserably in the rain looking like she’d rather be anywhere else. As a scrappy game extremely low on quality approached half-time, most present were similarly unenthused. The majority perked up immeasurably when the outstanding Milivojevic struck. Ayew, by contrast, had a conspicuously quiet game that was indicative of the difficult time he has endured at Palace since arriving as a summer loan signing from Swansea, a club whose fans couldn’t wait to see the back of him. Yet to score a goal in 13 appearances for Palace, he was repeatedly bullied off the ball by Leicester skipper Wes Morgan and missed a glorious chance to open his Palace account when shooting tamely at Schmeichel early in the second half. He had missed in similar circumstances earlier in the game, only have his blushes spared by the linesman’s flag. The Ghanaian’s afternoon ended in the 78th minute, when he was replaced by Alexander Sørloth. With his side trailing, Leicester manager Claude Puel had sent on Rachid Ghezzal after the interval, removing the curiously ineffectual James Maddison. The highly regarded midfielder’s card had been marked during the first half, when he found himself on the receiving end of an uncharacteristically angry volley of abuse from his normally placid manager for being too careless with possession. His replacement duly prompted further frustration in the Leicester technical area when sending a gilt-edged chance fizzing just the wrong side of the upright. Demarai Gray went close too, embarking on a driving run that took him 60 yards through the centre, beating two defenders along the way, before hooking a shot wide from inside the penalty area. Having avoided embarrassment in the first half, Guaita kept his side in front in the 80th minute. Getting down low to his right, he push a curling, goal-bound Vardy left-footed flick on to the foot of a post before gratefully grabbing the rebound. Saves don’t get much better. It was the stand-out moment of a tense, nervy second half that concluded with a raucous, roof-raising roar of relief.