A poll has found powerful evidence of the extent of everyday racism that members of minority ethnic groups in the UK face in their work and personal lives. The ICM survey, commissioned as part of the Guardian’s Bias in Britain series, focused on experiences that could be attributed to unconscious bias – where someone behaves in a biased way without necessarily being aware of it (or willing to admit it). These incidents are more difficult to count in official data than instances of explicit racist abuse or violence, and it may not be possible to conclusively show they are driven by racism on any single occasion. The poll found that people from ethnic minorities are much more likely than white people to report being accused of shoplifting, being asked to leave a restaurant, bar or club, being overlooked for a promotion for no good reason, being subjected to aggressive treatment in public or being mistaken for a member of staff. It also found that young people are more likely to report negative experiences than older people. And a majority (57%) of people from minorities say they have to work harder to succeed in Britain because of their ethnicity. As part of the series, we will be exploring the poll findings and looking at instances where people have experienced everyday racism and unconscious bias in their lives. Unconscious or implicit bias is one part of the explanation for why, despite equalities being enshrined in law, minority groups are still at a disadvantage in many parts of life. The term was popularised after US social psychologists devised a way of measuring the prejudices that we are not necessarily aware of – the Implicit Association Test. They published a paper in 1998 claiming that their tool for measuring "the unconscious roots of prejudice" showed that 90-95% of people were susceptible. While the reliability of that test is now contested, there is overwhelming wider evidence that unconscious bias seeps into decisions that affect recruitment, access to healthcare and outcomes in criminal justice in ways that can disadvantage black and minority ethnic people. One study found that university professors were far more likely to respond to emails from students with white-sounding names. Another showed that white people perceived black faces as more threatening than white faces with the same expression. In this series, Bias in Britain, we're exploring some of the ways unconscious bias plays out in the real world. For example, we conducted a poll which found that ethnic minorities are much more likely to report being suspected of shoplifting, refused entry to bars and clubs or being unfairly overlooked for promotion at work. While some of our biases may begin on an unconscious level, experts caution that the concept of unconscious bias should not absolve people of discriminatory behaviour. “If you’re aware of these associations then you can bring to bear all of your critical skills and intelligence to see it’s wrong to think like that,” says Lasana Harris, a neuroscientist who studies prejudice and social learning at University College London. “We all have the ability to control that.” We want to hear from readers about your experiences and perspectives. If you’re from a minority ethnic background, tell us about the times you’ve experienced unconscious bias in the UK and what impact it’s had on your life. We want to hear about incidents where something happened that you might have felt was motivated by racism but were unable to call out, or where the person responsible may not have been aware of what was causing their behaviour – perhaps a time when your boss confused you with a colleague of the same ethnicity, or a time that someone asked where you were “really” from. We’d also like to hear from those who’ve witnessed these issues in their workplace or other areas of daily life. To get in touch, fill out the encrypted form below – anonymously if you prefer. Only the Guardian has access to your contributions and we will not publish anything without your permission. One of our journalists may contact you to discuss the issue further. If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. Read terms of service here.