This weekend Christmas will be celebrated in some fashion throughout Europe – in Berlin as well as in London, in the caves and cellars of Cologne as well as in Manchester. It is a symbol, perhaps a relic, of that unity of the Western world which Christianity did so much to promote and which we in this century have done so much to destroy. But Christianity was not the only creative force, nor are the great wars the only cause of decay. Our civilisation also rests, as the Bishop of Chichester pointed out this week, on the great traditions of humanism, science, and law. And he might have added on the common heritage of the arts – that spring from the old enchantment of ancient Greece where the Nine Muses were born “in shepherds’ cabins on the steep hillside.” These things are not threatened by war alone but by that new religion, of which Fascism is but one expression and materialism another, which denies their value. For most of Europe this will be no merry Christmas. The citizens of Warsaw and Budapest, of Amsterdam and Athens will have little heart for it. Even the liberated countries, who have at least the joy of freedom, are troubled by cold and hunger, by political strife, by the separation of families, and by fear of the future. And we in these islands too, comfortable enough in our homes, must sit under the shadow of the German offensive which seems to have been timed so as to destroy even the brief illusion of good cheer which might otherwise have tempted us. We have, however, one consolation: this, the sixth Christmas of the war, will surely be the last. But can we be sure? Certainly Germany will have been defeated in 12 months’ time, but not Japan – and what kind of peace shall we have? And how long will it last? The events of the past few weeks have made the bravest wonder if it is really true, as Mr Sacheverell Sitwell has written, that “humanity is like an epileptic who falls into the fire, and can not learn his lesson, that he will be burned.” The men who govern Soviet Russia, the great new Power of the Old World, seem to have few hopes and few illusions. In his last speech Stalin said: It would, however, be naive to think that Germany will not attempt to restore her might and launch new aggression. It is common knowledge that the German chieftains are already now preparing for a new war. History shows that a short period – some twenty or thirty years – is enough for Germany to recover from defeat and reestablish her might. And on this assumption, logical enough, Russia is calmly preparing to change the map of Europe, to move millions of people from their homes, to cut down the growth of centuries with no principle in view except that of security. This week M. Bidault, the French Foreign Minister, has revealed that Poland is to be given the German provinces of Pomerania and Silesia (not to mention East Prussia) not because of racial or historic claims, not even for compensation, but because this act of injustice will ensure that in any future war Poland will be on the side of Russia against Germany. What cynicism is this? Can we really forget the Atlantic Charter so easily? And will Russia in fact feel safer when Poland has earned the hatred of 60 million Germans? Fortunately there is still time to change. While the terrible menace of Germany still holds the Allies together we must fashion the beginnings of a new order which will be more just and more permanent. In this task the naive but splendid idealism of the United States may be of decisive importance, provided it is not nipped in the bud by the frost of European politics. Russia and France and those other countries in Europe which have suffered so terribly from German aggression have a right to guarantees of security, but that security can best be achieved by a just peace enforced by a new League of Nations in which Britain and the United States play a full part. Here American opinion has a great responsibility. Every hesitation, every doubt, every confusion makes it more certain that Europe will go its own way to perdition. There is still time to persuade the statesmen of Europe that peace cannot be guaranteed by new strategic frontiers, by moving millions to and fro across the Continent, by beggaring the German people and driving them to anarchy and despair. Certainly we must be prepared to enforce peace by arms, but we must also begin at once to restore the economic prosperity and spiritual unity of Europe. Certainly we must fear and mistrust the Germans, perhaps for a hundred years or more, but this obsession must not blind us to other dangers and other evils. The Germans did not invent war but only perfected it. Russia and France should be warned now that American isolation, British disillusion, and German anarchy would be too high a price to pay even for security. Our aim should not be merely peace, the absence of war, which, like health or happiness, is a mere negation, but the reconstruction of Western civilisation. And for this we must first have a new Europe, democratic, prosperous, progressive, united if not by Christianity alone then by the common traditions of humanism, science, and law. From our own correspondents23 December 1944