Mauricio Pochettino gambled, and saw it pay off handsomely. Tottenham’s manager must have acknowledged the element of risk in weakening his lineup against a Leicester side who were unbeaten in seven games but everything fell into place in a way that, with a potentially season-defining night in Barcelona looming on Tuesday, affords them the best possible chance of salvaging their Champions League campaign. Harry Kane and Christian Eriksen were only required to make second-half appearances, by which time the game had been won by their two most reliable attacking side-kicks. One of them, Son Heung-min, has discovered his best form in recent weeks and gave Kasper Schmeichel no chance with an exceptional opener; the other, Dele Alli, made things safe after a slick break and the wider benefits of such a comfortable night’s work may become apparent soon enough. Since Leicester’s return to the top flight in 2014, this match has been second only to Arsenal against Liverpool in the scoring charts. The previous three had brought 19 goals but the team selections this time cooled expectations of similar abandon. Pochettino clearly had an eye on the Nou Camp in keeping Kane and Eriksen in reserve, while Claude Puel, deprived of Jamie Vardy for a second consecutive week, took the outwardly conservative move of adding Vincent Iborra to his midfield. In the event, Leicester began with few inhibitions. They had Tottenham, who initially looked loose and short of wit, stretched, although they escaped serious harm. Jan Vertonghen read a centre from the overlapping Ben Chilwell smartly enough to prevent a tap-in for Kelechi Iheanacho, who had just shot wildly over after chasing one of several raking balls over the top. But these were flurries of ambition rather than near misses. It took Spurs 25 minutes to summon any incision of their own but, when they did, Ricardo Pereira did well to deal with Lucas Moura’s cutback in a near-carbon copy of what had occurred at the other end. Moura was operating as Tottenham’s nominal centre-forward but, in practice, his relationship with Son and Alli was far more fluid. They rotated along the front line and, by the half-hour, had managed to make it look reasonably intuitive. Alli, running diagonally to catch Leicester napping at a right-sided throw-in, got behind the back line but found Nampalys Mendy, rather than any penalty-box poacher, stationed to meet his ball across. He was then tackled splendidly by Wes Morgan as half-time neared, a sparky run into the area appearing to have created the game’s first clear chance. The home defence had steadily become by far the busier. Yet there had been little to presage Son’s goal, which came in the first minute of added time. The finish, a textbook left-foot shot from 20 yards that flew beyond Schmeichel after he had cut in from the right, was outstanding, although Leicester had been surprisingly relaxed in granting him the angle. Mendy was particularly static when Son signalled his intentions and Jonny Evans a yard too slow in coming out to block. On the bench Kane, his chances of being leaned on for a salvage act having diminished in a flash, applauded warmly. Son attempted a repeat four minutes into the second half but, under slightly more pressure, shot into the crowd. Within moments he appeared on the left side of the box, demanding another fine intervention from Morgan. Leicester’s early fizz was a distant memory, their threat on the counter dimmed by Spurs’ improved care in holding possession. The home support were offered some encouragement when Chilwell shot over after a poor clearance from Hugo Lloris, who has rather too many of those in him these days, and buzzed approvingly when Gray made the Spurs keeper get down to clutch a low shot. When Puel introduced Marc Albrighton and Rachid Ghezzal from the bench, Leicester appeared primed to have a go. Almost immediately their best intentions fell flat. Spurs’ second goal was a tour de force from their front three. Moura, darting through the centre of Leicester’s half, found Son to his left and the only remaining question was whether the South Korean would spot Alli’s run on the far side. That was answered instantaneously, a clipped delivery being met by a perfectly-angled header beyond the back post. Tottenham had clicked irresistibly. Eriksen and Kane were roused in the final quarter , with Leicester offering gaps consistently enough to offer hope the latter might improve on an other-worldly record of 13 goals in eight appearances against these opponent. But there was little need to overexert and Tottenham will travel to Catalonia in lean shape.