The highlight of our fabulous week in Mull in June was our accommodation. A mile along a coastal path, Rubha nan Gall lighthouse cottage is off grid, but apart from not being able to use a hair dryer, you wouldn’t know it. The four en suite double bedrooms were furnished to a high standard and the kitchen well-equipped. The views past the lighthouse to the Ardnamurchan peninsula, not to mention the dolphin we saw just offshore, made this one of our favourite places ever.• Sleeps six, £158 a night, airbnb.co.ukMary Bythell In late spring we stayed in a wonderfully wild and peaceful campsite, hidden from view and surrounded by the woods and fields of south Norfolk. Each pitch was generously portioned and carved into neat circles among the long grass and wildflowers. The compost loos and the gas-fired shower were immaculately kept, and no electricity meant no internet connection and no noise, so we could completely relax. Best of all our fantastic hosts, Joe and Holly, were friendly, kind-hearted and laid-back. • £7pp, wardleyhillcampsite.comPolly Rodger Brown For a trip off the beaten track, Gjogv in the Faroe Islands is ideal. The Gjaargardur Guesthouse (doubles £120 B&B) is a cosy home in this remote corner of the North Atlantic, with wonderful walking routes in every direction. It serves hearty, rustic food (roast lamb, beef etc) and has plenty of advice for walkers (including the Slaettaratindur hike, the highest peak on the Faroes at 882 metres). The town also has a beautiful Scandinavian church by the sea. Pack for wild weather, as it changes by the minute! Gjogv is accessible by hire car (one hour) from Vagar airport.Nick Reeves We’ve seen a lot of Brussels on our TV screens this year! Much less well-known is Leuven (Louvain in French), a gem of a 15th-century university town less than 15 minutes’ train ride from the capital. It bowled me over, with its exquisite architecture at every turn, culminating in its magnificent town hall. The statues of Erasmus, and of a student pouring a glass of beer into his empty head (above), personify the historic and modern aspects of a city with classy shops, buzzing bars, and churches filled with Flemish art. Oh, and you can tour the Stella Artois brewery whose HQ is here. • visitleuven.be Moira Mushkudiani Manor, in Georgia’s mountainous Mestia region is a real gem. Run by a lovely family, this traditional home offers wonderful breakfasts of soft buttery pancakes, thick and crispy cornbreads, homegrown fruit and veg, ajapsandali (aubergine stew) and potent homemade sulguni cheese. It is the perfect base for one of the region’s wonderful hikes (the house sits at the start of the four-day trail to Ushguli, the highest village in Europe). Return in the evening for unmissable views across the valley to the famous medieval watchtowers. • Doubles from £18 B&B, on booking.com Jenny Harris Al Hamra is a 400-year-old village of mud houses. Most of them are abandoned and crumbling, which makes a visit a unique experience, especially a night walk through narrow alleys in almost total darkness with only stray cats as your companions. After sunset it can be very spooky. If you are faint-hearted, try rooftop stargazing. I highly recommend staying in one of the houses, recently converted into an inn (try Bait Aljabal, doubles £72 half-board on booking.com). It’s very basic with only mattresses on the floor but gives you an idea how people lived in the past. Jarek Legend says the lakes were formed when a magician turned a farmer’s seven daughters into seven lakes for refusing their hands in marriage. We can now admire their beauty (but never marry them) starting from the town of Penjikent near the newly reopened border crossing with Uzbekistan. Stay overnight at Noffin, the fourth lake, in a rustic homestay (under £10 a night, see website below), or drive straight up to the sixth lake. From the homestay it is a good day’s trek following the road/river past towering snow-topped mountains, timeless villages and blue lakes. Be prepared for snow in April at the seventh lake, an absolutely stunning setting.• ztda-tourism.tjNikolai K The absolute favourite part of our trip to Marrakech was our half-day cooking class with Amal, a non-profit organisation empowering disadvantaged women through culinary skills. It was such fun! There’s a range of options you can choose to cook, including tajines and couscous, with herbs picked from the garden. Booking online and communication were simple, and the vibe was relaxed and fun, with participants from around the world. And all for a good cause.• £29 adult, amalnonprofit.orgKatie Stobbs Travelling along the Silk Road in China, we paid a short visit to the Yuquan or “Jade Spring” Taoist temple in the city of Tianshui. Since it’s an active place of worship, it was incredibly peaceful and nowhere near as crowded as other temples we’d visited. The highlight was getting to chat with a few of the Taoist priests and watch them practice their centuries-old faith. The temple costs about 50RMB (about £6) to enter and it doesn’t have a website, but you can find it on TripAdvisor.Madison Plantier A 1½-hour flight from Bogotá, Guainía offers a landscape of Amazonian forests, white-sand savannahs and granite tepui [mesa] outcrops, all connected by wide, slow-flowing rivers, in which pink river dolphins abound while macaws and toucans fly overhead. Wildlife is abundant – we saw a number of jaguar prints on trails. Hugo Mateus of North Amazon Travel offers tours of five-eight days from around $300pp, staying in indigenous communities. Upriver are the majestic Mavecure hills, and downriver the Orinoco. The more intrepid can head overland to the Rio Negro headwaters. Not much has changed since Humboldt explored here 200 years ago. Nicola Flanagan This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.