Over Christmas, we usually try to throw a lunch party (isn’t seeing the people we love the stuff of life?) and we often visit the Indian sub-continent for inspiration, with my father such an avid fan of Madhur Jaffrey. When the weather is cold, I find that toasting and grinding fragrant spices is warming and comforting – like these fragrant sausage rolls. These richly spiced sausage rolls can be made in advance and frozen – delicious with red onion marmalade or a chutney. Prep 10 minCook 25 minMakes 30 or so 450g sausagemeat2 tbsp breadcrumbs320g pre-rolled puff pastry1 egg, beaten with a splash of milk 1 tsp fennel seeds, to decorate For the spice mix1 thumb of fresh ginger, peeled2 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped3 tbsp rapeseed oil1 red onion, peeled and finely chopped2 tsp cumin seeds2 tsp coriander seeds1 tsp fenugreek seeds2 tsp garam masala¼ - ½ tsp chilli powder – to taste2 tbsp tomato puree Start with the spices. Finely slice the ginger and chop finely with the garlic. In a small pan, warm the oil over a medium heat and fry the onion for seven or eight minutes, until soft. Meanwhile, gently toast the cumin, coriander and fenugreek seeds in a small, dry frying pan over a medium heat for a minute or two, until they smell fragrant, then grind in a mortar or spice grinder. Add the garlic, ginger and all the spices to the onions, and saute for four to five minutes more to soften the garlic and ginger. Finally, stir in the tomato puree, remove from the heat, season well and turn the mixture out on to a plate to cool. If you are going to cook the sausage rolls right away, heat the oven to 180C (160C fan)/350F/gas 4. Once the onion mix is cool, stir in the sausagemeat and breadcrumbs. Fry a little of the mixture in a pan to check the seasoning – you may want to add a pinch more salt. Now remove the pastry from the fridge, put on a floured surface and cut in half lengthways. Divide the sausagemeat in half and roll into two long sausages. Put a sausage along the length of each pastry and brush the long edges with egg wash. Roll the pastries around the meat and press the pastry together where it meets, using a fork to crimp the edges. Brush all over with egg wash, sprinkle with fennel seeds and cut into mini rolls about the thickness of a walnut – any thinner and they will fall over in the oven. At this stage, you can freeze them, separating the layers with parchment paper. Bake for 20-25 minutes, until puffed and golden, and serve with red onion marmalade, chutney or simply by themselves. You can double the quantity of the sausage filling to make meatballs – delicious with a simple ginger- and garlic-scented tomato sauce. This is an option for coeliacs if you omit the breadcrumbs from the filling. Buy extra pastry to freeze – always handy for whipping up a quick tart or makeshift pizza. “Rosé really comes into its own with Tommi’s clever riff on sausage rolls – try El Viaje de Ramon Rosé 2017 (£8 Co-op, 12.5%), which is gutsy enough to handle the spice. An Aussie Clare Valley riesling would also work.”