The former US first lady Michelle Obama has announced the name of her anticipated memoir. Becoming will be published globally in 24 languages on 13 November by Penguin Random House, which acquired world publishing rights to both Michelle and Barack Obama’s memoirs in a deal rumoured to be worth $65m. Obama described writing her memoir as a “deeply personal experience”, and saidshe hoped her story would encourage others to become who they want to be. The memoir will chronicle her life from a childhood on the South Side of Chicago to her years as an executive balancing the demands of motherhood and work, as well as her time in the White House. In a statement, she said: “Writing Becoming has been a deeply personal experience. It has allowed me, for the very first time, the space to honestly reflect on the unexpected trajectory of my life. “In this book, I talk about my roots and how a little girl from the South Side of Chicago found her voice and developed the strength to use it to empower others. I hope my journey inspires readers to find the courage to become whoever they aspire to be. I can’t wait to share my story.” The book will be released in the UK, Australia, New Zealand, India and South Africa in print and digital formats by Viking, an imprint of Penguin Books at Penguin Random House UK. In the US and Canada, it will be released by Crown Publishing Group. At the time of publication, Obama will embark on an international book tour, with details to be announced at a later date. Obama will be following in the footsteps of her predecessors by releasing a post-White House tell-all book. Since the popularity of Lady Bird Johnson’s A White House Diary, all of the first ladies, with the exception of Pat Nixon, have written a memoir after their husband’s term in office has finished. Other notable works in the genre include Laura Bush’s Spoken from the Heart and Hillary Clinton’s Living History. It is not, however, Obama’s first book. In 2012, she released American Grown, which focused on her White House kitchen garden and nutrition initiatives as first lady.