At 11pm last Tuesday, I said goodnight to a friend outside a pub in Kentish Town in north-west London. By the time we both got home – about a mile in distance – each of us had passed a murder scene: four young men were stabbed that evening, in at least three different locations. Two of them died. At the police cordon by the junction of the nearby Islip and Bartholomew Road and the Peckwater estate, a large group of Somali women spoke anxiously into their phones. It felt like so many of the scenes we’ve seen in London over the past year: a shocked community coming together from different backgrounds to deal with tragedy. A young boy, now known to be Abdikarim Hassan, 17, had been fatally stabbed outside a corner shop. There was further trauma to come. News spread first of another stabbing in King’s Cross – a 16-year-old boy who escaped with his life – and then the killing of Sadiq Aadam, 20, in Camden. Word got round on Snapchat and Facebook as plugged-in teenagers told each other to stay home. Sadiq was the third member of his family to be killed by knife crime; his brother was killed before Christmas. These deaths hit a community already reeling from the ”wrong place, wrong time” murder of local rapper, Lewis Blackman (aka ‘Dotz’), 19, who was killed in Kensington last Sunday. How has this situation come about? It’s easy to jump to conclusions in emergencies, and tempting to blame cuts to local authority funding. But it’s not a cliche to examine youth services or policing and how they’re funded. Local residents told me that there were issues with policing, and with cuts to youth services, and that “there was nowhere for kids to go”. Camden is in many ways like any central London borough. It contains micro-communities with different kinds of housing, people from different socioeconomic backgrounds with different spending power living next to each other. If it feels like our communities are becoming unsafe spaces for our young people, that’s because they are At St Mary’s Church in King’s Cross Father Pascale told me: “People are affected, they are anxious about their children. They can become resigned to the frequency of violence after a while.” In Kentish Town, I spoke to a local youth worker who said that lack of housing and lack of opportunities were to blame. There was no long-term plan for community cohesion. “We need more community police officers. They’re shutting down police stations – it worries me. We are going in the opposite direction. We need a better prevention strategy.” He told me that the police have no relationship with young people and that they only attend emergencies. It’s no surprise to learn that knife crime has risen across the capital. According to the Office for National Statistics data released in January 2018, knife crime increased by 21% to 37,443 incidents in the 12 months to September 2017. 15% of young people have told the Ben Kinsella Trust that they have friends who have carried knives. This was a story I heard echoed around Kentish Town all weekend – the majority of those who carry knives sit somewhere on a spectrum between criminal intent and self-protection. A report into youth service provision by Green London assembly member Siân Berry last year, showed that more than 30 youth centres had closed across London since 2011-12. Funding to voluntary sector youth services had gone down by 35%, and half of reporting councils were planning more cuts in 2017/18. A council spokesman told me that Camden had spent £5.1m on integrated youth support services in 2016-2017. “This includes services aimed at addressing youth offending and substance misuse, supporting youth clubs and projects, and schemes like Connexions.” Spending on youth services did appear to be higher than some other London boroughs, and Camden set up a taskforce to look into the rise in knife crime in December. But this problem is bigger than any one borough. It demands a coordinated response. It’s true that across London services for young people have been decimated. Council budgets have been reduced by government year on year, and even those councils that are committed to maintaining a high level of service have to innovate and do the best they can. Doing “more for less” is a mantra within councils that comes straight from the coalition government playbook. It’s also clear that there are not enough police. Addressing a packed community meeting last Friday, local MP Keir Starmer admitted that funds for policing had been slashed by central government. The mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, has said that the Met has faced £600m of police cuts in recent years. The funding gap must now be faced by the taxpayer and increases in council tax. The Labour MP for Croydon, Sarah Jones (chair of the all-party parliamentary group on knife crime), has called knife crime “an epidemic spreading through our communities”. It feels like normal London communities are now living in a state of emergency, a consequence of failed domestic policies, lack of funding, and institutional indifference. What’s needed now is a strategy to combat this. For now, the immediate focus given the number deaths in the community must be to reassure people that they are safe. Resources must be provided for children who have had to go to the funerals of their friends and family members. Over the weekend, the playgrounds were unnaturally quiet around these areas of north London. All that can be heard in the area now are sirens and helicopters overhead. Flags hang on the railings of the Peckwater estate. “Together,” they read, “You hurt one of us you hurt us all”, “You boys matter”, “We stand together”, “A child lost to a family is a child lost to a community”. If it feels like our communities are becoming unsafe spaces for our young people, that’s because they are. We need change and we need investment. We need it fast. • Seraphima Kennedy is a writer and academic researcher