The late Rev Billy Graham on Wednesday received a rare tribute from the nation’s top political leaders under the Capitol Rotunda, with Donald Trump saying the “legendary” American figure deserved to be recognized in the place “where the memory of the American people is enshrined”. “Here lies America’s pastor,” said the Republican House speaker, Paul Ryan, gesturing to Graham’s casket under the eye of the dome, surrounded by family, friends, lawmakers and a ring of paintings of the nation’s founders. “He ministered to all walks, from some of the greats whose statues line this hall – Eisenhower, King, Ford and Reagan – to the everyday citizens lining up today to pay their respects.” The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, added: “The man we recognize today shared the Gospel with more people, face-to-face, than anyone else in history.” As the leaders stood by the casket, Trump – who said his father was an admirer of Graham’s – reached out to touch the bare wood and Ryan bowed his head. Trump tweeted a tribute later: Today, in the center of this great Chamber lies Billy Graham – an Ambassador for Christ who reminded the world of the power of prayer and the gift of God’s grace. pic.twitter.com/5aMh8nFPJW Graham died a week earlier at age 99. Some 30 family members are accompanying Graham’s casket to Washington, where he befriended presidents of both parties and counseled others over seven decades. Graham’s son, Franklin, tweeted a photo on Wednesday of family members loading the casket on to a jet emblazoned with “Samaritan’s Purse”, the name of a Christian relief charity that he chairs. Graham is lying in honor before a funeral on Friday near his home in Charlotte, North Carolina. The Rotunda entrances were draped with black fabric, and Graham’s casket rested on a black-draped catafalque beneath the soaring ceiling and its painting, the Apotheosis of Washington. Though he met every president since Harry Truman and counseled most, Graham grew wary of politics after Watergate. He was closest to Richard Nixon but later said he felt used by him. In his early years as a preacher, Graham expressed racist and antisemitic views, although he later called for desegregation and apologised for suggesting Jews controlled the media. Bill Clinton recalled seeing one of Graham’s crusades as a child, a profound experience that became more amazing over his life. Graham counseled him as Arkansas governor, and later as president in the White House itself. “In that little room, he was the same person I saw when I was 11 on that football field,” Clinton said Tuesday after viewing the casket at Graham’s home. George W Bush and his wife, Laura, also visited Graham’s home on Tuesday. In Washington, Ryan said there had been no doubt that Graham would receive the honor of a public viewing in the Rotunda. He told reporters that almost immediately upon hearing of Graham’s death he, Trump, McConnell and Representative Patrick McHenry, who represents the Graham family’s district, agreed it would happen. Graham shares the honor with 11 presidents and other distinguished Americans, starting with Senator Henry Clay of Kentucky in 1852 and, most recently, Senator Daniel Inouye of Hawaii in 2012, according to the House and the Architect of the Capitol. Graham is only the fourth private person to lie in honor since 1998. The others are two US Capitol police officers who died in the line of duty in 1998 and civil rights hero Rosa Parks in 2005. Trump met Graham at the pastor’s 95th birthday party in 2013, but is closer to Franklin Graham Jr. On Friday, Trump was to attend Graham’s funeral near his library in Charlotte. Jimmy Carter and George HW Bush will not be there, meaning no former presidents will attend the funeral.