The mood and effect of American Crime Story: The Assassination of Gianni Versace is best exemplified by the fact that, when his boyfriend of 15 years, Antonio D’Amico, hears gunshots and races to find his dying lover riddled with bullets and bleeding upon the steps of Casa Casuarina, their Xanadu-like villa, you don’t think: “Oh, sweet fragility of life! Oh, the endless evil that man will visit upon man! But playthings to the gods are we!” You think: “Ooh, that’s Ricky Martin! In tennis whites! Isn’t he ageing well?” Which is to say that, in the opening episode at least, the soapy sensibility of Ryan Murphy, the show’s creator, has some emotional distance to close between the subject and its viewers. There’s also the inescapable high camp elements of the story of the Italian fashion designer’s murder, with which series two of Murphy’s pop culture anthology is concerned. It’s not helped by a weirdly clunky script that has the murderer, Andrew Cunanan, disgorging great lumps of exposition that pop the narrative bubbles we would otherwise be chasing after. On the other hand, maybe it’s not a problem at all. Maybe keeping us at a distance is as knowing and deliberate an artistic decision as Versace’s every design choice in Casa Casuarina. Like Murphy’s first and Bafta-winning American Crime Story, The People vs OJ Simpson, The Assassination is at least in part a commentary on the lenses in front of which a febrile piece of social history played out. When Cucanan’s bullets first met their mark in real life, the reaction from the public was, after all, just as shorn of genuine sorrow. A brand has been shot! Look, there’s Donatella arriving! And Diana and Naomi crying at the funeral! It was only ever deliciously unreal to us. The nine-part series opens with the murder and the first 50-minute episode flashes back and forth from there to 1990, interleaving the evolution of Cununan’s obsession with his victim and the development of the murder investigation. Cunanan is played by Darren Criss, who is a touch stagey. But Criss was a fine turn as Blaine Anderson in Glee, and hopefully he will find his groove over the next eight episodes. Edgar Ramirez as Versace does wonders with his part, managing to evoke the man’s fabled charm and a sort of commanding gentleness that explains why so many clients were drawn to him, and how he built a tiny Milan shop with a single rack of clothes into a billion pound fashion house. Quite what is fact and quite what is fiction is never clear. Donatella et al have disowned the series as “a work of fiction”. The programme itself carries the disclaimer: “Some events are combined or imagined for dramatic and interpretative purposes. Dialogue is imagined to be consistent with these events.” It is entirely in keeping with the genre that it is the bits that you are most sure are made up that are actually true. A fragment of one of the bullets that killed Versace also hit a dove and brought it down next to him. The police had failed to distribute the posters advertising Cunanan – who had killed four men in six months before Versace – as one the FBI’s 10 most wanted. And if the fact that a bystander ran to his car to get his Polaroid camera to capture the dying man’s body being loaded into the ambulance doesn’t seem stranger than fiction now, children of the smartphone world, let me assure you it did then. Having looked a little ahead at the series, it does begin to thicken and deepen. You don’t need to feel too guilty about what promises to be a glorious and, given its central subject, eminently unjustifiable pleasure.