The television industry’s exclusion of female show creators and people of color has only gotten worse in the new season, according to a study that paints a grim picture even as Hollywood has made bold commitments to improve diversity and representation. Creators of new shows in the 2017-18 season were 91% white and 84% male, marking a step backwards for both gender and racial diversity behind the camera, researchers with the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) reported on Tuesday. Despite modest gains in the diversity of casts in film and TV – and widespread evidence that diverse content yields box office success and high ratings – white men still occupy the vast majority of creative positions, the study found. “There are all kinds of missed opportunities,” said Darnell Hunt, a UCLA sociology professor and the co-author of the annual Hollywood diversity report. “It’s an outgrowth of the executive suites and the fact that they are still overwhelmingly white and male and who is in a position to judge which ideas being pitched are viable … and whose pitches will be heard.” The report, which analyzed the top 200 film releases in 2016 and more than 1,200 television shows, comes at a time when the entertainment industry is grappling with gender discrimination and its legacy of sexual abuse amid the Time’s Up and #MeToo movements. The research highlights the persistent underrepresentation in film and television even as women-fronted films and movies like Black Panther, with a nearly all-black cast, continue to shatter box office records – while projects with mostly white casts are overall less successful. Of the 45 new scripted television shows approved for 2017-18 across broadcast, cable and digital platforms, there were only four creators of color, all of whom were black. There were also only seven female creators. With women behind only 16% of new shows and minorities behind just 9%, the outlook was worse than overall representation in the previous season, which was marginally better in both categories. All new broadcast shows had white creators, Hunt said. Women also claimed only 28% of leads for new shows, a significant drop from the previous season. There was, however, improvement in casting of people of color, who made up 28% of leads for new shows, an increase from the prior year. But, the report found, over the last five years, there has been a broader trend of increasing diversity in television creators, particularly in broadcast and digital. “We are seeing some sustained progress over time … but we were starting at such an abysmal location,” Hunt said. In film, people of color accounted for 13.9% of leads in the top movies of 2016, virtually the same as the previous year. Women made up 31% of top film leads, marking a slight increase. Between 2011, the first year UCLA produced the report, and 2016, there has been virtually no change in film directors of color, who continue to represent only 12% of the top films. Women also made no gains, directing only 6.9% of the top films in 2016. The study provided further evidence that audiences prefer diverse content. Films with casts that were 21-30% people of color had the highest median global box office returns and highest median return on investment. Meanwhile, movies with casts that were mostly white had the lowest median box office returns, but made up a majority of the 2016 films. People of color also accounted for the majority of ticket sales for five of the top 10 films. TV shows with mostly white casts also tended to have lower ratings than more diverse shows, which were popular among all racial groups. “People want to see themselves represented on the screen,” Hunt said. “It just makes bottom line sense.”