The weight of goals that Sergio Agüero has scored against Arsenal, with Sunday’s strike a fifth in five matches, should have raised Shkodran Mustafi’s awareness of the Argentinian to red alert. Instead, Agüero was allowed to scamper on and score a route one opening goal from Claudio Bravo’s goalkick. It was a hideous lapse in concentration and application from the Germany defender, by no means the first of a type that frequently costs Arsène Wenger. Arsenal have suffered a drought of gold standard defenders since the loss of Sol Campbell and Ashley Cole as long ago as 2006. There have been quality creative players and forwards galore since then but Wenger’s blind spot for defenders and defensive organisation has been a crucial factor in his team’s multiple failures. John Brewin • Match report: Arsenal 0-3 Manchester City• Kompany leads the way for City’s old boys• Guardiola defiant over FA’s yellow ribbon charge It is not only Liverpool’s quality in attack that illustrates Jürgen Klopp has built a team of genuine substance and one that should emerge as Manchester City’s closest challenger. West Ham were awkward opponents on Saturday, the type that has often frustrated Liverpool on home soil in the past, yet the hosts turned a difficult fight into a routine win to record league victories either side of a European fixture. Strength in depth was evident with Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain and James Milner excellent in midfield. The quality of the full-backs, Andrew Robertson and Trent Alexander-Arnold, also underlined both Klopp’s options and his ability to develop players. “It is one of the most important positions in world football now because they are defenders but also attackers,” the Liverpool manager said. “Trent is very offensive orientated, fantastic crosses, good footballer. He has this little bit of street kid. If you see his crosses, they are a little bit dirty. On the other side you have Robbo and Alberto. This is the kind of battle between the players we need.” Andy Hunter • Match report: Liverpool 4-1 West Ham• The Dozen: the weekend’s best top-flight photos Romelu Lukaku played down the significance of the goal afterwards, though he must have been pleased to simultaneously score against his old club and answer the flat-track bully criticism by finally delivering against a side in the top six. Chelsea might have won this game with Lukaku in their ranks, though ideally they need a centre forward quick enough to keep pace with the openings provided byWillian and Eden Hazard. Lukaku is probably not that striker, and nor it seems is Álvaro Morata or Olivier Giroud, neither of whom appear to enjoy Antonio Conte’s full confidence. Willian is in exceptional form at the moment and has scored in his last two matches, but a predatory finisher remains the summer signing Chelsea need if their undoubted creativity is to get the reward it deserves. At Old Trafford, Conte’s team were clearly superior in the first half but appeared to lose confidence in their ability to hit back once Manchester United equalised. Paul Wilson • Match report: Manchester United 2-1 Chelsea• Mourinho delighted by vital victory There was talk before Bournemouth played Newcastle of an opportunity for England hopefuls to step forward. Lewis Cook had been in good form and already appeared in a Gareth Southgate squad. Callum Wilson was in the goals. Jamaal Lascelles had come back from injury firing. Each had their moments in the game. Cook provided a cheeky backheel assist, Wilson forced a save from Martin Dubravka with a lightning volley and Lascelles, at times, was imperious at the back. Each also had their failings: Cook and Wilson were largely anonymous, and Lascelles went absent as the Cherries came back. One more World Cup outsider playing caught the eye: England are not over-endowed with midfield passers but Jonjo Shelvey displayed the full repertoire on Saturday. He also did his fair share of defensive work. At the same time he missed a decisive chance and, seconds later, was found on his haunches as Bournemouth went up the other end to score. A curate’s egg all round then. Paul MacInnes • Match report:Bournemouth 2-2 Newcastle A little luck can go a long way when you are fighting relegation, and the final minute of Southampton’s match at Burnley may have significant ramifications. Of course the referee, Bobby Madley, did not mean to block Ashley Westwood as he looked to receive a pass but the indirect result – an equaliser by Manolo Gabbiadini from the ensuing Saints attack – may be felt more acutely by others at the bottom than a frustrated Sean Dyche. It means Southampton exit the relegation zone in time for Saturday’s huge match against Stoke and lends a rather more positive hue to their preparations. It also eases the pressure on Mauricio Pellegrino, who was nearing dead-man-walking status six weeks ago but has overseen a mini revival – losing once in nine league and FA Cup games. Two of their four wins of their time have been at a desperate West Brom but, as Southampton will agree after their Turf Moor escape, at times like these you take whatever you can get. Nick Ames • Match report: Burnley 1-1 Southampton Mauricio Pochettino took Serge Aurier to one side after this game and suggested the time may have come to go back to basics. The right-back, a £23m signing from Paris Saint-Germain who boasts 45 caps for the Ivory Coast, had been penalised for three foul throws in the same game prompting the manager, albeit with tongue in cheek, to claim the misdemeanours were reflecting poorly on the coaching staff. “I said to him: ‘You are going to get me sacked. It looks like we are so bad we don’t even practise throw-ins,’” said the Argentinian. It was a side issue in a victory secured late which extended Spurs’ unbeaten run to 15 games, but it did seem rather remarkable that a professional footballer of Aurier’s experience seemed unable to return the ball legitimately into play. The defender’s tackle had denied Alexander Sørloth to snuff out Crystal Palace’s best chance. But, while he continues to make such visible basic mistakes, he will struggle to convince. Dominic Fifield • Match report: Crystal Palace 0-1 Tottenham The ability to recover fast from a bad mistake is a necessary quality for an England goalkeeper. Stoke’s Jack Butland showed he has it by making fine saves soon after handing Leicester a goal. One uncharacteristic howler does not change the fact that he should be his country’s No1 at the World Cup. The good news for Butland is that his chances of avoiding relegation before the summer look better than they did before the appointment of Paul Lambert and some long overdue player acquisitions. Left-back Kostas Stafylidis impressed on his first start and the other January arrivals, Moritz Bauer and Badou Ndiaye, also played well. And with 18-year-old Tyrese Campbell making the step up to the senior team and suggesting he has the sharpness that the club’s other strikers lack, Stoke have hope, at least, of getting out of trouble. Paul Doyle • Match report: Leicester 1-1 Stoke Jürgen Locadia has made a good first impression since joining Brighton in January, scoring his second goal in 85 minutes over two appearances in their 4-1 win over Swansea. But the centre-forward will have some work to do before he displaces Glenn Murray, in theory a creaking old-timer at 34 but who scored his ninth and 10th goals of the season. Harry Kane, Jamie Vardy and Raheem Sterling are the only Englishmen to score more Premier League goals this season. “He’s always had that knack and desire to get in goalscoring positions,” said Chris Hughton, but it’s the intangibles that perhaps make Murray valuable. He won the penalty he converted for his first, having lured Mike van der Hoorn into a brainless shove by using his body smartly, as he tends to do in general play. For a team new to the Premier League, those smarts could be vital. Nick Miller • Match report: Brighton 4-1 Swansea Everton’s poor showing at Watford on Saturday underlined the sense that come the end of the season, some big decisions need to be made at Goodison Park – over the ownership structure, the manager and, perhaps most significantly, the playing staff. Quite simply there needs to be a clearout, with Ashley Williams among those who must be cut loose. The former Swansea central defender was at fault for Troy Deeney’s second-half winner at Vicarage Road, backing off the Watford striker and allowing him the time and space to fire a shot at goal. Williams has been lacking, both physically and technically, for several months now. The 33-year-old has had a proud career – not least captaining Wales to the semi-finals of Euro 2016 – but, to put it bluntly, he is now done at the highest level of English football. Sachin Nakrani • Match report: Watford 1-0 Everton Huddersfield Town were gone. David Wagner’s side had lost five league matches on the spin, failed to win in eight and relegation beckoned for a team that had been punching above its weight for so much of the season. That was the theory a few weeks ago, yet Huddersfield have responded superbly with six goals and six points in their past two matches, to put a little daylight between themselves and the bottom three and remind everyone what an excellent job Wagner is doing as manager. On Saturday, Huddersfield return to Wembley to face Tottenham in the stadium where they secured their place in the Premier League via victory in the play-offs nine months ago and, in Wagner’s words, enjoyed “our biggest success so far”. Survival would arguably eclipse that achievement and it is testament to the manager and his players that their destiny is back in their own hands with 10 matches remaining. Stuart James • Match report: West Brom 1-2 Huddersfield• Pardew given another week to halt slump