Last year, the Ringer website analysed what made the Marvel/Netflix shows tick in 2017 and assembled a telling list of narrative traits and conventions. Some were good: the propensity for an outstanding opening sequence, for example. But the list of negatives far outweighed the positives: gratuitous violence; a sad and lonely main character; and an apparent need to link anything and everything Marvel together. From Luke Cage and Iron Fist to The Punisher and Daredevil, there’s a thread of “darkness” that looms large over the Netflix comic canon. It’s not that such an approach to adaptation can’t work – look at The Dark Knight – it’s just when it becomes the only way, things move from dark and brooding to pitch black and boring. The writer Grant Morrison believes things in the world of comic adaptation have become a bit too serious for their own good. “I think everything has its place and has something to say, but I don’t like the stuff that’s too dour,” he says. “I don’t think the world is a particularly miserable place. Even when it’s bad, people tend to make jokes and try to survive – and most people aren’t glum in glum situations. They find humour and some way to survive.” Marvel and Netflix are bringing a new audience to comic adaptations, and shows such as Luke Cage and Jessica Jones have pushed the form forward. But when compared with something such as Preacher – which amps up the comic-book gore and includes plots involving God, Hitler and the pope – it can look a little staid. “The Defenders does have fun bits and almost all involve Krysten Ritter,” wrote GQ’s Joshua Rivera. “As Jessica Jones, she brings a heavy dose of boozy scepticism to the otherwise very dire and dour proceedings, taking the piss out of her extremely serious team-mates.” That jokey, remember-this-is-still-a-comic-book approach is what the best adaptations have taken to heart. Jessica Jones proved that Netflix and Marvel can mix light with dark. The show’s mind control and rape storylines are about as serious as a comic gets. But, as Emily Nussbaum wrote in the New Yorker, “in the world of Marvel Comics, a female antihero – a female anything – is a step forward. But a rape survivor, struggling with PTSD, is a genuine leap.” Despite that serious subject matter, though, Jessica Jones still didn’t take itself that seriously – and that’s the point. Preacher, The Tick and Legion – are all shows that have huge doses of daftness, which sit side-by-side with more serious action. And they thrive because of it. Morrison’s latest adaptation – co-written with Brian Taylor – is Happy! which found a home on Syfy in the US. A play on film noir traits, and featuring a detective aided by an imaginary friend, it fits right into that lineage of comic book shows that aren’t too stuffy for their own good. For Morrison, the rise in comic adaptation is a sign that TV in general is becoming more free to take risks. “Back in the day when I was trying to sell shows in Hollywood and I was trying to come up with original ideas, they were always seen as a little too out there,” he says. “But after Game of Thrones, Twin Peaks or any of these amazing shows that have come out, we’re getting away with a lot more. And that’s probably why people have turned to comics in a much bigger way for material.” Material, he says, that might have been seen as “a bit too much for television” in the past or “too weird or avant garde” is now ripe for adaptation. “In a landscape where you have more than 400 television shows being made [a year], to be original or different requires a bit more effort,” he adds. With Preacher, Jessica Jones, The Tick and Legion all due to return this year, it will be fascinating to see how far Seth Rogen and co are prepared to push things. Let’s hope they keep putting the prurient about the po-faced. The Tick is on Amazon Prime now; Jessica Jones season two is available on Netflix from 8 March 