Wonder Wheel might well be the last Woody Allen movie to get a major release. Allegations of sexual assault by his daughter, Dylan (which Allen has denied), have dismantled his reputation in some quarters, and many actors – including Greta Gerwig, Ellen Page and Rebecca Hall – have said they will never work with him again. Even actors in Wonder Wheel are expressing regrets. At odds with this is the inescapable fact that Allen has given women better roles than pretty much any film-maker of the modern era. Allen’s Oscar record speaks for itself: two best actress winners (Diane Keaton in Annie Hall, Cate Blanchett in Blue Jasmine); four best supporting actresses; and six more nominations for women, not to mention mature, female-centred films such as Hannah and Her Sisters and Interiors. You can see why, until recently, women considered it a great honour to be cast in Allen’s movies. This apparent contradiction takes some unpicking. Allen’s female characters increasingly conform to a very limited palette: the brassy, neurotic broad (Kate Winslet is another one in Wonder Wheel); the hooker with a heart of gold (Mira Sorvino in Mighty Aphrodite, say); and, in some cases, the youthful woman drawn to an older, Allen-like figure - the latter a trope that chimes disturbingly with his real life, including his current marriage to his former wife’s stepdaughter (35 years his junior). But there is another facet to Allen’s record with women: he is the laziest director in town. Allen’s one-movie-a-year work rate is often praised as heroic, but in order to maintain it, he barely directs his movies at all these days. This was revealed, perhaps inadvertently, by the recent book Start to Finish: Woody Allen and the Art of Moviemaking, in which long-time Allen chronicler Eric Lax shadowed him through the making of 2015’s Irrational Man. Allen doesn’t rehearse or prepare. He does the minimum number of takes and camera setups, never does reshoots, and likes to be finished by six every evening. What’s more, he barely gives his actors any instructions at all. No wonder big stars happily work with him: compared to other directors, it’s a holiday. Knowing Allen’s hands-off approach, his films become a litmus test of acting ability. Some actors sink: Ewan McGregor and Colin Farrell in Cassandra’s Dream, for example; or Justin Timberlake in Wonder Wheel. Others swim magnificently. Either way, Allen is like the disinterested pool attendant over in the corner. Hayley Atwell said on working with him: “I didn’t feel directed by him at all. I didn’t have any kind of relationship with him.” And Cate Blanchett on Blue Jasmine: “First day, [Allen] said, ‘It’s awful. You’re awful.’” But Blanchett took matters into her own hands, researched the role and put in the Oscar-winning performance, despite rather than because of the director. That’s what good actors do. We can’t take away all of Allen’s credit as a writer or director, but we should give a lot more to the actors themselves. Often they have been what has held his movies together. Wonder Wheel is in cinemas from 9 March