Sorting books in preparation for our imminent move (across a courtyard), I found a notebook I’d kept during my third year in Rome. It’s a shiny, red A4 pad full of food notes, much of it a sort of diary, in the style – I thought – of Nigel Slater’s Kitchen Diaries, the last food book I read before not-packing and moving to Italy. There are also lists of Roman recipes, Italian words and phrases with circles around them, and stuff stuck in. One of the stuck-in things is a triangular packet of salt from a ferry, another a column that Rowley Leigh wrote for the Financial Times, When in Rome, all about Roman bitter greens. Being a newspaper column, there is no doubt about its age: 24 May 2008. A note in familiar writing reminds me that it was my mum who ripped it out and sent it to me. I can imagine the scene. It is breakfast, Dad is drinking tea and eating toast with so much butter and marmalade that a blob falls off, while Mum is reading the paper with occasional commentary. Suddenly Mum exclaims “Martin, look! Rowley (first-name terms) is in Testaccio (which is where I was living, therefore we could be proprietorial) and eating cicoria.” We are a family who still deal in clippings; the column was ripped out, put in an envelope and sent to me. I remember receiving it, and reading Rowley’s description of Testaccio (feeling somehow cheated that I had not bumped into him, but pleased that he was writing about the place – as if that somehow endorsed my choice – and of making a salad called puntarelle with bitter greens of the same name. I have underlined and annotated the cutting “really weird and uniquely Roman form of chicory called cicoria di catalogna … with elongated dandelion-like leaves and pale white hollow tubes, which are sliced, then served bouncing fresh and raw.” I have translated the words “raw” and “bouncing” as rimbalzanti, and copied something about the ancient Romans putting salt on their greens to lessen their bitterness, which is the origin of the Italian word insalata, salad; also of “salacious” – powerful stuff that it is. Suddenly the red notebook is a sort of time capsule of my history: blobs of marmalade and etymology. It has also made me hungry for bouncing salad. It is now the season for puntarelle, a salad as ordinary and everyday as cabbage in Rome, but no longer the preserve of this city. Puntarelle look like a cross between dark romaine lettuces and jagged-edged spring greens. The icy-white inner tubes are the prize: gently bitter and tasting like the rib of crisp lettuce crossed with celery heart. They are sliced into thin strips, curled in iced water until crisp, dried, then dressed. The standard dressing for puntarelle is a garlic clove pounded with anchovy fillets (I use six for both salt and flavour), mixed with enough olive oil to make a dressing, and vinegar and lemon juice to sharpen. It is a dressing that works just as well with frisee or thinly sliced fennel and radishes. If anchovy dressing is not your thing, both puntarelle and fennel or radish salads love citrus dressing. Lately I have been making Samin Nosrat’s version from her book Salt, Fat, Acid, Heat – a pinch of lemon zest, two tablespoons of lemon or orange juice, a teaspoon of vinegar and five of olive oil, shaken in a jam jar with black pepper, a peeled, smashed garlic clove (which is then removed) and, of course, a good pinch of salt.