You wait for ever for a food-related Brexit analogy to come along, and then you get two at once. In recent days, we’ve seen Sir Martin Donnelly, former Department of International Trade permanent secretary, state that leaving the European customs union would be “like giving up a three-course meal in favour of a packet of crisps” and MP Anna Soubry laying into Jeremy Corbyn in a decidedly lactose-intolerant tweet, describing him as “full fat anti-EU” and offering “a skinny Brexit, a cynical ploy”, when his version of Brexit won’t even be “semi-skimmed”. Both of these analogies are pretty straightforward, although Donnelly, for his part, neglects to state what kind of crisps we would get (one hopes it would be Kettle Chips). Soubry’s dismissal of Corbyn’s weak-looking Brexit plan works relatively well, although “skinny” is not technically a milk, Anna, it’s a type of cafe latte – “skimmed” or “1%” would have been better. Political gastro-dissing on the debate is nothing new. As far back as November 2016, an aide to Tory MP Mark Field was caught with a note reading, “What’s the model? Have your cake and eat it”, in reference to the EU single market. To which “yes” seems to have been the answer all along. In September 2017, a spokesperson for Theresa May stated that: “The contents of the [former] Chancellor’s freezer are not a matter for me.” Mind you, Osborne – who was sacked by May when she took over at No 10 following the Brexit referendum – had reportedly stated he would not rest until the PM was “chopped up in bags in my freezer”, so it might not have been a terrible idea to keep an eye on its contents. Meanwhile, last July, Dominic Cummings, former Vote Leave director, described David Davis, secretary of state for exiting the European Union, as “thick as mince”. Which seems a bit dismissive of a foodstuff as versatile as mince. Throughout it all, the likes of Scotland first minister Nicola Sturgeon, Andrew Davies, leader of the Welsh Conservatives, and shadow chancellor John McDonnell, among many others, have reminded us: “Brexit means breakfast.” The most important meal of a bright new day? Or just two words that sound quite similar? The UK must decide.