Being the newborn child of a celebrity has its ups and downs. You’ve probably got a silly name. On the other hand, you might be getting rocked to sleep by an £800 robotic crib. Such has been the fate of Dimitri Kutcher, the one-year-old second son of actors Mila Kunis and Ashton Kutcher. Interviewed on a recent episode of Dax Shepard’s podcast, Kutcher Sr revealed the couple were “eternally grateful” to the Snoo Smart Sleeper, designed by paediatrician and bestselling parenting author Dr Harvey Karp, which rocks a baby to sleep at different speeds depending on the volume of their wailing. “It’s incredible,” said Kutcher, who claimed Dimitri slept for a full six hours when he was just three days old. But it’s not the only fancy baby gadget on the market – here are some of the most extravagant: The Nursery Works Vetro Crib purports to be “the first 100% recyclable, non-toxic acrylic crib on the market”. It retails for about £3,250, is transparent, so as not to emotionally scar your baby by enclosing them within the wooden bars of, say, Ikea’s perfectly serviceable £59 SNIGLAR cot. Bath It’s never too early for a jacuzzi, or so suggest the Italian creators of the £1,358 Onda Luxy Bubbles Baby Spa Bath, which has an “air massage” system, digital water temperature display and coloured LED lighting designed to set your child’s mood. What’s wrong with the kitchen sink? The £144 BabyNes infant nutrition system is a Nespresso machine for baby formula. It produces “a perfectly measured bottle, at the temperature you select,” in less than a minute, from pods of powder formula mixed for five stages of growth. The Royal Family has been parading its offspring in the Silver Cross Balmoral Pram ever since it was created in 1877. Made in Yorkshire and sold by John Lewis for £1,600, it is twice as dear as some prams from the notoriously costly Bugaboo range, and it doesn’t even fold away. No list of extravagant consumerism would be complete without a contribution from Gwyneth Paltrow, who last year launched Christian Louboutin’s first baby shoe range in collaboration with her website, Goop. The £180 “Loubibabys” come with the designer’s signature red sole, in a traditional “Mary Jane” style.