Boris Johnson has said travelling across the Northern Irish border could be as easy as travelling between London boroughs, comparing a future border checks system to the congestion charge he oversaw as London mayor. The foreign secretary said the UK could instigate an invisible system of checks across the border. His comments come as the EU prepares to publish the legal text on the divorce agreement reached between the UK and EU in December, which covers the border in Ireland as well as the financial settlement and agreement on EU citizens’ rights. “There’s no border between Islington, Camden and Westminster, but when I was mayor of London we anaesthetically and invisibly took hundreds of millions of pounds from people travelling between those two boroughs without any need for border checks,” Johnson told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “There are all sorts of arrangements. I think it’s a very relevant comparison, there is scope for pre-booking, electronic checks.” Inside the EU, both Ireland and Northern Ireland are part of the single market and customs union so share the same regulations and standards, allowing a soft or invisible border between the two. Britain’s exit from the EU – taking Northern Ireland with it – risks a return to a hard or policed border. The only way to avoid this post-Brexit is for regulations on both sides to remain more or less the same in key areas including food, animal welfare, medicines and product safety. Early drafts of the agreement Britain hoped to get signed off on Monday said there would be “no divergence” from EU rules that “support north-south cooperation”, later changed to “continued alignment” in a formulation that appeared to allow for subtle divergences. But it raised new questions about who would oversee it and how disputes might be resolved. It was also clearly still a step too far for the DUP. - Theresa May, the prime minister, spoke to the taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, by phone on Monday evening to discuss the text. Varadkar’s office said he had insisted the legal text spelled out the fallback option for “full regulatory alignment” on either side of the border if no agreement was reached at the end of the negotiations. “The taoiseach also repeated the necessity from the EU side to have the detail of the backstop option of full regulatory alignment spelled out in the draft legal text of the withdrawal agreement,” his office said. “This option would only come into effect if agreement on one of the other options is not reached.” Ireland’s tánaiste, the Irish deputy head of government, Simon Coveney, also held talks with the EU’s chief Brexit negotiator, Michel Barnier, on Monday. Coveney said commitments made in December between the EU and the UK needed to be clearly reflected in new legal text. “EU solidarity remains strong with Ireland’s concerns,” he said after his discussions with Barnier. Johnson said he did not agree regulatory alignment was the solution to the border issue. “We don’t think that is the right way forward. The prime minister said very clearly in December, when the joint report appeared, we want a different solution to the Irish border and we are confident that we can,” he said. “Let me assure you, we think we can have very efficient facilitation systems to make sure there is no need for a hard border, excessive checks at the frontier.” Ireland’s taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, has been much more sceptical than the UK about the potential for avoiding border posts via virtual checks on importers. Whilst agreeing with British ministers and EU negotiators that it is inconceivable for there to be a return to a hard border with the north, Dublin argues that the best way for the UK to achieve this would be by permanently remaining in a customs union with the EU and seeking single market membership like Norway through the European Economic Area. The UK has conceded that some of this will be necessary in its interim phase after Brexit, but hopes clever technological solutions can allow it have looser economic links in the long run. Varadkar is not alone in being sceptical about whether such a cake-and-eat-it customs and trade strategy is viable. Johnson also said the ending the jurisdiction of the European court of justice remained a red line in the negotiations. The EU is reportedly set to demand this week in its draft withdrawal agreement that the UK remains indefinitely subject to the court as the final arbiter of future treaty disputes, according to the Financial Times. The EU will argue that the jurisdiction cannot be time-limited to a two-year transition, because the divorce deal covers payments from the UK to the EU that could continue for more than a decade. Johnson said that was not acceptable. “I say, no that won’t happen, because that’s been expressly ruled out by the British people,” he said. “We can’t remain subject to the ECJ, because we are taking back control of our laws. I think there is a very good deal to be done.”