Emma Hannigan’s Letters to My Daughters has shot to the top of book charts in Ireland, after the author announced that her cancer was now terminal, and her fellow writers launched a campaign to make her final novel a No 1 bestseller. On Wednesday, official book sales monitor Nielsen said that Hannigan’s novel had sold 4,065 copies in the last week, making it Ireland’s bestselling title by some margin, ahead of the second-placed The Year That Changed Everything, by Cathy Kelly, which sold 1,893 copies. Irish writers including Kelly and Patricia Scanlan, who have been part of the campaign to get the novel to the top of the charts, reacted with delight. Omg that’s fantastic news. I was waiting till tomorrow to harass Maria @DubrayBooks for numbers :) and you ladies with books out and promoting @MsEmmaHannigan are incredible. Xxx Hannigan, who turned to novel writing after she was told she had the breast cancer gene BrCa1 in 2005, has published an array of bestselling titles including her debut, Designer Genes, which drew from her own story, and the memoir All to Live For. She had a double mastectomy and both ovaries pre-emptively removed in 2006, but has been diagnosed with and treated for cancer 10 times since then. On 16 February, she announced on her blog that “all avenues have now been exhausted” in her latest round of treatment. “Farewell and thank you, I am taking a bow. Until we meet again may all that is good and decent be yours,” wrote Hannigan, revealing that “faced with very little time can I tell you what screams out at me? Love. Nothing else has much meaning any more … The love in my heart is all that matters now. I am broken-hearted at having to say goodbye, so if it’s all right we’ll say farewell instead.” She added that she had also just published a new novel, Letters to My Daughters. “Usually I’d spend the next few weeks chatting about it and inevitably daring to wonder if you like it. Because this is the time when all authors want to hide in the back of the wardrobe in case nobody likes their new baby! I won’t need to hide, unfortunately, but I sincerely hope you enjoy it.” Her fellow Irish authors, on learning Hannigan’s news, launched a campaign to get the book to the No 1 spot in the bestseller lists. Author Anna McPartlin wrote on Twitter: “Emma can’t promote her work herself so please join us. Buy it. Read it. Promote it”, while Marian Keyes described the novel as “a brilliant page-turner, full of warmth and emotional intelligence”. It is high in the charts of all Ireland’s bookstores, said Hannigan’s agent Sheila Crowley, including chains Dubray Books – which has said it will donate all profits to the Irish Cancer Society – Easons, O’Mahony’s and The Book Centre. Crowley, who has been representing Hannigan for nine years, said that there was “incredible respect and love for her” in the book trade. “We are continuing to embrace everything she has done, not just as an author but as a human being,” she said. “Emma would be having chemotherapy on a Thursday, take a day or two to relax, and then on Monday be baking brownies for a bookshop event ... It’s extraordinary that she found this new career while sitting in a hospital bed.” Hannigan’s publisher Hachette Ireland is rushing through a reprint of the title, which is about three sisters who are devastated when their nanny May, to whom they are closer than their mother, suddenly dies. The novelist has been asking readers to raise money for Breast Cancer Ireland by texting CURE to 50300; outside Ireland, supporters were directed to the charity’s website. On 21 February, Hannigan wrote on Facebook: “I’m quite simply blown away by the kindness being shown. More than that, if my story can help raise much needed funds so that less families have to face losing a loved one, I’d be thrilled. My time is running out, so please help me to help others, if you can.” Crowley told the Guardian that €70,000 (£61,500) had already been raised for the cancer charity. On Monday, Hannigan’s husband, Cian, wrote on her Facebook page that she had asked him to post the following message: “Dearest friends, your support has meant the world to me. Let’s work together to beat 100k in donations.”