A weather front nicknamed the “beast from the east” has hit Europe, bringing snow and plunging temperatures across the continent. Schools have been disrupted across Italy, and Romans woke to the rare sight of the city covered in snow. It was the heaviest snowfall in Rome in six years, and the largest for the end of February in decades. The city, which is not well equipped to deal with snow emergencies, asked other areas to send in snowploughs to help clear roads. Only one runway was operating at Rome’s main airport, Fiumicino. The Italian capital’s second airport, Ciampino, was closed overnight and workers were clearing a runway to allow it to reopen on Monday morning. Italian aviation officials said Ryanair, which uses Ciampino as its Italian hub, had decided to cancel all flights to and from the airport. But they said most of Italy’s other main airports were open despite delays to some flights. The cold weather was expected to continue, with the UK’s Meteorological Office stating that “the high pressure over Scandinavia bringing the cold easterly flow is expected to remain in place for several days”. Italian police asked residents to stay at home if possible, but that did not stop people taking the opportunity to enjoy a snowball fight in St Peter’s Square in the Vatican. On Sunday night, temperatures in Moscow dropped to nearly -20C, the coldest night of the Russian winter so far. Roman Vilfand, the chief of the Russian Meteorological Office, said Muscovites should brace themselves for frosty weather in early March and could only “count on the warmth of the soul”, not higher temperatures outside. France’s national meteorological service Météo-France warned that temperatures would be between 8C and 10C below the average for the season. In Germany, meteorologists reported a record cold for this winter of -27C (-16.6F) on Zugspitze, the country’s highest peak. In the UK, the bookmaker Coral has slashed the odds on March being recorded as the country’s coldest ever month. “It’s going to be a bitterly cold start to March, with the cold showing no signs of letting up and we think there’s now a real possibility of it being a record breaking month for the low temperatures,” said the firm’s Harry Aitkenhead. In Romania, where temperatures plunged to -8C (18F) on Monday, the mayor of Bucharest, Gabriela Firea, announced schools would be closed in the capital for at least two days. Schools were also closed elsewhere in Romania. In Croatia, about 1,000 soldiers joined efforts to clear the snow in the worst-affected areas where more than 1.5 metres of snowfall has been reported. The spell of winter weather has closed schools in the north-west, and heavy vehicles have been banned from all roads leading toward the coast.