A journalist investigating alleged tax fraud involving businessmen connected to Slovakia’s ruling party has been found murdered alongside his girlfriend. Ján Kuciak, 27, and his fiancee, Martina Kušnírová, were discovered shot dead in the home they shared after worried relatives alerted police, saying it had been a week since they had heard from the couple. Slovakia’s most senior police officer, Tibor Gašpar, told reporters the murders “likely have something to do with [Kuciak’s] investigative activities”.The country “has never faced such an unprecedented attack on a journalist,” he said. The two bodies were found on Sunday evening in the town of Vel’ka Mača, east of the capital, Bratislava. Gašpar said the reporter was shot in the chest and Kušnírová in the head. He said they were thought to have been killed between Thursday and Sunday. Kuciak was working for Aktuality.sk news website, where he focused mainly on tax evasion stories. His last piece was published on 9 February and covered a suspected tax fraud connected to a luxury apartment complex in Bratislava known as the Five Star Residence. The report identified suspicious transactions among five companies. Kuciak had been covering the story for some time. In October 2017 he wrote on his Facebook page that he had reported a threatening phone call to the general prosecutor’s office. “It has been 44 days since I filed a criminal complaint … for the threats. And the case probably does not even have a particular cop.” Gašpar said everyone who had been in touch with the journalist would be investigated Police would provide protection for an unspecified number of other reporters from Aktuality, he said, but gave no details of the measures to be taken. The suspected use of the complex of apartments to commit tax fraud prompted thousands of protesters to take to the streets last year calling for the resignation of the interior minister, Robert Kaliňak, a close ally of the prime minister, Robert Fico, over his business dealings with its developer, Ladislav Bašternák. Bašternák has been investigated by the police over possible tax fraud. Kaliňak, who is number two in Fico’s Smer party, which leads Slovakia’s coalition government, is said to have a 17% stake in the developer’s companies. Both men have denied any wrongdoing.