Formula One lost a day of testing here because of the cold weather that has engulfed Europe. With only eight practice days to shake down the cars and for drivers to acclimatise to their new rides before the first round in Australia on 25 March, it is time that will be sorely missed and has led to further calls for testing to be moved out of Europe, potentially to Bahrain, which last hosted it in 2014. Running was limited on Tuesday because of the low temperatures and on Wednesday several inches of snow had carpeted the Circuit de Catalunya. By the afternoon it had been replaced by persistent rain which, combined with the track temperature barely reaching 5C, meant the teams opted not to go out on track for anything but brief sighting laps. The Red Bull team principal, Christian Horner, believed it was time lost they could ill afford. “Sitting here in the snow? Well, anywhere would be better,” he said. “We came here for cost reasons. It’s cheaper than flying all the kit and people out to Bahrain but it actually ends up costing you money by not running in terms of the lack of development and opportunities to fix faults. “If there is an opportunity to go to a warmer climate next year then we would take it. It’s a trade-off in terms of the lack of running we have had this week and therefore the ability to fix problems that might bite you in the arse come race one, two and three. There are only eight days – it is such a premium. Four days per driver and we are down to three and a half each now. There is no other sport where you would have so few days of practice before going into a major tournament.” Consideration is being given to adding a day to next week’s second test, starting it on Monday rather than Tuesday but it would require the agreement of all 10 teams to do so. Switching winter testing to Bahrain would, however, be of considerable import to the majority of teams who are on tight budgets. The Haas team principal, Gunther Steiner, has said that beyond the additional cost of shipping equipment to Bahrain, it would also impose a further logistical expense. Teams can transport new parts for testing to Barcelona as the week progresses by road, whereas they would have to be flown in to Bahrain. “You guys have no idea how much stuff is coming here every day for the car. It’s brutal,” he said. With no driving to be done Valtteri Bottas, who has done most of the running in the Mercedes thus far, with Lewis Hamilton having only driven once in cold conditions on Monday afternoon, has said he has no intention of playing mind games with his team-mate. Bottas was comprehensively outraced by Hamilton last year, although the Finn did win two races. He has said he feels more comfortable in the car this year and the friendly relationship he established with Hamilton remains strong. “I just want to win as many races as I can and that way the championship. I don’t need to change anything else that I do,” he said. “I’m not going to start, for example, playing any mental games or anything in the team, because I think like this it works well. It is up to me how I perform on track, and I’ll decide if I’ll show muscle when it’s needed. I’m not going to start wasting my energy playing any games. If I perform on the level that I aim to perform I would like to see more on track battles with Lewis.”