Jane Harper’s award-winning debut, The Dry, was set during a hideous drought, as federal agent Aaron Falk investigated the death of his childhood best friend in a remote country village. Her second, Force of Nature, takes place deep in the Australian bush, as five women are sent on a corporate bonding retreat, which sees them trekking for days down cold, rainy, remote trails. We know from the start that one of the women, Alice Russell, will not come back. Harper’s story flits between past and present. As the fragile trappings of civilisation fall away, and as the women lose their path and run out of food, we learn that Alice has been a whistleblower in a case of corporate crime being investigated by agent Falk. Alice, writes Harper, “felt the faintest stirrings in the atmosphere. Something base and elemental and almost primitive, where a bit of stale bread and cheese became a prize worth fighting for … the word she’d been searching for had formed on the tip of her tongue, so real she could almost taste its residue. Feral.” The book is gratifyingly chilling, for the human horrors of the story but even more so for the women-against-nature survival battle, which Harper charts so unnervingly. Mick Herron’s London Rules opens with a scene of slaughter in a quiet village. “From the back of their jeep the men fetched weapons, sleek and black and awful.” The killers are in military gear, their jeep is sand-coloured, the sun is “as white as the locals had known it”. All the breadcrumbs scattered by Herron lead the reader to place the terrorist attack in some faraway, heat-baked country. And then as it ends, he delivers the punchline: the village lies in the “stunned Derbyshire hills”. London Rules is the fifth novel to feature Herron’s chain-smoking, corpulent, flatulent failed spy Jackson Lamb and his team of “slow horses” at Slough House. Set just after the Brexit vote, it sees the UK rocked by a series of bizarre terror attacks, as Dennis and Dodie Gimball – he the MP who orchestrated the referendum, she his tabloid columnist wife – prepare to reveal rabble-rousing secrets about a Muslim politician who is set to be elected mayor of the West Midlands. “Like other newspaper columnists, like other politicians, they genuinely thought themselves beloved,” writes Herron, somewhat pointedly. Meanwhile, there’s been an attempt on the life of the execrable Slough House recruit Roddy Ho, and Lamb is forced to heave himself into action before things turn into, as one of his crew puts it, an “omnifuckingshambles”. It is, as ever, a joy to return to this world: there is a warm, wise, amused depth to Herron’s writing, which shines a stark light on the atrocities he describes. He’s also horribly funny. The institution of marriage is dealt another blow by the domestic thriller market, this time in the shape of Alafair Burke’s sleek, intricately plotted The Wife. At first Angela is willing to believe her husband, Jason Powell – a celebrity bestselling academic – when he tells her that accusations of sexual harassment made against him by an intern are a lie. But when the press gets hold of the story and a second woman comes forward with an even more troubling accusation, her belief starts to waver. Angela, though, has a past of her own that she doesn’t want to come to light – her own story of abuse. “When you hear about a missing kid, or a murdered woman, you scour the article for clues. Not clues about the perpetrator. No, we search for clues about what makes that woman or child different from the women and children we know and love.” The narrative alternates between Angela’s perspective and that of Detective Corrine Duncan, who is investigating the allegations, as Burke skilfully and deceptively edges her way towards the truth. • To order Force of Nature, London Rules or The Wife for £11.04 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99