A few months ago our clothes dryer stopped working. We didn’t use it very much but they’re handy to have if the domestic engineering has gone awry and you need to dry some socks or school uniforms in a hurry. The problem with the dryer was that the door wouldn’t close properly. My first instinct was to fix it but I could only get it to work if I propped against it an extremely heavy object like a bag of soil. Clearly not a long-term solution – I’ll just have to get a new one, I thought. But then a few days later I spotted a dryer that had been left outside someone’s house for the council to pick-up. I inspected it and it looked OK. It still had the cable and plug, which was promising, and it didn’t look broken ... So, I stuck it in the car and took it home. When I plugged it in, of course, it was dead. But a quick google of the model number revealed all manner of advice. I could see straight away just from the search results that this particular model has a recurring problem with the drive belt coming off. All I had to do, the chat boards told me, was unscrew a panel on the back and clip the belt back on. Pretty straightforward. And it worked. Even though the belt still occasionally comes off, it’s very satisfying to see it functioning. Buoyed by this triumph, I doubled down when I found a discarded microwave. The one in the kitchen was on the blink so I thought it might come in handy. It was clean and worked perfectly well. Not long afterwards, ours gave up the ghost for good so the “new” one was duly installed. I know I’m not the only person who finds pleasure in salvaging such things. Soon after moving into our house, we decided that an old wardrobe – itself rescued from the streets of London – was surplus to requirements and it was put out in the lane. It was gone the next morning. A few days later, our neighbour opened up his garage and I thought I spotted a familiar-looking piece of furniture: there was our old wardrobe in the corner of his garage. We have since teamed up on a salvaging project after his wife spotted an old table football set in the street when she was walking the dog late one Sunday night. We carried it back and after a bit of tightening up here, and a bit of WD40 there, you can have a decent game. Very satisfying. It’s not the money saved that I find so satisfying so much as the avoidance of waste. Waste has always bothered me, possibly a deep-seated result of having parents who grew up in the 1930s Depression. My dad was always fiddling about with things to fix them and so if he were alive today he would be amazed at what people chuck out. He’d barely be able to get down the street without collecting something because, in these times of super-abundance, the chucker-outers outnumber the salvagers. What’s the best household item you’ve ever found or recycled? Tell us in the comments below.