Members of the Broward County Police Benevolent Association handed carnations to students as they entered Marjory Stoneman Douglas high school on Wednesday, two weeks after a former student gunned down 17 people inside the freshman building. For student Madison Geller, Wednesday offered an opportunity to get back into a routine, in spite of her fears. “When I walk in there, I’m going to replay the whole thing in my head. But we have to come here and try to learn,” the high school junior said. “This week we will try to be comfortable and get back into the same routine.” Angelyse Perez, a senior, said returning offers a chance for everyone to “get through this and be together”. “But I’m graduating,” she said. “I just want to get out of here.” On 14 February an expelled classmate with an AR-15 killed 17 people in a massacre that has profoundly altered the lives of the survivors. A long line of cars bringing people back to the school in Parkland, Florida, was guided by police as dozens of television trucks and vehicles camp out nearby. Only students, parents and staff are being allowed through a security cordon. The main entrance is covered with a sign saying “Welcome Back Eagles.” The walkway leading onto the campus of Marjory Stoneman Douglas high school was lined with flowers and photographs, memorials to the 17 students and teachers killed. Alexis Grogan, a 15-year-old sophomore, was among those planning to wear maroon, a Stoneman Douglas color, among other things honoring those who died. She said she was nervous after losing her friend Luke Hoyer, who sat two seats behind her in Spanish. Still, she said support from her fellow students and their fight to strengthen gun control laws was keeping her strong. Relatives of the victims kept up pressure on Tuesday in Florida’s capital with emotional testimony during a legislative hearing to discuss raising the age limit to buy long guns from 18 to 21. The bill also would create a program that allows teachers who receive law-enforcement training and are deputized by the local sheriff’s office to carry concealed weapons in the classroom, if also approved by the school district. The school’s superintendent has spoken out firmly against that measure. Nikolas Cruz, 19, has been charged with 17 counts of premeditated murder.