An emotional Ben Stokes spoke of his “relief” and “happiness” after leading England to victory in the second ODI against New Zealand. A five-month absence brought about by his arrest on the morning of 25 September has seen the allrounder miss seven ODIs, four T20Is and an Ashes series. A star turn in his second match back with the national side has underlined Stokes’ worth as a player but also what playing for England means to him: “Walking off tonight made me understand how much of a privilege it is to represent your country.” This was Stokes fourth ODI man-of-the-match award in an all-action display of 63 not out with the bat, two for 42 with ball and two run outs in the field. New Zealand were restricted to 223 and their target picked off by six wickets and with 12.1 overs still to go. Facing the press for the first time since the incident on a night out in Bristol, the 26-year-old, who notched his 11th ODI half-century, spoke openly of an exasperating few months, watching from afar as England lost 4-0 to Australia to relinquish the Ashes. The England and Wales Cricket Board lifted a suspension on Stokes in mid-January after he was charged with affray following a police investigation but he missed the subsequent one-day series victory over Australia. The 26-year-old eventually joined his team-mates in Hamilton on 15 February after indicating in court that he would plead not guilty to the charge, though he played no part in the Trans-Tasman T20 Tri-Series. “It was frustrating to watch the Ashes,” he said. “I went through all the emotions as I would have done playing but there’s not a lot I can change about that now. I’ve been following all the cricket the lads have been playing but what I have to do now is focus on going forward. I want to contribute every time I play for England.” He did not doubt whether he would play a part this winter, throwing himself into Durham’s pre-season programme along with his own personal training sessions. He even forced his body clock onto Australia time for the start of the Ashes, just in case. “That was the focus [to play again this winter],” said Stokes. “I’ve been working hard at home making sure that when the opportunity came again I wasn’t going to let anyone down. When I got the nod I wanted to expect to be asked to participate fully rather than be eased back into the team. I wouldn’t expect anything less of myself and I don’t think Morgy [Eoin Morgan] would expect anything less of me either.” While Stokes faces trial for affray, he is not required at the first hearing on 12 March which sits between this series and the forthcoming Tests against New Zealand. The pleasure of leading his side to victory here has underlined his desire to crack on with his career. “It was very satisfying for me,” Stokes said. “I was quite emotional walking off there at the end. It was a different feeling to what it is normally. “There was relief, happiness and obviously it’s been a long time. Hopefully now this is a stepping stone to trying to keep on helping England win games. We’ve got a massive summer ahead and the World Cup coming up as well so hopefully, this is just the start of it.” England, as they did after the first ODI, will check on how Stokes pulls up, wary of his workloads after time away. He admitted to a bit of stiffness when returning for a second spell in this second ODI. “There’s nothing like match overs. You try to replicate everything you can in training but it’s that extra adrenalin you get playing and that extra intensity does have an effect on the body when you haven’t had it for a while.”