Russian President Vladimir Putin has ordered the implementation of a daily ceasefire in Syria’s besieged rebel-held enclave of eastern eastern Ghouta, according to the country’s defence minister. Sergei Shoigu said in a statement on Monday that a ceasefire will begin on Tuesday in the Damascus, and will take place from 9 am until 2 pm every day. He also said Russia will help set an evacuation route for civilians in the area, and that details would be released soon. The announcement came after at least 29 people were killed in eastern Ghouta, despite the UN security council resolution passed on Saturday, which demanded an end to the fighting. Russia is a key ally of Syrian president Bashar al-Assad, whose regime forces continued to defy international pleas for a ceasefire on Monday. Local doctors and monitors said a suspected chlorine attack in the rebel-held area outside Damascus also left 18 people injured on Sunday evening, as residents condemned the international community’s inability to put an end to the fighting. “I am embarrassed for the UN security council,” said Ghanem Tayara, the chairman of the Union of Medical Care and Relief Organisations (UOSSM), which helps run dozens of hospitals in Syria. “The mightiest nations on the planet cannot enforce the most basic standards of human rights and decency.” The fresh death toll in eastern Ghouta brought the week-long carnage in the enclave to more than 500 killed in airstrikes and shelling by forces loyal to Assad. A UN security council resolution was unanimously approved on Saturday calling for a month-long ceasefire “without delay”, but the killing has continued, with both the Assad regime and its Iranian allies declaring they would continue military operations to defeat “terrorists”. The violence highlights the Syrian government’s desire, alongside its allies in Moscow and Tehran, to score a military victory in the area, which has been under a tightening siege for nearly a year and is strategically significant due to its proximity to the capital, Damascus. It has also laid bare the inability of the UN to enforce demands for a ceasefire or the lifting of sieges. Reports of an attack using chlorine, which has been used frequently in the past by the Assad regime, would represent a further escalation in the violence if confirmed. Doctors said they treated patients in the town of Shifounieh, in eastern Ghouta, after a bombing. They exhibited symptoms consistent with exposure to chlorine, including respiratory problems, inflammation in the eyes and mucous membranes, as well as cases of hysteria and dizziness, they said. A video released by the Syrian American Medical Society, which also helps run hospitals in opposition-held parts of Syria, showed children and first responders doused with water and breathing through oxygen masks. “The most heartbreaking thing in the hospitals is the children and infants who are brought into the hospital from under the rubble and their entire family has been killed, mother, father and siblings,” said one doctor in Ghouta. “Where do we go with this child? Children whose age is in the single digits who have known nothing except fear and terror and death and shelling. “The humanitarian organisations have failed. I wonder if we can appeal to the animal rights organisations,” he added. The watered-down resolution passed by the security council does not have a timeframe, though it calls for a ceasefire “without delay” and the lifting of sieges as well as the delivery of humanitarian aid. Its allowance for continued military operations against terrorist groups is likely to allow the Assad regime and its allies to continue bombarding eastern Ghouta, as the regime groups all opposition under the terrorist label. “After the deal, new weapons have been used that were not used before,” said a rescue worker in the enclave. “We are talking now about a green light for the Syrian regime and his Russian allies to destroy this society before the eyes of everyone. I cannot say anything except damn the whole world, and damn everything.” On Monday, French President Emmanuel Macron told his Turkish counterpart Recep Tayyip Erdogan that the proposed UN ceasefire for Syria must be applied across the country, including in Afrin where Turkey is waging an offensive against a Kurdish militia. During a telephone call between the two leaders, Macron said the 30-day ceasefire “involved all Syrian territory, including in Afrin, and must be put into effect everywhere and by everyone without delay”, the French presidency said. He added that Turkey, Russia and Iran, the three countries overseeing talks in Astana aimed at ending the nearly seven-year civil war, “have a direct responsibility in this regard that must be applied on the ground”. Ankara last month launched an offensive against the Kurdish People’s Protection Units (YPG) militia in Afrin in northern Syria. On Sunday the Turkish government said the proposed UN ceasefire would not affect its operation, which it claims is aimed at fighting “terrorist organisations that threaten the territorial integrity and political unity of Syria”. Turkey sees the YPG as the Syrian branch of the Kurdistan Workers’ Party (PKK), which for more than three decades has waged an insurgency against the Turkish state and is banned by Turkey, the US and the European Union as a terror group. But the offensive has raised tensions with Washington, which works closely with the YPG in the fight against jihadists in Syria. Agence France-Presse contributed to this report