“There are so many young introverts who feel that there is something profoundly wrong with them. And that’s incredibly disabling,” says Susan Cain, author of Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can’t Stop Talking. Cain has helped to popularise a clearer understanding of what it means to be introverted. Her TED talk on the subject has clocked up almost 7.5m YouTube views and her book brought together a raft of research on introversion. The most simple takeaway is this: introverts take their energy from alone time while extroverts are energised from being around others. Introversion is separate from shyness or reserve. Quiet, which has become a bestseller, has put a dent in the cultural bias towards extroverts – a bias that is sometimes thought to be most pronounced in, although not limited to, western societies. Cain challenges perceptions such as those in the Harvard Business Review in 2006, which revealed that 65% of senior corporate executives surveyed viewed introversion as a barrier to leadership. Such perceptions can lead to non-extroverts being undervalued. For example, a Sutton Trust analysis of BBC data found that highly extroverted people had a 25% chance of being in a higher-earning job. While introverts may need to adapt to a leadership position, Cain explains, they are no less capable of succeeding. Jonny Pryn is an introvert who has successfully made this adjustment. He is the co-founder of language learning startup One Third Stories, which makes and sells children’s story books that begin in English and end in other languages. The business has grown from just Pryn and his business partner Alex Somervell to a team of five. “I’ve found managing my time really carefully allows me to perform when I’m out in front of people and then again when I need to be by myself and more creative,” Pryn says. “If I’m not spending a certain amount of time by myself, I feel absolutely drained.” Pryn will occasionally take a break from the office buzz and work in a nearby cafe. Pryn and Somervell recently appeared on Dragons’ Den, turning down an offer of £60,000 for a 20% stake in the business (they have since received £310,000 in investment from elsewhere). Pryn was taken aback when he caught the show’s preview. “I saw myself absolutely strutting into the Den. At the time, I was trying to portray a real confidence.” He may have ramped it up for the cameras, but Pryn says putting on a bolder persona during presentations usually works well. Adam Grant, author and professor of management at the Wharton School at the University of Pennsylvania, would support Pryn’s approach. “Your personality is a tendency that is in part biological, in part learned,” he says. “But we can choose to override that tendency when the time is right, and I think that is something we all need to get comfortable doing.” When managing proactive employees, introverts were the more effective leaders Leadership is one focus of Grant’s research. In a 2010 study, Grant, and co-researchers, set out to test a theory that, when managing proactive employees, introverts were the more effective leaders. The results suggested their theory to be correct. Extroverted leaders were less receptive to proactive followers, while introverted leaders listened to followers and made them feel valued, which in turn encouraged them to work hard. Tamara Rajah, who considers herself an introvert, agrees with that assessment. “I really hate shutting down people’s opinions, enthusiasm and ideas,” she says. Rajah is the founder and CEO of Live Better With, a business with 17 staff that sells non-medical products to ease the symptoms of long-term health conditions, primarily cancer. Rajah’s understanding of what it is like to be an introvert also benefits more introspective members of her team. “[Extroverts] gets loads of energy from on the spot, back and forth thinking. With introverts, I’d take care to tell them beforehand what we’re going to be discussing, so they can think in advance.” Rajah has also learned to manage her own introvert tendencies. She prepares carefully for meetings, but if questions come up that she doesn’t feel fully equipped to answer, she makes a point of saying that she’s noted them down and will follow up afterwards. Another successful introverted leader is Manchester-based Prof Vikas Shah, who was recently awarded an MBE for services to business and the economy. Shah is CEO of textile and commodities trading business Swiscot Group. In situations that might be uncomfortable for introverts, such as networking events, Shah makes a plan. He will mingle a little at the beginning, stay for the talk, then excuse himself. “You don’t have to be the last person standing. Allowing that flexibility makes a big difference to how you cope.” The success of some introverted entrepreneurs and heads of business does not, of course, prove that extroverts can’t be great leaders. “[Leadership] is about having the flexibility to bring the strengths of introversion and extroversion to the table,” says Grant, “so to know when to listen, to know when to give direction, to know when to actually respond to suggestions that come from below. I think the best leaders end up operating like ambiverts.” For non-extroverts who strive to take on a leadership position, Cain has advice. As introverts are considered to be less ambitious, they need to find ways to get people to see them as leaders, such as snapping up public speaking opportunities. “Just the sheer act of being in front of a group can change people’s perceptions of you, and have them start thinking of you as a leader.” Sign up to the regular Guardian B2B email here for more insight and advice direct to your inbox.