Nobody knows who’ll win the best picture Oscar. But we can apply science to the matter. For weeks, studios have been filling the trade journals with “for your consideration” adverts. The Oscars voters have seen these over and over again, and they may ultimately colour their decisions. So what can we suspect about the fate of each nominee from these ads? Let’s find out … An admission of defeat. Call Me By Your Name seems resigned to losing best picture, so has gone all out for best adapted screenplay. The ad tells you how many awards the screenplay has already won, a snatch of the film’s dialogue (in the typewriter font Courier, because it means business) and a photograph of James Ivory. An actual photo of a screenwriter in an advert. Look at that adorable face. Imagine how heartbroken it’ll be if he loses, you animals. Now this is just classy. No stills from the movie. No vulgar quotes telling us how good the film is. Nothing whatsoever about Daniel Day-Lewis’s retirement. Just a simple painting of a gown and an elaborately worded notice: “Focus Features thanks the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences and proudly congratulates our Oscar nominees.” Sir, you flatter us. This would have been a slam-dunk if only the Oscars had a sexiest director category. Look at Christopher Nolan here, splashing around in a wetsuit like some kind of hunk. That perfect hair. That mysterious stubble. Ostensibly the message is: “Behold the struggles Nolan endured to achieve perfection.” Really, though, it’s saying: “Your next James Bond is right here, guys.” Very cleverly designed. On the left, an ensemble shot of The Post’s extraordinarily talented cast. On the right, an image of Tom Hanks and Meryl Streep climbing a long and steep staircase, symbolising the chances that anyone who has had anything to do with this film will actually win anything on Sunday. Good lord, this is terrible. If the 2018 Oscars are a breakthrough moment, with black and female directors finally getting their seat at the table after decades of being ignored, then leading an advert for a middlebrow film about an old white man with the quote “The movie we need right now” seems especially shortsighted. If only they’d gone with my choice of: “The movie your dad clapped at in the cinema, the mad old bigot.” The horrible truth is, not every Oscars voter has seen every film. This poster seems to acknowledge this, offering a shot of a critical plot moment. Now, instead of saying: “Oh, this is that film about the billboards,” clueless voters can impress their friends by saying: “Oh, this is that film about the billboards that burn down at some point.” Perhaps they’ll reward this helping hand with a vote. All right, Lady Bird, we get it, you had some good reviews. But show a little restraint; you don’t have to reprint all of them in their entirety. Look at AO Scott’s review. It’s seven sentences long. Who’s got time to read seven whole sentences, when they could be watching a cat fall into a toilet on YouTube? Next time, just show us some star ratings or something, brainiac. A great ad. An iconic image surrounded by quotes that run the gamut from “This film is well made” to “This is the film you should vote for if you want to look socially aware.” There’s a comparison to Hitchcock and the phrase “old-school movie-making” to reinforce the film’s credentials as a film and not merely a talking point. Based on ads alone, I’d vote for Get Out. What the hell is this? This is less a for-your-consideration ad and more a series of the most berserk inspirational Instagram quote-posts you’ve ever seen. “EMBRACE LIFE,” it says, next to a deliberately dowdy shot of a tatty living room. “EMBRACE STRENGTH,” it says, next to a thumpingly overdone shot of interracial friendship. “EMBRACE EACH OTHER,” it says next to a shot of a woman dancing with a slimy fish monster she’s about to bone. That’s it. No glowing review quotes. No attempt to make the movie seem politically relevant. Just a handful of lazy slogans. My only assumption is that The Shape of Water has unlocked a cutting-edge new marketing strategy that operates on a level unfathomable to mere mortals. And for this reason, I am certain that it’ll win.