Eighteen divers have entered a cave in northern Thailand in an attempt to retrieve 12 boys and their football coach who have been stranded in a cave for the past two weeks. The rescue operation started about 10am local time and the soonest any boy would be freed was 9pm (3pm BST), said Narongsak Osatanakorn, the governor of Chiang Rai province. The boys would be removed gradually with each accompanied by two divers in an operation that could continue until at least Monday. “Today we are most ready,” Osatanakorn told a press briefing. “Today is D-Day.” The team includes 13 international divers and five Thai navy Seals. “We can say they are all international all-stars involved in this diving operation and we selected five of our best who can work with them,” he said. An Australian doctor with extensive cave-diving experience went into the chamber on Sunday, examined the boys and approved them for the operation, authorities said. The boys and their families had been informed. “Their health and their minds are ready and they all have knowledge of the mission,” Osatanakorn said. “They’re ready to go out.” He said the 1.5km path from the cave entrance to the “third chamber” that has been a staging ground for the operation was not completely dry but mostly walkable. “Yesterday the water levels were the lowest they had been,” Osatanakorn said. “Although there are some slightly difficult parts [where] we have to bend or crawl, we can say that we can just walk through it.” He would not say whether the boys would need to dive at all in the 1.7km journey from where they are sheltering to the third chamber. “What I can tell you is that there are many parts that they can walk,” he said. Water levels had dropped 30cm since Saturday and “we have reached peak readiness”, he said. “The meaning of readiness is ... perfect weather, water and the kids readiness, physical and mental.” A return journey from the boys’ chamber to the exit takes about 11 hours and the governor said the entire mission could take at least two days. “There’s no time limit for the operation,” he said. “It depends on the weather. It depends on the water levels. If something changes we’ll stop. But I expect the operation to finish in the next couple of days.” Helicopters are stationed around the cave along with more than a dozen ambulances. Under plans devised earlier this week, each boy will be accompanied on the journey to the hospital by a parent and a mental health worker. Authorities had said on Saturday they had a three- to four-day window to remove the boys before monsoon rain risked sealing them off until as late as January. But heavy rain hit the site overnight and on Sunday morning media was cleared from the area surrounding the cave, triggering speculation the operation had commenced. Authorities said the rainwater overnight was less than expected and did not substantially alter water levels, which have fallen at least 70cm this week due to hundreds of pumps operating inside the cave. “We took this chance as our D-Day as it is the day that we are very ready,” Osatanakorn said. “We may lose this opportunity, this window to launch the mission. That’s why we decided to do it at 10am today.” The boys entered the cave with their football coach on 23 June and became trapped when water inside rose suddenly. They were found on Monday and the Thai military, aided by international experts, have been working on plans to free them from the cave complex has been going on ever since. Rescuers need to bring them out before the monsoon rains hit, pushing water levels inside the cave up again and trapping them inside for at least four months.