An independent inquiry into a top grammar school, which was revealed by a Guardian investigation to be forcing out pupils who were unlikely to get top grades at A-level, has delivered a damning report accusing the school of illegally treating its students as “collateral damage” in the pursuit of its own interests. The 150-page report into events last summer at St Olave’s, a selective boys school in Orpington, south-east London, called for a root and branch makeover at the school after a council investigation exposed multiple cases of maladministration and scenes of distressed pupils contemplating suicide after being pushed out of the school midway through the sixth form. One member of staff told the inquiry that a student was so fearful of telling his parents that he could not continue at St Olave’s “that he might as well kill himself” while another on the phone to his parents said “they just want to be rid of me, they just want me gone”. Other pupils in extremely vulnerable situations were told no exceptions could be made to the strict academic requirement of three Bs to progress into the final year of sixth form. In one case a student who scored all As and A*s at GCSEs and was heading for medical school was refused any leniency despite being diagnosed with depression triggered by a family suicide. The report, commissioned by Bromley council, challenged the pursuit of academic excellence at all costs. “A school has the responsibility to do its best by all of the pupils,” the report said, adding that by excluding students, the school had put the institution above the pupils. “Parents of the pupils affected were right to say their children were being treated as collateral damage. It should not have happened.” The findings of the report by leading educationalist Christine Whatford were based on exhaustive interviews with more than 130 people involved with St Olave’s, including the headteacher, pupils, parents and governors. The report concludes that Bromley council and the Diocese of Rochester should apologise to the parents affected, and that the school should formally scrap its policy of restricting access to the upper sixth form. Paul Wright, who took over as chair of governors at St Olave’s after the scandal broke, said the governing body fully accepted the findings and recommendations of the report.“We offer our gratitude to parents, students and staff, for their support, input and patience during this time, without which, we would not have been able to take the many positive steps forward that we have already been able to make,” Wright said. The scandal first erupted last summer when parents complained to the Guardian that their teenage sons had been left in tears after being told their places for year 13 – the final year of sixth form – had been withdrawn because they had failed to get top grades during end-of-year exams. A total of 16 boys were pushed out at the end of year 12, leaving them struggling to find places elsewhere to finish their two-year course. Other students were told they would only be allowed to continue at St Olave’s on a discretionary basis. Parents launched legal action on the grounds that the exclusions were illegal and within days of the Guardian revelations the school reversed the policy. Head teacher Aydin Önaç resigned last November after being suspended a month earlier as the council investigation got under way. The report queried Önaç’s claims that he did not know the exclusions were potentially illegal. “It is clear that no one told the head that what he was doing was illegal.” the report states. “It is less clear why they didn’t. The admissions code and the off-rolling rules are not obscure pieces of legislation.” A-level results went up during his seven-year headship, making it one of the most successful state schools in the country. But the exclusions policy left parents complaining that the school had become an “exam factory” and that pastoral care was inadequate. Önaç, who was previously a headteacher at Fortismere, a popular comprehensive in north London, gained notoriety after he joined St Olave’s in 2010 when he ate a baked spider in assembly to raise money for the school. The Guardian has attempted to contact him for a response to the report. The investigation also criticised the school’s leadership for the claims of financial “doom and gloom” to justify cutting staff, cancelling courses and putting off urgent repairs. In fact, the school recorded annual surpluses and built up £2m in unrestricted funds in its bank accounts. Parents were urged to donate £50 a month to the school by direct debit. The school also raised £35,000 a year in selling mock entrance tests to the families of applicants to the grammar school, and retained hardship funds for disadvantaged pupils, worth more than £50,000 that went unspent. The report also recommends that a new complaints and whistleblowing procedure should be created, while private companies established under Önaç, as part of a grandiose scheme to open a string of private schools in China, should be closed. Bromley council accepted the recommendations and welcomed changes at the school, which would focus on the individual development of pupils in a highly competitive grammar school setting. Cllr Peter Fortune said: “It is hoped a line can now be drawn under the events of the past few years and the school and its pupils are allowed to continue to build a fulfilling environment in which pupils are encouraged to develop, thrive and achieve academic success.”