Everyone in the world has or has had one, yet our conception of what it is to be a mother is fatally flawed, argues Jacqueline Rose. The consequences of our devotion to that skewed vision are dire, ranging from a systemic hatred of single mothers, punished for perceived sexual and social irresponsibility, to an expectation of maternal perfection and joyfulness at damaging odds with the messy reality of birthing and raising children. Her book, Mothers: An Essay on Love and Cruelty, is, she tells me as we sit at the kitchen table of her north London flat, an attempt “to raise the ante and have a truer, more virulently exhilarating and disturbing account of motherhood in our general culture. That’s what the book’s trying to do; it’s trying to say, can we put this out there?” It’s not all that Rose has put out there; this week, perhaps the most surprising Man Booker prize longlist ever has been published, and Rose is one of the judges. There are few big names, plenty of newcomers, and of the 13 books, one is a graphic novel and one a thriller. “In each case it felt as if our chosen novels were alerting us to something very hard to take on board but that we urgently needed to think about.” “In such dire times, we urgently need the dissident, awkward, creative, voice of fiction,” Rose says. It’s not hard to detect her own interests in the list – exemplified in a lifetime of work that encompasses feminism, psychoanalysis, politics and literature but, she says of the judging process, “I found myself truly stretched.” In Mothers, the “this” that she wants to get “out there” is multiple, complex, various. Even when Rose addresses apparently concrete social issues – such as the treatment of “maternity tourists” by the rightwing press, or the incidence of depression among working-class black women in post-apartheid South Africa – she is doing so in the knowledge that “behind any individual life of a mother, there are whole histories pressing on who she is and who she’s allowed to be”. In a profoundly moving final chapter, Rose writes about her maternal grandmother, whose family died in Chelmno concentration camp during the second world war, and the effect that it had on Rose’s own mother, who was “married off” when she was only 20 in order to fulfil her parents’ desire for their children’s settlement and security. Of her childhood – she was born and grew up in London – Rose writes: “Every morning before we went to school, my sister and I, and eventually our younger sister, were expected to join in the ritual three-cloth cleansing of the entire home: wet, dry and methylated spirits. As I look back on it now, I don’t think, as she cleaned the house spotless, that my mother ever realised that there was nothing she needed to expiate, that she had not been the perpetrator – not ever, not now or in the distant past – of any crime.” One of the most frequently recurring themes of the book, and indeed of our conversation, is Rose’s belief that mothers are required to perform a deeper, if not impossible, cleanup job; their unsolicited task is to preserve the fiction that the world is a safe place when, as she points out, “if anybody knows that’s rubbish, it’s a mother”. Back in 1991, Rose published The Haunting of Sylvia Plath, in which she tore down the construction of Plath-as-icon, not least through the husbanding of her estate by her widower, Ted Hughes, and his sister, Olwyn; it was described by Elaine Showalter as “a stunning account” of the way Plath’s legacy was controlled. Now, Rose says, when she thinks of that book, “what’s interesting is that I don’t discuss her as a mother, hardly at all, and I have to say I think that’s probably because I wasn’t one then”. She adopted her daughter, Mia, who is now 23, from China when she was seven and a half months old; as she and her then partner, psychoanalyst Adam Phillips, went through the process, her book on Plath must have felt like recent history. Speaking now, Rose takes particular notice of the fact that Plath began her collection Ariel, published posthumously, with the poem “Morning Song”, and its opening line, “Love set you going like a fat gold watch”, about the experience of giving birth. She wanted, Rose notes, to end with the poems referred to as the Bee Sequence, and “Wintering”, the last word of which is “spring” – with, in between, “the darkness of shadows, as if she knows that to be a mother is to be in touch with what’s dark; if you want love to spring you’ve got to be in touch with darkness”. Hughes changed both the composition of the collection and its sequencing, in order, says Rose, “to make her death look poetically inevitable, and therefore destroys what she was doing around the discourse of mothering”. The relationship between literary texts and psychoanalytic theory is at the heart of much of Rose’s work, finding expression in her abiding preoccupation with Proust, who crops up not only in non-fiction such as 2011’s Proust Among the Nations: From Dreyfus to the Middle East but also in her only novel, Albertine, which creates another life for the object of Proust’s hero’s obsession. It was published in 2002, the first book that Rose wrote after the death of her sister, the philosopher Gillian Rose, at the age of 48. “I didn’t feel I could write in an academic way,” she said in an interview in 2012. “It’s exhilarating and frightening letting the floodgates open.” She has also written extensively – attracting some criticism – about the history and nature of Jewish nationalism, using the techniques of psychoanalysis to call for it to confront its fractured psyche. “You can feel her pain throbbing through these essays,” wrote the late Peter Preston in a review of her 2007 book The Last Resistance, which sought to track the evolution of Zionism to modern day Gaza. There’s all this hostility to mothers, along with the expectation that they will make the world perfect Throughout her work beats the belief that to leave the mind and the heart (a word she uses frequently) unexamined is to store up immense and unstoppable trouble for yourself, and for others. She half-laughs when she tells me about an essay by the analyst and paediatrician DW Winnicott, written in 1949, in which he lists the 18 reasons a mother has to hate her baby. “My favourite one is: she hates him because she can neither eat him or have sex with him. Which is such a shocking thing to say even now! So one of the things that really struck me is that there’s all this either hostility to mothers, or the expectation that they will make the world perfect.” Citing the example of Rachel Cusk’s A Life’s Work – “she was lambasted for it” – she says that women who do talk about “the immense equivocation and difficulty and psychic painfulness as well as joy of what it means to be a mother” are censured for drawing attention to anything approaching ambivalence. “It’s as if because mothers are in touch with the fraudulence of the things they’re being asked to do, then they’re hated.” If Mothers is happy to delve into the past – both far distant, as Rose dissects different readings of Medea, and muses on the civic aspect of motherhood in ancient Greece, and more recent, through the work of, for example, Virginia Woolf, Simone de Beauvoir, Elena Ferrante and Roald Dahl – it is keenly aware of its responsibilities to the present. Rose believes that “feminism has realised that it can’t just talk about white, middle-class women. That’s a lesson that was hard-learned in the 70s and 80s, but if you’re thinking about mothers, you really can’t talk about them unless you talk about, for example, the fact that in America, the infant mortality rate for black babies is more than double what it is for white babies”. Referring to the 54,000 women that, according to a 2015 report from the Equality and Human Rights Commission, lose their jobs in the UK every year as a result of pregnancy, and of the obstacles put in the way of them fulfilling basic health maintenance such as antenatal appointments, Rose says: “I could not believe the virulence of the hatred. And that goes alongside all this saccharine idealisation of the mother as the protector of the child, who makes the world safe for the child, and who is good, and who is virtuous.” Meanwhile, she argues, “there’s the experience, say, of giving birth. And of having a baby, which is at least a large part about mess, bodies, viscousness, mucus, shit, and then touching, holding, smelling, feeling. It’s about the most incredible range of busted boundaries around who we’re meant to think of ourselves as. And none of that mess is part of the public, official discourse on mothering.” She remembers telling an academic colleague whose childcare arrangements sometimes fell through to bring her baby to work with her, not only so that she could make her working life possible, but so people could see what was involved. “When somebody like Sheryl Sandberg says ‘lean in’,” she notes drily, “and make your office demands even when you’re having a baby, she’s not actually envisaging babies in board meetings, right? Because what can’t be stood, in that official, sanctioned, rather phallic, clean environment, is mess, smell, dirt, nappies, unpredictability, noise.” There are, of course, moments of joy, and of a more positive boundary-busting. When her adopted daughter was an infant, Rose found herself dozing off with her, “and waking up and thinking, the baby is lying on top of me, and then thinking, no, no, no, the baby’s inside you, that’s fine, go back to sleep. And then realising … that was really crazy and it gave me such pleasure. And it felt like she was really making a claim on me, and in me.” I feel trans people are in touch with the peculiarity of what it means to make a gender distinction absolute and rigid I ask her how rapidly changing ideas of what constitutes a family – indeed, a mother – fit into her view of the future. In the book, she writes about Susan Stryker, a trans woman and activist who describes holding her female partner’s body as she gives birth, and the physical feelings, as well as the emotions, that the experience provoked in her. What she learned from Stryker, says Rose, “is that the moment of becoming a mother is about being connected with something different from what you are. Because you never know who’s arriving … There’s a radical strangeness at the heart of giving birth. And what Stryker does say is let’s just push this as far as it can go.” She adds: “To answer your question simply, I feel that trans people are in touch with the peculiarity of what it means to make a gender distinction absolute and rigid, and therefore they’re in touch with the inherent strangeness of our sexual lives and that to give birth to someone is also to put you in touch with a kind of strangeness.” Documenting all the complexities and injustices around motherhood is one thing; but how can they be changed? Two things would have to alter radically, says Rose. “One is the male psyche would have to undergo something of a revolution in terms of the fear of the maternal body, because it is a reminder of neediness, dependence, fragility, everything that in our culture men are told they must not be.” And the second, she argues, is that we would have to face “the poverty and immiseration” caused to vast swaths of people by austerity. “It doesn’t work; what’s incredible is that people go on voting for it, as if they buy into the super-ego lie that we must suffer and be on top of things, and there’s something appropriate about the very viciousness of the social system.” And implicated in this scenario, she adds, are mothers – the people to whom we look to heal and to soothe the ills of the world. “What I’m saying very crudely is that you have to be a socialist and a bit of a Freudian to stop offloading on mothers two utterly banal truths about being a human subject, which is that the world is unjust and our hearts and bodies are frail.” • Mothers is published by Faber. To order a copy for £11.04 (RRP £12.99) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.