McLaren’s racing director, Éric Boullier, has resigned from the team on the eve of the British Grand Prix. Boullier had been under huge pressure this season as McLaren’s hopes of improvement disappeared with an uncompetitive car and reports of open dissent and dissatisfaction within the team. Boullier joined McLaren in 2014 from Lotus, appointed by Ron Dennis in an overhaul of the team’s structure. Since then the team have gone through the most unsuccessful period in their 52-year history. McLaren have won eight constructors’ titles and 12 drivers’, the most recent by Lewis Hamilton in 2008. They have taken 182 victories since Bruce McLaren drove in their first grand prix at Monaco in 1966 but have not won now since Jenson Button took the flag in Brazil in 2012. Worse still, during Boullier’s tenure they have had only two podium finishes, both at Australia in the first meeting of 2014. Boullier had been bullish about his future as recently as at the French Grand Prix, insisting he had no intention of resigning but events have clearly moved on swiftly and, with the team appearing no closer to solving their problems, the 44-year-old’s position was clearly judged to be untenable. That McLaren have chosen the week of their home race, the British Grand Prix, to accept Boullier’s resignation and make sweeping changes within the team, when it would attract the most attention, indicates the seriousness of their situation. The team’s chief executive, Zak Brown, said the reforms were inevitable. “The causes are systemic and structural, which require major change from within,” he said. “With today’s announcement, we start to address those issues head on and take the first step on our road to recovery.” Brown insisted the changes were not a kneejerk reaction, although the suddenness of the announcement suggested otherwise, but admitted the team had to adapt. “We are too slow to react,” he said. “We need to simplify things within the organisation. We need to operate like a race team, a much faster organisation, we are a bit too slow, we are bit too clunky.” Between 2015 and 2017 the team entered a works partnership with Honda that it was hoped would return them to the front of the grid but instead endured three calamitous seasons, finishing ninth, sixth and ninth. During this time Boullier was a leading exponent of the argument that McLaren’s car was competitive but had been let down by the underpowered Honda engine. This year, with a proven power unit provided by Renault, who won four titles with Red Bull, McLaren were given nowhere to hide and their car has still proved off the pace. It is still way behind Red Bull and the Renault works team. Fernando Alonso has wrestled more from it than might be expected, but even his best result was fifth in Australia. His teammate Stoffel Vandoorne has managed only three points finishes. They have made the top 10 in qualifying only twice, both times by Alonso. They are sixth in the constructors’ championship, 203 points behind Ferrari at the top. Boullier has acknowledged that their car has a fundamental problem with lack of grip through slow corners but what is more damning for the Frenchman and McLaren is how this issue made it through their design process. The team are looking to make a raft of changes to accompany Boullier’s resignation. The former driver Gil de Ferran, who won the Indy 500 in 2003, has been made sporting director.