Henrik Stenson is entitled to ask what he has done wrong. Since producing an epic final round to seal the 2016 Open Championship, misfortune has followed the Swede at golf’s oldest major. Twelve months ago, Stenson’s Open rental home was burgled as he played his first round at Royal Birkdale. He has arrived at Carnoustie with an existing problem, namely a left elbow injury which forced Stenson to withdraw from last week’s Scottish Open. “I’m not 100%,” Stenson admitted. “I have a bit of inflammation in the arm, it has been a bit weak. I played 18 in Sweden on Saturday and didn’t feel that great when I woke up on Sunday to travel over here. We will try and prepare, try not to overdo it in the lead up and hopefully we will be good to go by Thursday. “I probably wouldn’t have travelled but the Open is obviously very special to me. At the same time, if things go south I’m not going to tee it up without seeing myself playing the full tournament. There is no point doing that but as of now, we will prepare like I’m going to play and I’m hopeful of playing. We will just have to do the best we can with what we have got.” Stenson has recorded top 10 finishes in the opening two majors of this year. But for fitness issues, he would ordinarily be considered a strong Carnoustie contender. “I think this is a really good course for me,” he added. “I hope to keep going in the right direction but my preparations for this week have been a little disrupted, or more than a little, compared to what I wanted. “I was going to be here on Sunday and Monday before the Scottish Open then go down to play that. None of that happened so we will just do the best we can with the circumstances. I guess expectations are at a low.” Stenson had personal items and playing clothes stolen on Thursday at Birkdale. “I was looking forward to a nice relaxed evening at home; instead we had forensic teams looking for fingerprints,” he recalled. “It probably isn’t as bad as if it was your own property but you still know the owners have to go through that hardship instead. I’m staying in a hotel this year so hopefully there are no issues with burglaries.”