Ashley Young has put his name forward to take a penalty should England’s tie with Colombia culminate in a shootout to reach the quarter-finals, with the Manchester United player confident he can make amends for Euro 2012. Misses from Young and Ashley Cole in Kiev condemned Roy Hodgson’s side to defeat against Italy in the last eight of the European Championship, their sixth defeat in seven competitive shootouts at major tournaments. Whereas Gianluigi Buffon denied Cole, Young saw his effort strike the crossbar but the wing-back, who has fought his way back to a starting place for the national side at these finals, will step up if required at Spartak Stadium. “Of course I’ll put my name forward,” said Young, who is a member of a five-strong leadership group in Gareth Southgate’s young squad. “I have the confidence in my ability to step up and take one. I’ll definitely be one to put my hand up. We’ve worked on them in practice and I have confidence in my ability to score more. “I think when you work on it and you practise it in training, you know which way you’re going to go and you stick to it. If you change your mind at the last minute, that’s when things go wrong. There’s going to be a lot of football before it gets to penalties, though, so hopefully we’ll get the right result before.” The 32-year-old has missed in three successive shootouts – at Euro 2012, United in a pre-season tournament against Barcelona later that summer and in a League Cup tie against Middlesbrough in 2015 – but is one of at least eight players in Southgate’s squad who are understood to have made clear they would be willing to step up against Colombia. Harry Kane, Jordan Henderson, Jesse Lingard and Kieran Trippier, the team’s dead-ball specialist, would consider themselves candidates, as would Jamie Vardy. However, Southgate, who infamously missed his spot-kick at Euro 96, has taken a more scientific approach to one of England’s regular failings in preparation for the knockout stage of this competition. He has had his players replicating shootout situations since before their arrival in Russia, including the long lonely walk from the halfway line, with his squad having undertaken psychometric tests to ascertain who would take the penalties. “We’ve been through all the various drills to prepare,” said the manager. “Once we get to that point we know our ranking of player: not just with us but over the years where some players have taken more in matches than others. We’re prepared but there’s a lot of football to be played before we arrive at that point. Should it come to that stage, we’re ready.”