Last week Danielle Brooks’s father, a church deacon in the small town in South Carolina where Brooks was raised, called his daughter in New York. “He said, ‘Danielle, you won’t believe what just happened. I get out of the car and see this couple walking their dog, and they just stop in front of the house. He calls over and says, ‘Excuse me sir, are you Taystee’s father?’” The unexpected visitors were fans of Orange Is the New Black, and particularly Brooks’s character, one of its few truly likable inmates. “That’s crazy,” whistles Brooks, a little unsure of whether to be impressed or alarmed. I’m due to meet Brooks in a Chinese tearoom in midtown Manhattan in the middle of a sweltering summer day. I arrive half an hour early to cool down, but Brooks is already there, all in black, tucked away in the corner, as low-key as Tasha “Taystee” Jefferson is forthright. When she gets going, Brooks, 28, is a hoot. She has a deep, throaty giggle so contagious it should come with a health warning, though she’s as quick to well up, too, when she talks about the crippling self-doubt that followed her Broadway debut in The Color Purple. It’s easy to see why OITNB cast her as the emotional heart of the show. She’s passionate and warm; if you had to choose a cellmate, she’d be high on the list. But there isn’t much in the way of light for Taystee on the horizon right now. “You see her really dealing with this stuff,” agrees Brooks. “For a long time, she’s someone who hides behind her pain, being the sunshine in the rain…” She dissolves into giggles, then goes at it again. “That’s so cheesy! So cheesy. Now she’s... she’s in the storm. She’s in a tornado. Earthquakes, the whole nine yards. We’re getting to see her go through it.” For all of Taystee’s misfortunes, Brooks’s career is on the up and up. A question about what she’s up to next takes around 15 minutes to answer. She’s in a mysterious new Chris Morris film she can’t say a word about (“He is the most private director I’ve ever met. I’m not even gonna do it to him, I’m gonna let y’all wait for it.”) She’s got three other movies coming up: one she doesn’t want to jinx by talking about it, one about gun control, another about death row, both featuring a lot of crying, plus an animated series in which she plays a grumpy grandmother – she’s just been doing the voiceover for it. In 2016, while shooting OITNB, Brooks was also starring in The Color Purple on Broadway. The schedule sounds punishing; she says she slept when she could, often in cars between the two jobs. When she found herself staring up at an 18ft billboard of herself in Times Square advertising the run she was about to star in, it was a discombobulating experience. “I was looking at it and I saw these two women from Texas, who didn’t know me from Adam. I was like, ‘That’s me! That’s meeeeee!’” She claps. They all took a picture together. The performance won her a Tony nomination. “I would sing a song called Hell No every night, and got to say hell no to any fears or anxiety that I had, or feeling that I wasn’t capable, or that people would think I was a fraud, or just a TV actress. All those things that kind of creep in your head, I was able to say, ‘Fuck that!’” She politely mutes the vowel, but the worries became so loud that she ended up getting counselling to deal with them. “I always wanted to be a Broadway girl. But once I got Tony-nominated, it really messed with me, because it was like, yes I’m getting this affirmation that you’re right where you’re supposed to be, but there was still this voice saying, ‘You’re not good enough.’” Brooks admits that she’s often tough on herself. As well as acting she has modelled for Lane Bryant and designed a clothing line for Universal Standard; she often tweets with the hashtag #voiceofthecurves. “I want to design clothes that I wish I could have worn when I was a teenager. And giving that to the next generation of girls. That’s why I do it.” This sense of purpose, of looking beyond herself, defines her life. “I want to be in everything, but that’s because I haven’t seen someone who looks like me in everything. I want to play a superhero. I want to be the love interest. I want to write my own stuff and create my own projects. I want to be in French films.” She can’t speak French – yet. “But I can learn it! I just want to be fully challenged as an artist, so that anyone who looks like me, who relates to me, says ‘Oh, if Danielle did it, I can.’ That’s what it’s about for me.” Previously she looked for role models like Viola Davis and Rutina Wesley. “Seeing them made me think, ‘I can do that,’” she says. “I am glad I got those examples, but now I can focus on being that example.” She credits church with getting her into performing. “It’s a good training. You learn how to talk in front of people, sing in front of people. They’ll give you encouragement,” she laughs, leaning back in her chair and clapping. “But they’ll also let you know if it ain’t going too good.” When she was 15 she went to a residential arts high school 20 minutes from her home town, where she could take theatre classes. The experience was life-changing. “I would always challenge things at church. And they didn’t like it,” she chuckles. “It wasn’t that I was rebellious, I was just curious about the why of it. So getting to come into this other world was eye-opening. I had a classmate who had a nanny. That. Blew. My. Mind. You had somebody other than your mother to feed you? What?” She applied to Juilliard, one of the most prestigious drama schools in the world, because she knew that some girls at her school had gone there. “I was like, ‘I don’t know what this Juilliard is, but the black girls are getting in…’” At her final audition, she remembers everyone else sitting on the floor, introducing themselves. “My turn? I stood my ass up.” She gets up from the table, switches into the performance. “I said, ‘My name is Danielle Brooks, I’m 17, from South Carolina.’ Everybody was like, ‘Yeahhhh’,” she says, mock-cheering. “They were really chilled. I made the most out of that one day, and I got in.” OITNB came along a year after Brooks left Juilliard. As Taystee, she was a counterpart to Piper, showing what prison looks like for the vast majority of inmates who aren’t rich and white. “Like, I know you like to see Alex and Piper make out,” she says. “But the important thing is prison reform and immigration, and civil rights issues. That’s really what the show is about, and I think Taystee brings people back to that. We ain’t got no make-up on, we got all the same outfits on...” She starts to say she watched Ocean’s 8 recently, with a naughty chuckle. She stops herself, then continues. “Fuck it, I can just say it. First of all, yes, I’m here for all these women working. But the fact that the first minute, Sandra Bullock’s got all this make-up on and she’s in prison? Her hair’s got waves in it! I was like, ‘What the heck is this?’” Recently Brooks was part of a video ad called A Great Day in Hollywood, which gathered 47 black stars working on Netflix, from Ava DuVernay to Spike Lee, Lena Waithe to Laverne Cox. “Being part of that was incredible. But there still needs to be more! Because if we were to do the white version, it would be…” she laughs. “It would be a bigger picture.” She’s been thinking lately about why people watch so much reality TV. “Especially black people. Real Housewives of Atlanta, Love & Hip-Hop, those shows. And it’s because we’re thirsty. We are so thirsty to see ourselves.” A Great Day in Hollywood was released with the caption: “This is not a moment. This is a movement”, and Brooks says that’s important. “There’s no one way to be black. There’s no one way to be white. There’s no one way to be skinny, there’s no one way to be gay. If we show how complex we are as people, we can really help change the world with art. And I believe that.” Brooks believes it because she has seen it. “The fact that I have such conservative parents – when I first was on Orange, it was hard for my mom to watch that show. To now, her being in rooms with Laverne Cox and Lea DeLaria and loving the hell out of them.” She gets more emphatic, more high-pitched, a minister’s daughter through and through. “And people who preach every day that homosexuality is a sin – they watch my show! So I feel like it’s so important because I think it will help us understand each other better. To understand that we’re all the same.” Orange Is the New Black season six is on Netflix from 27 July