When I was in my mid-20s, fresh out of graduate school, I worked as an office temp in New York. It was like being invisible for my whole working day. Everywhere I worked, people called me Christina or Elizabeth or Stephanie – any girl’s name. No one cared that I was a writer. No one ever even asked me to lunch. I ate alone every day. I had just been through a bad breakup, and many of my friends had moved away, so often I ate dinner alone, too. I began spending more time at the bar across the street from my apartment building. The bar was called Toby’s and it was dim and rectangular, with time-darkened floors and a scary red-painted bathroom. Students went there as well as locals, and the bartenders were friendly, so there was always someone I knew. I told myself that I was using the bar as a sort of community centre – a meeting place for civic-minded neighbours. I went there to gather with local townspeople for political and public awareness; Toby’s was a rich component of urban community life; alcohol was not the point at all. I wasn’t a regular. (I was totally a regular.) I wasn’t the only one. Others included a man who looked absurdly like Barney Rubble. An estate agent named Lina. A man in a leather jacket, who ended all conversations by saying, “Shoulda, woulda, coulda.” A younger man with long flowing hair and combat boots. A thin, intense young woman who wrote poetry. The bartender’s girlfriend was there every night, doing crossword puzzles. I had the distinct impression that she didn’t dare let the bartender out of her sight. And there was an exceedingly creepy regular named Willie. Willie worked around Toby’s – washing glasses, restocking supplies – as a way to keep up with his bar tab, which must have been astronomical. He was short, with greasy grey hair and a bloated face and teeth like dirty kernels of corn. His eyes were the worst – glittery and vulturine. He always found an excuse to walk behind any girl who stood at the jukebox, or brush up against any girl who used the payphone, or squeeze past any girl who stood in line for the bathroom. The poet and I would occasionally have irony-free conversations about how we never seemed to have time to write, but the others seemed to tolerate me, if not especially like me. When I walked in to Alcoholics Anonymous, lots of people recognised me. Maybe I was spending too much time at the bar During my lunch hour at temp jobs, I began making calls about volunteer work. I applied to Samaritans and was accepted. For two weekends, I went to volunteer training sessions, which I loved, because I liked being a student again and I was intrigued by some of the emotional stories. As part of the training, all volunteers were asked to attend a local Alcoholics Anonymous meeting so we could see what it was like to seek help, as well as to give it. I found a meeting in the basement of a church in my neighbourhood and, when I walked in, lots of people recognised me and waved hello. (Maybe I was spending too much time at Toby’s.) I ended up having a good time – more studying, more stories, plus they served free doughnuts. I completed my training and started working at Samaritans. Ironically, the call centre was grim, dingy and depressing. Chipped lime-green walls, two battle-scarred desks and squeaky roller chairs. It wasn’t all that different from Toby’s, actually, although it lacked a jukebox. It is daunting, even frightening, to answer calls at a suicide prevention line, but you get used to it quickly. Samaritans taught the volunteers an algorithm to use on callers, so I always had an idea of what to say. They also taught us never to use the word “I” in a sentence when talking to a caller, and that helped me focus. And besides, most of the calls are from repeat customers and they know how to put you at ease. Because, like Toby’s, Samaritans had regulars – so many that there was a whole three-ring binder with notes on them called the Regulars Book. New volunteers were supposed to read through the binder and familiarise themselves with the regulars, so that, for instance, you didn’t spend two hours talking to Crystal about her feelings of worthlessness only to have her say at the end, “Well, I guess I’ll give you a call again next week when my husband goes bowling.” We were supposed to work the assessment algorithm with the regulars. It was supposed to go like this: Are you thinking of suicide? No. Have you thought about suicide in the past two months? No. Have you ever attempted to kill yourself? No. Oh, well, thanks, goodbye. Click. But it didn’t really work like that because the regulars had got wise to it and, if they felt like talking, they answered yes to one of the questions and that prompted you to ask more. Do you have a plan? Do you have access to pills or weapons? And then the regular would say yes to one of those questions and it would prompt other questions and the call might go on pointlessly for half an hour when, really, all the regular wanted was a little sympathy about how overpriced cantaloupe is. I got to know them all: Frank with his disabling shyness, and Calvin, whose chronic bronchitis kept him housebound, and Eva, whose children never called, and Ricardo with his addiction to couponing, and Roberta with her crippling fear of laundromats, and Mark with his ailing mother. They weren’t suicidal, most of them – they were unbearably lonely. Their loneliness was so palpable it flowed down the lines toward me, as thick and sticky as old motor oil. I did my best with all of them, tried to do whatever good I could in a 10-minute call. I knew that, often, I was the only person they would speak to that day. It seemed to be enough just to say, “Did something happen today?” or, “That sounds truly upsetting.” The only regular I disliked talking to was a girl named Rosie, who called sometimes to talk about how her writing career had stalled. “And I’m a fucking excellent writer!” she’d say. I worried that Rosie and I had too much in common. There was a chalkboard where volunteers left notes for the incoming shift. Once, it read, 'Dena is sending us eclairs!' Some regulars called pretty much every day, as a sort of check-in: “Not too badly, thanks, though they were clean sold out of coleslaw at the deli.” Some called weekly: “Well, just thought I’d let you know I’m still upright.” Sometimes the regulars disappeared for months or even years. No one knew what had happened to them during these hiatuses, but I always wondered. Did the regular get more functional and actually go out in the world and live life for a while? Or did they get less functional and spend time in a hospital, perhaps one where phones were not allowed? Or did they take up with some other, more desirable hotline and only return to Samaritans when the new hotline stopped taking their calls? In nearly all respects, the regulars mirrored my romantic life up to that point. There was a chalkboard where volunteers left notes for the incoming shift about regulars. “Maude’s been watching the Weather Channel again.” (Maude had a fear of storms.) “Abe’s mother is in the hospital.” “Bob says Meals on Wheels didn’t show.” And, once, excitingly, “Dena is sending us eclairs!” Dena was like a Facebook ranter 20 years before Facebook even existed. She called almost every day to say something like, “People used to have manners!” and, “Maybe I’m old-fashioned, but I believe in hard work!” and, “I guess any idiot can get a medical licence.” And now she was sending us eclairs – unexpected but very much appreciated. The eclairs arrived the next week, in a white box with a green ribbon. Some volunteers refused to eat them – they thought Dena might be trying to poison us – but I thought they were delicious, all the more so as they got slightly stale. A local TV station wanted to do a story on Samaritans and the administrator asked me if I would be willing to appear on the segment. I found this wildly flattering, even though it was just going to be the back of my head that appeared: Samaritans wanted to maintain the anonymity of its volunteers. I showed up for the televised shift and sat at the desk while the camera crew set up and wired me for sound. As soon as they were ready, the lines went silent. We waited. And waited. Finally the phone rang and I answered immediately, using what I hoped was a soothing, professional tone, “Samaritans, can I help you?” “Oh, hello,” said a woman with a matter-of-fact voice. “My husband is set to work the next shift at Samaritans and he’s gone off and left his lunch here on the table.” “And how do you feel about that?” I asked, acutely conscious of the camera. “I don’t feel any particular way about it,” the woman said. “But do you all have some crackers and peanut butter to tide him over? I tried to call him at the office but he’d already left.” “Yes, we do,” I said, and then, for the cameras, I added, “It may be hard to believe it now, but you won’t always feel this way.” This was one of the all-purpose remarks they taught us in training. “Probably not,” the woman agreed cheerfully. “Thanks a lot!” She hung up. I turned around. The camera crew was already packing up. “You did a great job,” the producer told me. The segment aired on the evening news the next night. The cameraman had caught me in profile and I was immediately extremely recognisable. The next time I walked into Toby’s, all the regulars cheered. People bought me drinks for a week. Now the Toby’s regulars began to think of me as a good listener. Lina told me about her daughter’s sciatica and helped me find an apartment. The leather-jacketed man asked my advice on his music career and gave me the number of a good locksmith. The bartender’s girlfriend let me help her with the crosswords and even smiled when she saw me. She was pretty when she smiled. Barney Rubble turned out to be a homicide detective and helped me with the plot of a short story. (No one at Samaritans had ever helped me with the plot of a story, but then no one from Toby’s had ever sent me eclairs.) The poet got a job in midtown and now I had someone to meet for lunch. I realised, belatedly, that the Toby’s regulars were just as lonely as the Samaritans regulars. And – even more belatedly – I realised that I had been lonely, too. Now I belonged. One night Willie followed a pretty student out of Toby’s and kissed her as she drunkenly waited for a cab. The bartender opened the door and whistled sharply. “Willie, knock it off!” The girl extricated herself and a taxi pulled up to take her home, but I couldn’t get over it. “That poor girl!” I kept saying to the bartender. “She’ll never be the same!” He was more philosophical. “She’ll be all right.” “But Willie kissed her!” “Here’s what’ll happen,” the bartender said. “She’ll cut back on her drinking for a while, she’ll defrost her freezer, she’ll call her mother more often than she used to. In no time at all, she’ll be fine.” It wasn’t quite what we said at Samaritans, but it wasn’t that different. And it did make me feel better. Samaritans had a Christmas party at a bar – for the volunteers, not the callers – and I met lots of new people. Most importantly, I met the man who is now my husband. I was sitting at a table with three beers lined up in front of me because I disliked queueing, and I guess he thought that showed practicality, or industriousness, or maybe just forward thinking. He came over to talk to me. A year later, we moved to London, and I said goodbye to my temp agency – “Goodbye, Josephine!” they said – and the regulars at Toby’s. I couldn’t say goodbye to the regulars at Samaritans because we weren’t allowed to give out personal information, but I wanted to. I still think of them. Sometimes I want to talk to them. I wonder what Ricardo thinks of Groupon and if Frank has discovered match.com and whether Dena is on Facebook now. But mostly, I wish I could tell them again what I learned for myself: you may not believe it, but you won’t always feel this way. Names have been changed. • Katherine Heiny’s novel, Standard Deviation, is out now in paperback, priced £8.99 (4th Estate). To order a copy for £7.64, go to guardianbookshop.com. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at befrienders.org Commenting on this piece? If you would like your comment to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).