Dave Brailsford has launched a stinging attack on the recently elected president of world cycling’s governing body, the Frenchman David Lappartient, accusing him of having a “French mayor” mentality. “I gave him the benefit of the doubt when he started,” the Team Sky principal said of the UCI president. “I thought, ‘OK, he is new to the job, he obviously doesn’t quite understand the responsibilities of a presidential role.’ I think he has still got the local French mayor kind of mentality.” Ironically Lappartient has in fact been the mayor of Sarzeau – population 6,143, in Brittany – which is hosting the finish of the fourth stage on Tuesday, for a decade. The war of words between the men has escalated since the publication of the highly critical DCMS select committee anti-doping report in March, following which Lappartient said that if Team Sky was “using substances to increase performances, this is exactly what is cheating”. Brailsford’s criticism of the UCI president come in the wake of comments Lappartient made at the end of last week when he appeared to suggest that Chris Froome had been cleared of any wrongdoing by Wada and the UCI because of his wealth. “Froome had more financial support to find good experts,” Lappartient said. Speaking to the Guardian on Saturday the Frenchman reiterated that view saying: “It’s not just in cycling, that’s global justice. That’s democracy, you can’t prevent somebody from spending money on legal defence by capping it.” But Brailsford dismissed Lappartient’s position as a “cop-out”. Brailsford added: “Justice is justice and whether you are in the smallest team in the professional peloton or the biggest one, the justice and the rules that apply to you should be the same and fair. There should be no issue whatsoever there. “If you want to be the president of an international federation then protect everybody in that international community,” Brailsford said. “Don’t take a French angle or a nationalistic view on the international community. Protect the international community with no bias. “And I think he is still learning that really. The quicker he can get there, and learn what a president of an international federation’s responsibilities are, the better it will be for everybody. But he has got some work to do.”