Given the variety of ways he has managed to fall off his bike over the years, it would have been unlike Geraint Thomas to complete a Tour de France without a jitter of some kind, but a disturbing skitter of the back wheel on an early corner in Saturday’s time trial barely registered on his personal Richter scale. The Welshman is legendary for the injuries he has accumulated, among them the broken pelvis with which he completed the Tour in 2013, the collarbone he smashed in the Alps last year and the collision with a metal spring in Australia in his under-23 days which resulted in a ruptured spleen. Until the final time trial, Thomas had not put a foot wrong in three weeks and 2,000 miles. On Sunday, he will celebrate a classic Grand Tour win, where an eventual winner avidly garners seconds until they become minutes. His victory had looked to be on the cards since the final kilometres of the first stage, where the defending champion Chris Froome had gone off the road at a particularly chaotic phase of the race, and Thomas had avoided disaster. In other years, one felt, Thomas would have been on his back with the best of them. There were echoes, too, of 2012, when Froome lost time on the first road race stage, in effect settling any potential contest for the leadership with Bradley Wiggins. From that moment in the Vendée, it was relatively plain sailing for the 32-year-old: a perfectly calculated team time trial by Team Sky, a few more seconds gained on the uphill finish at Mûr de Bretagne, a second or two snatched in intermediate bonus sprints. It was in the Alps that he truly emerged as the probable winner: his surge out of the lead group at the Alpine finish at La Rosière and his sprint to win at Alpe d’Huez underlined his freshness relative to his challengers. There was no immense drama, no spectacular coup de panache, but the time was gained inexorably; from that point, the chances of an internecine battle with Froome for the leadership began to look remote. Thomas’s only time loss of any import to a potential challenger came when Primoz Roglic won the stage into Laruns on Friday. He rode his luck, as potential Tour winners must. What if Froome had not sought road space quite so desperately in the final kilometres of day one, and had not been forced off the tarmac, losing 51sec? What if the eventual runner-up Tom Dumoulin had managed to get a rapid bike change rather than swapping a wheel when he broke a spoke approaching the finish in Mûr de Bretagne, and had lost – let us say – 13sec rather than 1min 13sec? What if Roglic’s Lotto NL-Jumbo team had ridden a team time trial to match Team Sky rather than losing 1min 11sec? Keeping your head amid the chaos proves too much for many on the Tour de France; there is a massive amount to be said for a disciplined – borderline cold-blooded – win by a hot-blooded rider, a triumph of control by a man who had often pushed the envelope too far. It was epitomised by the extreme caution with which Thomas tackled the final bends in the time trial, understandable given on how many occasions in the last 10 years another – yet another – crash had been greeted by the thought he might have won something truly major if only he had stayed upright. Like their leader, Team Sky rarely looked out of sorts, which has been the story in six of the last seven Tours de France. There were minor hiccups en route to La Rosière and Alpe d’Huez, with attacks from Alejandro Valverde and Steven Kruijswijk, but those were easily fended off. The most serious attempt came from Mikel Landa on Friday on the final Pyrenean stage, and here they found allies along the way in the form of Kruijswijk and Roglic’s Lotto NL team. Arguably, the most serious contretemps was a Keystone gendarmes moment when Froome was mistaken for a fan as he rode down from the finish at the Col de Portet on Wednesday. By the quadruple winner’s standards, this was a low-key Tour – reflected in the questions over whether or not he had won Saturday’s time trial stage before it was awarded to Dumoulin – but given the grace he showed throughout the three weeks where he had to play second fiddle to Thomas, he deserved a better reception than the one he received on the roads of France. Herein lies the challenge for Sky, assuming it causes their bosses any loss of sleep. Dave Brailsford and his men circumnavigated France to a chorus of catcalls, with occasional punches and splashes of unidentified liquid thrown their way, and a hail of eggs directed at their bus towards the end. Such behaviour is unacceptable, but dominant foreign squads do not usually meet this kind of reception in France. Eddy Merckx had a mixed reception, but Miguel Induráin navigated five winning Tours in a row – mostly in a robotic style which makes Sky look like masters of spectacle – with barely a raised eyebrow. Over the years since their debut in 2010 – when Thomas was their star performer – the British squad have become an increasingly toxic presence, thanks to a mix of dominant riding and a weight of baggage that oscillates uncertainly between ambiguity and hypocrisy. Thomas is a credit to his sport: happily hardcore, courageous in the slightly crazy way that is the hallmark of the best, and with his feet planted firmly on the South Wales ground. He does not seem like a man who will let stardom go to his head. His roots are to be found in the dilapidated, uneven track at Maindy in Cardiff, where Tom Simpson won a silver medal in the Empire Games in 1958; his successors were to be found this week at the Newport Velodrome down the M4 to the east at the national youth and junior championships, hotly contested by Welsh youngsters including a posse from the Maindy Flyers. His will be a win that should inspire affection across the piece, but his team seem unlikely to earn more than grudging admiration.