The husband, Hugh Owens: “Can I say something without you flying off the handle? I have said this before that when you put cardboard in the skip, do it properly and not without any thought what will happen to it. It was all over the yard. I have picked up the big pieces but I want you to clear the rest from the shrubbery.” The counsel for his wife, Tini Owens: “The petitioner felt like she was being chastised like a child and she was extremely embarrassed that she was spoken to in this manner in front of their housekeeper.” The judge, Robin Tolson QC (refusing the wife a divorce): “I am satisfied that the wife has exaggerated the context and seriousness of the allegations to a significant extent. They are all at most minor altercations of a kind to be expected in a marriage. Some are not even that.” Inasmuch as any lay person can conceivably understand the working of the supreme court, the judicially enforced misery of Tini Owens, who was last week again denied a divorce from her estranged husband, seems to owe much to the first judge, Tolson’s, idiosyncratic definition of endurable marital conduct or of what “the hypothetical reasonable observer” would take that to be. You gather, anyway, that if Edward Albee’s Martha had ever banged on at Tolson about freezing her tears, Tolson would have judged that a reasonable observer would consider this a perfectly normal – within a marriage – way of making ice cubes. “Minor altercations [the cardboard incident was one of various humiliations] of a kind to be expected in a marriage”? Expected by whom? Rumpole? We can only speculate on what might have given rise to Tolson’s Job-like mentality, at least as imposed by him on Tini Owens, his unfortunate petitioner – in which approach, admittedly, you can see the advantages for any state committed to marriage. Properly publicised, the Tolson measure of marital misery surely has more potential to reverse the divorce rate than any amount of government-sponsored mediation – the ensuing social stability would have to compensate, as much as anything could, for substantial layoffs in the matrimonial breakdown industry. No less a realist than Chaucer’s Wife of Bath, experienced in the “woe that is in marriage”, our distinguished QC effectively instructs all unhappy wives, whether their heads have been turned by too much romantic fiction or by newer fads about coercive control, to accept that conventional expectations of say, dignity and mutual respect, may have no business within an already trying marriage. Could your ghastly despot of a husband be simply, like Mr Owens described by Tolson, “somewhat old school”? Could his latest ugly, wheeze – eg, refusing to let you divorce him – just be one of those “events in a marriage” that, Tolson informed Mrs Owens, “scarcely attract criticism of one party over the other”. Having said that, Tolson said, without entirely shifting the blame for the Owens’s discord: “I… find the wife to be more sensitive than most wives.” Assuming that “most wives”, like Tolson’s redefinition of “sensitive” to mean “dislikes being controlled”, represents this man’s anecdotal impressions, as opposed to any current scholarly literature, this demonstration of the potential horrors of state-monitored unions arrives, rather usefully, at the point when it’s proposed, in the Lords, to extend their availability, in the first instance to siblings. It is not the first attempt: in 2004, an alliance of Christians and homophobes tried to wreck civil partnerships legislation with an amendment extending them to cohabiting siblings. The implication being that the beginning of the end of official prejudice against same-sex unions was no more than a tax dodge. Along with the upskirters’ friend, Christopher Chope, we find Edward Leigh, Norman Tebbit and the then bishop of Rochester, Michael Nazir-Ali, among those aligned with the (still sitting) Lord Maginnis, in seeking fairness for “people who are not”, Maginnis said, “indulging in an unnatural sexual practice”. With civil partnerships established, the Burden sisters, Joyce and Sybil, became the first parties, in 2008, legally to represent that historic advance for gay rights as an affront to inheritance tax-paying siblings (mercifully, they appeared to own enough to make their home secure). Dismissing their case, judges in the European court of human rights noted that the promotion by a government of marriage and long-term, same-sex relationships is a legitimate social aim. Today, it may not, ultimately, help Catherine and Virginia Utley, the latest cohabiting siblings to become publicly exercised about their future tax bill – sorry, this “tragic loophole” – that their project so closely resembles the resumption, by other means, of homophobic attacks on civil partnerships, to the point of resurrecting various original contributors, including Nazir-Ali. The siblings could, after all, have campaigned specifically for tax reform (given the value of their caring), without going near extending CPs and therefore to Tebbit’s earlier pleasantries on this subject: “I quite fancy my brother.” Moreover, would it even be a kindness if the Treasury were to look favourably upon the Utleys’ complaint, since civil partnerships come with liabilities indistinguishable from those in marriage? “Dreadful” – in Catherine Utley’s words – as it may be of the government to impose on her the same inheritance tax liability as it does on all unofficially cohabiting couples, any officially recognised couple surrenders, in exchange for tax privileges, freedom from state supervision. As the appeal court stated, re Owens v Owens: “Parliament has decreed that it is not a ground for divorce that you find yourself in a wretchedly unhappy marriage.” In what the state encourages, with tax breaks for recognised partners, it can also, to the same end, interfere, via its court enforcers: men such as Mr Tolson. Even eligible lovers who once considered going for this fantastic tax bargain may wonder, in the light of his marital prescriptions, what the hell they were thinking of. • Catherine Bennett is an Observer columnist