Reflecting on Boris Johnson’s cabinet resignation letter this week, it was hard not to think also of Peter Ridsdale, the larger-than-life chairman of Leeds United between 1997 and 2003. The free-spending Ridsdale took his football club to the brink of triumph before taking it even faster to the brink of bankruptcy. In 2003, confronted by his critics and the fans, he offered the memorable excuse, which should be carved on his tombstone: “But we lived the dream.” As a born and bred Leeds boy myself – and Ridsdale was in my brother’s class at school – I need no lessons about the umbilical but destructive link between football and the delusion of living the dream. But as Johnson’s resignation letter showed on Monday, living the dream is clearly a deep political delusion too. “[The Brexit] dream is dying,” the worst foreign secretary in modern history lamented. These were deeply revealing words. To be fair, all of us live our lives in the imagination as well as the real world. All of us know the pull between doing the romantic thing and doing the realistic thing. Government ministers live their whole lives with this tension. Sensibly, most tend to be realists rather than romantics. Yet Johnson, as William Hague put it rather brilliantly in the Daily Telegraph this week, “after a long struggle over which one he is, has finally proved he too is a romantic – provided someone else is first”. It is not possible to understand Brexit without understanding that Brexit is, as Johnson called it, a dream. Many different dreams, in fact. For some it has been a dream of sovereignty, for others a dream of freedom, or of restored greatness and much else. There is nothing necessarily wrong or ignoble with dreams, or even some of those particular dreams. But in the end dreams exist in the imagination, not reality. They don’t put food on the table. They don’t balance the accounts. Dreams are never enough. That has been this government’s achilles heel. The fundamental practical difficulty that all Brexiteers have faced since June 2016 is that dreams of this kind oversimplify a world full of complexity. Brexit was offered as a single liberating proposition, when in fact it involved multi-layered consequences and implications that require negotiation with others. It is hardly surprising that the May cabinet and the wider Tory party have struggled to come up with a defined view of Brexit because, in the end, Brexit isn’t a plan at all. It’s an attitude, not an agenda. It is more important for Brexiteers to “believe” in Brexit than to implement it. It’s like believing in your football team. It’s why Brexiteers are so suspicious of Brexit betrayal. In their minds, Brexiteers own the result in 2016 – and regard it as absolute – but are unwilling to own the practical consequences. Faced with a choice between Brexit and a plan for Brexit, they will always choose the former. As a consequence, most of the practical detail has had to come from the realists, some of whom are against Brexit altogether, while others are supporters of what Johnson this week called “semi-Brexit”. That is why last Friday’s cabinet summit at Chequers was so important. Chequers was where dreams ran into realities. It was a collision that was bound to happen eventually because, without it, there could be no negotiated Brexit. That may not matter to those for whom Brexit is a statement of faith. But it is not enough for anyone else. May and most of her ministers, along with most of business, most employees, and a large part of the leaver majority and all but a small segment of the remainers, want a negotiated exit. They do practical. Too many Brexiteers don’t do practical at all. They despise it. They wallow in their superiority to mere detail. When push came to shove, that is why David Davis resigned too. Davis spent two years attempting to produce a practical Brexit. But even he ultimately found the facts did not fit his fantasies. He is almost certainly right that the facilitated customs arrangement that the cabinet opted for last week will be unacceptable to the EU and won’t work anyway. But he had no acceptable and workable substitute either. At least Davis tried. Johnson, on the other hand, didn’t bother at all. For Johnson, Brexit was just a stance, a way of getting attention. The revolutionaries of earlier eras saw their revolutions as gateways through which they would stride in order to implement plans, policies and projects they were passionate about. Johnson simply saw Brexit as a gateway against which to pose and prepare for the prime ministership. On Thursday the realists will begin to consolidate their decisive victory over the romantics. The publication of the government’s Brexit white paper – which should have happened long ago – is the beginning of the true negotiation between the May government and the EU. It is certain not to be the final word on the terms, partly because they must now be negotiated with the European commission, the parliament and the member states, and partly because important parts of the UK plan would breach Brussels’ red lines. There will be plenty of fresh opportunities for the Brexiteers to cry betrayal in the weeks ahead. But this is deeply unfair on the realists. It is the romantics who offered a false and unachievable solution to Britain’s real problems. It is the romantics who have refused to take responsibility for their own success. It is not the realists who are betraying the voters, but the romantics. Most of all it is their most prominent leader. Johnson offered Britain his dream, but he has given Britain its nightmare. Thank goodness he has gone. May he never return. • Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnist