I love a neat pasta recipe in which the sauce can be made in the time it takes for the pasta to cook. This week, I bring you two such recipes that make the most of summer kitchen companions: tomatoes and corn. One is a bright red tomato sauce made simply with a box grater. The other is a new take on an old children’s favourite,sweetcorn cut from the cob and made a little more chic with the addition of greens, ricotta, green chilli and “little ears” of orecchiette. Use the best oil and the ripest tomatoes you can get your hands on – there is nowhere to hide. Prep 10 minCook 20 minServes 4 1.5kg large ripe tomatoes (I used bull’s hearts)2 tbsp red-wine vinegar1 small garlic clove, peeled and very finely choppedSea salt Extra-virgin olive oil400g spaghetti or spaghettini1 small bunch basil or marjoramA few sprigs of mint100g ricotta salata or parmesan (I use a vegetarian one) Cut half the tomatoes in half across the middle (around the belly, not through the core). Using the cut side of the tomatoes against the coarse side of a box grater, grate the halved tomatoes, then discard their skins. Halve and cut the core from the rest of the tomatoes, using a hand to squeeze out some of their juice (you don’t want the sauce to be too watery). Roughly chop these squeezed tomatoes and add to the bowl of grated tomato. Add the vinegar, garlic, a good pinch of salt and about four tablespoons of olive oil. Taste and add more vinegar, salt or oil as needed – if you think the tomatoes need it, you could also add a tiny pinch of sugar (at this time of year, I never think it’s necessary). Leave to sit and steep for 15 minutes. Cook the pasta in well-salted boiling water for one minute less than the packet recommends. Drain, then put it back into the pan, pour in the tomato sauce, and toss with the herbs and a good grating of ricotta salata. Tangle into bowls with more oil and grated ricotta You can use frozen corn if fresh is hard to come by. Smoked salt is a luxury: use it if you have it; if not, sea salt will do just fine. Prep 15 minCook 20 minServes 4 400g orecchiette, or other small dried pastaExtra-virgin olive oil350g sweetcorn kernels (from 3 fresh cobs)Smoked salt and black pepper 1 bunch rainbow or swiss chard, stalks and leaves separated and sliced2 green chillies, finely chopped100g ricottaZest and juice of ½ unwaxed lemon1 large bunch basil Bring a large pan of well-salted water to a boil. Add the pasta and cook for one minute less than the packet instructs. While the pasta is cooking, heat a tablespoon of oil in a large frying pan over a medium heat, then add the corn and a good pinch of salt and pepper. Cook for four to five minutes, until the kernels are tender and beginning to brown. Next, add the chard stalks and cook for a couple minutes more, before adding the leaves and the green chilli. Cook for a further four to five minutes, until the leaves have wilted. Once the pasta is cooked, reserve a mugful of its cooking water, then drain well. Add the pasta to the frying pan with half the ricotta, then grate in the lemon zest and squeeze in the juice, along with a splash of the cooking water. Toss, then, if need be, add more cooking water, so you end up with a silky sauce that coats each piece of pasta. Toss through most of the basil. Spoon the pasta into bowls, put the rest of the ricotta on top and finish with the last few basil leaves.