If you’re one of those people who reflexively hates anything hip, Dirty Projectors will profoundly aggravate you. If the Brooklyn-formed group were juice, it would be cold-pressed; if they were an apartment, it would be a converted warehouse full of rare cacti; and if their rather torrid saga became a movie, it would be directed by Noah Baumbach. They have the – potentially annoying – hyper-literacy of the economically comfortable middle-class hipster, both lyrically and in their diverse influences (African pop, classical minimalism, R&B, punk). They also have a propensity for moments of bow-legged wackiness; a restive Dr Seuss energy makes them scurry about from one thing to the next, often within the same song, which you might need to acquire a taste for. You might have also been rubbed up the wrong way by their previous, self-titled record, one of the most extraordinary breakup albums ever released, which bandleader Dave Longstreth used to rake over his relationship with former bandmate Amber Coffman in forensic detail. Moments of exquisite poignancy (“we had our own little bubble” – a sad, perfect pause – “for a while”) were offset with hugely unlikable snootiness (“what I want from art is truth / what you want is fame”) and the sense that Coffman, once so much a part of the band, couldn’t put forward her side of the story. But even if you’re Coffman’s hipster-hating older brother, you might find a grin creeping across your face on hearing this irrepressible, sunny, even rather silly follow-up. If its predecessor was Longstreth’s Here, My Dear, this is his I Want You, the one where he dives into the shallow waters of new love with his eyes closed. “You pulled me up when you took my hand,” he sings on the beautiful opener Right Now, aided by R&B singer Syd on backing vocals. “There was silence in my heart and now I’m striking up the band.” They reply in bawdy honks of brass. On the next track, the single Break-Thru, Longstreth is like the friend you see on Saturday morning who has visibly got laid on Friday night: seemingly hoisted on air by cherubs and chirruping birds. This being Longstreth, though, his girl isn’t “fit” or “banging” – instead “she’s got features on Fellini / Deadpan, unimpressed, Archimedes’ palimpsest / Just hanging out all Julian Casablancas.” And off he bowls down the street, twanging a guitar line as happy and saucy as a wolf whistle. Later songs are called I Feel Energy, I Found It in U, You’re the One … “OK, we get it!” his brunch buddies must be crying out. This lovedrunk headspace prompts some funny, psychedelic images – “I’m in love for the first time ever / The universe becomes my mom and my dad,” he sings on I Found It in U. “And when we met there were alien hosannas / Thrown from the heavens like Prince and Nirvana.” While his musical speciality is knotty cleverness, the sheer certainty of his adoration also results in some of his simplest melodies, not least the chorus of Blue Bird, which feels like a nursery rhyme that you’ve always known. That’s not to say anything is smoothed out: Longstreth eggs his arrangements until they’re rich but still fluffy. Haim, Amber Mark, Empress of, Dear Nora, Rostam Batmanglij and Fleet Foxes’ Robin Pecknold also turn up for vocals, while there’s modular synth from Tyondai Braxton and dinky funk percussion; high, plinking piano drives the waltz of What is the Time. Most idiosyncratic of all is the brilliant closing ballad (I Wanna) Feel It All, with Sinatra-style strings, reversed cymbals, and a two-note motif played on recorder – the latter instrument is a cool balm after the sweaty energy of the previous songs. It’s all very strongly written, though Longstreth is now reaching for familiar motifs – the lovely, downward-plodding chords of That’s a Lifestyle are reminiscent of those on the previous album’s equally lovely Up in Hudson, and there’s only so many more tightly circular riffs and sudden heavy guitar chords he can write. That’s a Lifestyle is nevertheless the richest track here, as Longstreth rolls his tongue back in long enough to muse on marketing and capital – though, given he rarely looks beyond himself, it could be an extended metaphor for his own band. How long Longstreth’s swoon will last is debatable, and you can imagine an awkward moment when his new partner dips into the previous album: “What’s this bit about ‘love’s gonna rot, and love’s gonna dissipate’?” But it’s thrilling to be caught in his heart’s upswing – a reminder that, like childbirth, we’ve evolved to forget the pain of heartbreak so we can keep moving forward.