It is 11 years and one month since a chubby-faced Welsh youth stood on London’s Tower Bridge marvelling, along with a slightly less chubby-faced Manx youth, at the fact that they were both about to make their debuts in the Tour de France. Both Mark Cavendish and Geraint Thomas were products of the legendary British Cycling academy in Manchester, run by the plain-speaking coach Rod Ellingworth, who moved with Thomas to Team Sky in 2010, where the pair have remained ever since. Thomas’s Tour victory on Sunday marks another high point for Ellingworth’s protégés. In the coach’s 2013 autobiography Chasing Rainbows (declaration of interest; I co-wrote it), Cavendish takes the starring role, in much the same way that Sir Bradley Wiggins did in the 2008 Olympic team pursuit four, where Thomas was a tower of strength while flying largely under the radar. There was some debate over whether Wiggins should partner Cavendish in the Madison relay, as the Londoner’s form was dubious; the effervescent Thomas was the man who should have taken his place. Only one cyclist has taken longer than Thomas to win his first Tour de France, from debut to triumph: Joop Zoetemelk, the rangy Dutchman who took the 1980 race, the highlight of a career spent in the shadow of Eddy Merckx and Bernard Hinault; Thomas has always raced alongside more ambitious men such as Wiggins, Cavendish and latterly Chris Froome, notching up sufficient wins to remind onlookers of his innate talent, while inspiring a degree of frustration that he never quite made the definitive breakthrough. The past four weeks may have changed that. Within British cycling the pattern is now firmly established along the template set by Ellingworth, but originally foreseen by Peter Keen, founder of the Lottery funded cycling structure: track racing is used as a way to develop skills necessary for road racing. So Thomas won junior one-day Classics such as Kuurne‑Brussels‑Kuurne and Paris‑Roubaix as well as racing amateur six-day track events with Cavendish. During those outings Ellingworth, inevitably, recalls Thomas being involved in “massive falls”, including one in which he skinned his palms in a stage race and turned up at breakfast the following morning assuming he would abandon only to be told that he pedalled with his legs not his hands. The Welshman’s arrival at the academy, a year early, took the entire structure up a level because of his sheer innate talent, the coach wrote. Ellingworth also recalls how, tongue in cheek, he told a team meeting that a certain rival was such a strong favourite in one event that the only solution was to find a volunteer to fall off in front of him. “It was Geraint Thomas who raised his hand,” to be told: “Only joking mate.” The ultimate team man, then, as Froome discovered in the 2015 and 2016 Tours. Between stints in the service of others Thomas has built a fine all-round palmarés: two Olympic gold medals, a Commonwealth road race title, a one-day Classic – the Grand Prix E3 – and a wealth of stage races, beginning with the Flèche du Sud in 2006 and gaining in significance over the years; the Bayern Rundfahrt in 2011 and 2014, the Volta Algarve in 2015 and 2016, Paris-Nice in 2016, the Tour of the Alps last year before this season’s diptych of the Dauphiné Libéré and Tour. The picture is that of a cyclist who can do anything – along the lines of Hinault, Merckx and Zoetemelk – from winning a major stage race, a prologue time trial or challenging in a major one-day Classic such as the Tour of Flanders or Paris-Roubaix. Whether Thomas repeats this year’s feat is open to question, not least because of the team leadership issue at Sky. At 32 he has only a couple of years available to win a second Tour de France, and he has already stated that returning to the one-day Classics might become an ambition. Winning multiple Tours in the modern era seems to be a matter for a specialist such as Froome. The obsessive strain of altitude training camps and extreme diets is not to be underestimated and Thomas is celebrated as a man who loves normal human things such as a couple of beers, as he made clear in his autobiography. In one sense that barely matters. Thomas’s win has massive implications for cycling in Wales. The council in Cardiff got in on the act on Sunday with a hastily arranged series of events to mark the occasion and in the longer term that Welsh yellow jersey should provide fresh impetus to a sport which was already on a roll in the South Wales heartland thanks to the success of Nicole Cooke, Becky James, Thomas and his fellow Sky Welshman Luke Rowe. Over recent years a constant flow of youngsters has come on to the velodromes in Cardiff and Newport and there has also been the foundation this year of a national under-23 team to act as a feeder for the Commonwealth Games. Zoetemelk never won the Tour again but he retired happily in 1987, having taken the world road race title at the age of 38 to crown a remarkable all-round career. The modern sporting world expects repeat feats but in fact the trend is for cyclists to win the Tour only once; Wiggins was exceptional not in winning a single Tour but in never returning to it after his win. Whatever direction Thomas chooses to take, his history suggests he will succeed at it, if not without losing a certain amount of skin along the way.