Porochista Khakpour has views about what she refers to as The Book I Sold – as distinct from Sick, the book that she actually wrote. “I laugh sometimes thinking about that book that I would have written,” she tells me from Glendale, California, when we speak on the phone. “I mean, what a fake book that would have been.” In the epilogue to Sick, she describes that imaginary book as “a story of triumph, of how a woman dove into the depths of addiction and illness and got well. She got herself better. She made it. The Book I Sold might even imply you can do it too. Or anyone can. Who knows. The Book I Sold was never written past a barebones proposal”. Instead, Sick is the story of different kind of triumph, and one certainly less congenial to the fantasy of perfect wellness. In it, Khakpour describes years of severe ill health that expressed itself in numerous symptoms, both physical and psychiatric; a slew of doctors, therapists and, frankly, quacks, who proposed a wide variety of diagnoses and treatment plans; and near unending rootlessness, as Khakpour, having emigrated with her family from Iran as a child, moved between Los Angeles, New York, Pennsylvania, New Mexico and Germany. While some of her upheavals are explained by the life of a writer and teacher – now 40, Khakpour is the author of the novels Sons and Other Flammable Objects and The Last Illusion, and has taught in a number of institutions including Columbia University and Bard College – the underlying sensibility is that of a quest. As she powerfully describes in Sick, each new horizon represented a fresh start, often on multiple levels, as Khakpour wrestled not simply with work, personal relationships and health, but with her innate sense of feeling out of joint, never quite in the right place at the right time. (She laughs as she tells me that someone recently, and hesitantly, described her as nomadic: “I think she was worried it would be insulting as a Middle Eastern person, even though I don’t come from nomads.”) In 2012, Khakpour was finally diagnosed with Lyme disease, the tick-borne bacterial infection that affects an estimated 300,000 people in America each year and the symptoms of which include rashes, joint pain, fevers and fatigue. Lyme can be treated successfully with antibiotics but it can also mutate into a far less fathomable condition, chronic or late-stage Lyme, which causes even more havoc in the body and mind; in the course of Sick, Khakpour describes some truly terrifying episodes, from convulsive fits to an apparently impenetrable wall of insomnia. When we speak, she is roughly on the road to recovery after a recent relapse; her benchmark is that she hasn’t been to hospital for a couple of weeks. Nonetheless, she has retreated to her parents’ house, and has had to cancel events on her book tour. And behind all this is another trauma: that of being believed. Late-stage Lyme has been for many years a controversial diagnosis, with even infectious disease specialists unwilling to commit to a firm definition; in the wider world, it has been tinged with the suggestion that it is essentially neurotic in origin, along with conditions such as chronic fatigue syndrome or fibromyalgia. Khakpour is encouraged by recent progress on that front; the CDC (Centers for Disease Control and Prevention), she says, “is pretty much on our team”, and has expanded and refined its definitions of Lyme. Probing a little further, I use the word “mysterious” to describe the illness, with its cavalcade of symptoms, uncertain course and resistance to treatment, and Khakpour rightly picks me up on it. “In some ways it is mysterious,” she says, “and in a lot of ways the mystery is wilful on the parts of the medical community. Because there’s a ton of data, there’s a ton of great, brilliant mainstream scientists, and organisations that are providing a lot of good info on this, so I don’t know why – I mean I do know – I am very frustrated with why it’s controversial still.” I ask her to elaborate. What does she know? Why does the controversy linger? We haven’t progressed so much from seeing women as hysterical when they present “Because it would cost the US a lot of money, just like Aids and cancer, it would require a lot. And our country has an atrocious healthcare system, and they don’t want to put that power behind things to both deal and eradicate. We have a really shamefully horrid healthcare system, and I think that’s part of it. It’s much more convenient to think these people are just crazy, or it’s in their heads. It’s a very real thing; I don’t know of anyone who doubts it any more. Occasionally I encounter people that do. I’m astounded at their wilful ignorance; it’s not actual ignorance.” Illness never takes place in a vacuum; it can never be separated from the social and political context of its treatment. I tell Khakpour that I found it hard to get past a passage in her book in which she is being taken to hospital: “An ambulance arrived, and a black paramedic tried to take my vitals as I convulsed, foaming at the mouth, going in and out of coherency. When she finally got me to make some sense, I immediately expressed a worry: Please don’t take me somewhere where they are racists.” Going through what could be a life-or-death situation, frightened, disoriented – and still needing to have this thought; unimaginable if you haven’t experienced it. “I often talk about hospitals as a place where you get profiled quite a lot,” she says. “And so you have to be really careful there. That’s their job, right, in a sense? People in emergency medicine are supposed to just look at you, and you have to say, where am I going to be safe? It’s a mess.” In the scene just described, Khakpour relays an additional complication; when she is very unwell, she becomes very pale, and the paramedic, thinking she was white, was confused. That sense of dealing with an identity that becomes unstable in the world courses through the book; but as a woman, as an immigrant, and as someone who is chronically ill, Khakpour is always at a disadvantage. “The real core of it,” she argues, “is we haven’t progressed so much from seeing women as hysterical when they present.” She tells me that the long-term sick are often advised to take advocates with them to medical appointments; and if she is accompanied by a white, male friend, “a suit-and-tie sort of guy”, they will often get further. In the Trump administration, the “mess” has got an awful lot worse, as healthcare becomes more and more limited and increasingly labyrinthine to access; Khakpour, like so many sick Americans and their relatives, spends days chasing doctors, medications and results. “We know what they’re doing, right?” she says, of the attack on the nation’s health. “It serves a very small, elite, Aryan nation subset of the population. But I think more and more Americans are realising that they’re being excluded and excluded and excluded.” Does she think, then, that there’s a glimmer of hope? The people who believed Trump was speaking for them – are they also becoming aware of their own disempowerment? “I think they are. And I think they will. And if he gets another term, it’s only going to be because their racism outweighs their own self-interest; their xenophobia, their own sexism. All the bigotry will have more weight to them than anything else; that’s the only way.” But as much as Sick is a narrative of illness, treatment and the medical system, it is also a book about interiority; what happens to the mind and to the emotions when they are under siege for so long. We come back to the idea of the wellness bible, the triumph-over-adversity story, the manual for positive thinking. We are back to that other, unreal book: “The Book I Sold would have been a pretty crappy book. I mean, I wish I was better, and I wish I wasn’t going through all this, but I don’t think that book would have been a good book, because it would have just been: Ta dah!” She is at pains to say that she doesn’t want to dismiss others’ books. But she adds: “There’s so much of Do These Five Things and You’ll Be Better, and This Is What I Did. But the thing people don’t always see is that, for whatever reason, I’ve seen a lot of those same people in those same books, I’ve seen them in IV wards, and I’ve seen them during touring, and they sometimes relapse too. “The body is fragile. I had a very set idea of what would make me well, and I was happy to let things happen to me, and then my body didn’t respond to them the way it used to. It’s very complicated; wellness is not this easy proposition at all.” Sick is published by Canongate (£9.99) on 2 August