The former boys’ football coach and Newcastle United coaching assistant George Ormond has been found guilty of committing 36 counts of sexual abuse against 18 victims over a 24-year period between 1973 and 1997. The jury of six women and five men, who heard evidence from 50 witnesses during the six-week trial at Newcastle crown court, took two days to return the verdicts. The jury returned not guilty verdicts on one charge of buggery and one of indecent assault. Ormond, who was described as a “predatory paedophile” by Northumbria police, committed the crimes when he was a prominent coach at the boys’ club from 1973, and from 1993 to 1997, when he was assisting with Newcastle United’s youth coaching. The victims, who cannot be named for legal reasons, came forward to police and gave evidence in court of being abused by Ormond. The victims, some of whom broke down and wept when giving their evidence, all said they did not tell anybody for years about the abuse they had suffered. Many said they had felt ashamed and embarrassed, and were worried they would be ridiculed and not believed. They said they were intimidated by the power and influence Ormond wielded on their prospects of a career in professional football. One victim said Ormond warned him to keep quiet, telling him: “I’ve got your dreams in my hand. If you say anything, I will crush them.” Det Supt Mick Paterson, of Northumbria police, appointed 11 officers to the investigation after victim Derek Bell waived his anonymity and spoke publicly about it in November 2016. He praised the victims who gave evidence. “George Ormond is a sexual predator, a predatory paedophile,” he said. Paterson added: “He preyed upon his position of trust with young men who had aspirations and dreams of footballing success and careers, and he used that hold as a kingmaker to allow him further access to more victims to abuse them. That is insidious and the worst breach of trust. “I commend the victims who came forward and told us what happened; it allowed us to pursue a very large investigation and bring George Ormond to account. They are very, very brave men who should be held up to other victims out there. Policing has come a long way and we can support people on their difficult journey of coming forward.” Paterson accepted that Northumbria police’s response was inadequate in 1997, when the force did not investigate after the first allegations against Ormond were made. Bell, who was abused by Ormond while playing for the boys’ club in the 1970s, told a Newcastle United physiotherapist, Paul Ferris, in the spring of 1997, but said he did not want to go to the police. Ferris nevertheless informed a senior police officer, but told the trial that the officer had said the police could not take action, as Bell did not want to make a formal complaint. Ferris also informed John Carver, then a senior Newcastle United youth coach who in 2015 became the club’s manager. Carver told the court he had not been sure what to do and Ormond remained involved until 1998, when Carver told him he had to leave due to a new requirement for coaching qualifications. Paterson told the Guardian that police practice at the time “wasn’t adequate”, because it relied too much on victims initially being prepared to make statements. It had been “a missed opportunity” in 1997, he said. “It is regrettable that George Ormond went on and abused after that. All I can really say as the head of safeguarding now, my approach would be very, very different.” Newcastle United’s response in 1997 to being first notified of the allegations against Ormond is being considered by Clive Sheldon QC, who is conducting an inquiry for the Football Association into whether clubs handled allegations of sexual abuse appropriately. Following the verdict, Newcastle United did not make any comment, except for a spokesman saying that the club has cooperated fully with the police and FA inquiries. Bell told the Guardian he was pleased that Northumbria police had now conducted a full investigation but he believed they should have investigated more fully in 1997, and in 2000, when he did first make a formal complaint about Ormond. In 2002 Ormond was convicted of 13 counts of indecent assault against Bell and six other victims, all while they were playing for the boys club. Paterson accepted that police then appear to have conducted little further investigation of Ormond’s activities, including at Newcastle United. During this trial, Ormond opted not to give evidence himself. His barrister, Rebecca Trowler QC, had told the jury that he denied that any of the alleged abuse or incidents took place, and accused many of the victims of lying. The prosecuting barrister, Sharon Beattie, had described Ormond as “a classic groomer and manipulator” of young people, particularly exploiting his influence on their football prospects. The trial judge, Edward Bindloss, is expected to sentence Ormond later this week.