The next few months will see some exciting developments in the Guardian Documentaries strand of short films. Since I joined the Guardian in October 2014, my colleagues and I in the video team have been upping the ante in our quality and range of stories. The strand has become a rare opportunity to commission top international filmmakers to make films of 15-30 minutes – comparatively long for an online video - that take us in-depth into untold stories about real people. The current slate of films, which you’ll be seeing soon, we think reflects the ideal crossover point of journalism, storytelling and visual flair. We’re releasing three challenging new documentaries in consecutive weeks at the end of July and start of August. White Fright (20 July) is about an under-reported attempted attack on a Muslim community in upstate New York. Cops and Robbers (27 July) features an NYPD police officer with a troubling past that is unexpectedly revealed. Little Pyongyang (3 August) takes us into the world of the North Korean community in suburban London, the biggest community of North Koreans outside the Korean peninsula. We’ve also been screening some of our new films at festivals and cinemas across the world, including in New York, London, at the Sheffield Doc/Fest and at the Cannes film festival’s Directors’ Fortnight. At the latter two, we won top awards. Black Sheep, a story of a young black man who joined a racist gang, won best short documentary at Sheffield, one of the world’s top documentary festivals. Skip Day, a beautiful observational portrait of a group of young people having a final day at the beach after their prom, won the Illy prize for best short film in Cannes. Both films will be coming to the Guardian website in October. All these documentaries are very much standalone short contemporary films designed to remain relevant in a year’s time or more, and so not necessarily tied to a current news story or Guardian reporting. I’m aware it can seem unusual to people who are used to the Guardian being all about the written word that we make such films. But they are core to our mission, as an organisation, of unearthing stories of people, places and situations that aren’t getting enough attention. We think these stories are best told visually: in some ways, they’re like our Long Reads, but for stories where you need to see the action rather than just read about it. They are intended to be a meticulously researched experience you can savour and think about, and that’s why they’re the length they are. When we’re deciding what to commission for the strand from the hundreds of ideas we get sent from around the world, it’s important that we think about whether the idea is telling our audience something they didn’t know and didn’t realise they wanted to know, and then keeping them interested and surprised for 20 minutes. We also need to ensure that, even though these documentaries are nearly all made by freelancers, they uphold the Guardian’s highest editorial standards. A great example of this is Little Pyongyang, British director Roxy Rezvany’s documentary about North Koreans living in New Malden. Rezvany has spent years getting to know the population of defectors there, and they trust her. With North Korea being so much in the news recently, this community is often written about superficially, as a curiosity. We haven’t heard from them directly, and that’s what Rezvany does so well. Rather than trying to cover everyone’s stories, Rezvany chose to focus the film around one main character, Joong Wha. He addresses us directly to camera rather than being spoken for, and the visual palette of the film is drawn from the imagery of North Korea that means something to him – especially the food. It’s also a bright pink palette, which we knew would be striking: you can’t look away from it. The importance of a film that looks good and communicates clearly and thoughtfully is a big factor when deciding which documentary proposals to go for; it’s just like the written excellence we look for in our print journalism. The process of pitching films to us is deliberately an open one – any documentary maker from anywhere in the world can pitch us anything, anytime, as long as they can give us a good idea of what they’re planning. If you have an open door, you get the best ideas. Sometimes the simplest pitch makes it feel like an easy decision: when the director Ed Perkins pitched Black Sheep to me, it was a brief description of a few months in the life of Cornelius, his protagonist. It sounded like nothing I’d heard before: a young black teenager who was so desperate to fit in that he made friends with his racist tormentors. He was going to tell it using a mix of close-up testimony and verbatim reconstruction. It just felt like it would work. We deliberately commission a wide range of films in style, perspective and even seriousness. In June, we released an in-house production, The Trap, made in collaboration with Annie Kelly, our brilliant colleague whose journalism on modern-day slavery has broken major stories. This 30-minute film about the sex trafficking of women from US prisons featured characters from across the country, with access to prisons that was jaw-dropping. This was a documentary breaking a new and important story that needed a visual treatment to explain the complex cycle of exploitation; depicting it in words only might have been a harder sell. Kelly and the other collaborators on this project spent more than a year crafting an empathetic portrayal of women who drew us into their world, past and present. For a total contrast, we also like slightly more leftfield, lighter films too: for example Fish Story, Charlie Lyne’s meta-investigation about a family legend involving fish surnames. This film is one of our most successful, and won best short documentary at the Grierson awards, the UK’s major documentary awards event. It’s funny and lovable, and it’s investigative documentary journalism with a twist. Our audience seemed to love it and it keeps racking up the views – you can’t stop the film before it ends; you have to find out whether the legend of the gathering of the fish-surname people was true. It also bears repeated viewings, and that’s something we aspire to. All our films take time - anywhere from three months to as long as two years in the case of White Fright. Sometimes, a story takes time to blossom, and we would rather wait for those big conclusions and a real story arc than rush something out. Often by waiting longer and allowing a filmmaker to dig in to a character’s life more, you end up with a film that resonates further into the future. This is the unique privilege of the documentary strand within the Guardian’s ecosystem: we can be patient as long as the film retains its contemporary relevance. I’m in awe of our filmmakers’ commitment to spending so much time making these documentaries so impressive. Our documentaries are watched all around the world – I’m often surprised by how large our non-UK audience is. The strand is dedicated to telling internationally relevant stories, and that’s important in an age where much of British TV has abandoned telling factual stories outside of the English language. We’re uniquely placed to be a home for documentary, with an inquisitive audience that’s online savvy and probably watches documentaries more than the average person. I hope you enjoy watching this new batch of films, and that they showa different way of consuming some important stories.