One of the pleasures of reading Ottessa Moshfegh is that – unusually, these days – she rarely writes in the present tense. Instead, the sense of immediacy, the sense of being inside a character, the sense of things happening and having psychic value, both to the writer and her reader, is provided by the structure and content of her sentences. Matter of fact, full of bravado yet always wryly observational, these stack up steadily to construct the brisk interior landscape of her third novel, My Year of Rest and Relaxation. A young New York woman – unnamed, moneyed, a spoiled Wasp by her own account, not long out of higher education and now a receptionist at a gallery where art thinks of itself as subversive but is in fact “just canned counterculture crap” – prepares herself for a year-long sleep. This self-induced coma, powered by prescription psychopharmaceuticals, will be broken only by short intervals of waking, during which she will eat ordered-in pizza and visit the lavatory. Why would anyone do this to herself? Because she’s already been made abject and partially erased by everyone she knows. Her mother – “a bedroom drunk” – used Valium to keep her placid as a baby. Her father ignored her. All she managed to elicit from either of them was an aggressive vagueness; even their deaths were acts of absent-minded rejection. Meanwhile, Trevor, her boyfriend since college, now the ex she can’t stop obsessing about, has spent years wearing her down. At the height of their relationship Trevor’s idea of mutually rewarding sex was to come in her mouth while she slept – or pretended to. Everyone is vague about her needs, specific about their own. “Back then,” she admits, struggling with the decaying spectre of late postmodernism that haunts the novel, “I interpreted Trevor’s sadism as a satire of actual sadism.” So this will be less a year of unconsciousness than an orderly retreat “under the black veil of Ambien”, an organised effacement of the self. Her wish is that after some “good American sleep” she will come out the other side into a new life. By the time she wakes, she hopes, even her apartment will have transformed “into a paradise of realised dreams” - although when she tries to imagine that, the best she can do is “a cheesy mural of a rainbow ... a set of dentures in a glass”, the view fast-forwarded to the assisted living facility at the end of a nightmare. One of the other pleasures of reading Moshfegh is her relentless savagery. All this is delivered as comic – it is comic – but it’s not exactly funny, though of course we laugh. Some light relief is provided by the sleeper’s bulimic friend Reva, whose dialogue is scripted from a self-help manual, and by Dr Tuttle, the cartoon psychiatrist whose willingness to prescribe makes the year of recuperation possible. Dr Tuttle, a half-mad croaker in the tradition of William Burroughs, wears a neck brace and a white sleeveless nightgown to work and maintains the half-ironical paranoid patter of a 1960s cartoon psychopomp. Her office is rank with the smell of cat piss, her prescription pad always at the ready – Ativan to Zyprexa via Neuroproxin, Seconal, Promaxatine, primidone, Nyquil; Seroquel, lithium, Xanax and all the rest. It’s clear that the majority of these substances are real enough: until you reach “Infermiterol”, at which point, though you’re fairly certain it’s made up, readerly confidence weakens and you begin to wonder if the medication is real and the doctor herself a hallucination – not so much the text’s, as your own. The narrator, who has similar doubts, is nevertheless ready to pick and mix. “The goal for most days was to get to a point where I could drift off easily, and come to without being startled. My thoughts were banal. My pulse was casual.” Dr Tuttle’s laid-back lunacy provides the only alternative in the text to the arctic self-centredness of everyone else – including that of the narrator, whose retreat is both enabled by and an expression of privilege. Contemporary privilege is, in this context, relief from the responsibility to acknowledge the existence of others. The dissociation of Moshfegh’s characters - their freedom from the need to make human contact, their constant emotional abandonment of one another during interactions as familiar as sex or childrearing - comes over as genuinely vile, but also as inadvertent, less willed than evidence of a baked-in incompetence on a cultural scale. While we’re laughing, we feel disgust. It’s a combination that makes for diamond-hard entertainment: halfway through, though, the reader begins to hope that My Year of Rest and Relaxation will wake up, collect itself and begin to move in some new direction. By then it has established the zoology of a well-funded New York in the moment of supernatural narcissism prior to 9/11; it has been viciously and decisively witty; and it has demonstrated the author’s intellectual and emotional bona fides: now it needs to wake from its own dream and offer conclusions. When it does, almost as an afterthought, the shock is profound and disorienting. M John Harrison’s You Should Come With Me Now is published by Comma. • My Year of Rest and Relaxation is published by Jonathan Cape. To order a copy for £12.99 (RRP £11.04) go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.