Toto Wolff, the Mercedes team principal, has revealed that Lewis Hamilton immediately reassured his team of his confidence in them after he was forced to retire from the Austrian Grand Prix on Sunday. Despite the disappointment, Wolff said the Briton had already psychologically reset in order to be best prepared for this week’s British Grand Prix. Max Verstappen won the race for Red Bull but Hamilton’s championship hopes took a real blow in Spielberg when he failed to finish because of a fuel pressure problem on lap 63. His title rival, Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel, was third, gaining a 15-point swing in his favour and retaking the lead by one point from Hamilton. Having been quick all weekend and leading the race after the first lap, Hamilton looked in the best position to secure another win. However, Mercedes made a strategy error in failing to pit him under the virtual safety car and he lost track position when he did stop, dropping back to fourth. Pushing to overtake he overworked his tyres and with blistering was forced to stop again as his hopes for the race turned to damage limitation. Hopes that were ultimately thwarted when his car finally ground to a halt. It was his first DNF since Malaysia in 2016 and ends a remarkable run of 33 consecutive races when he has scored points, highlighting just how bulletproof the Mercedes has been. He could not hide his disappointment but Wolff believes he quickly thought of the bigger picture. “He came on the radio and said: ‘I don’t know how many are listening in Brixworth and Brackley but I cannot remember the last time I had a DNF. This team has had the best reliability over the last years. This team has had by far the fastest car in the race today and it is the best team I have driven for, so we need to recover from this and I have no doubt we will come back stronger.’ That is his mindset.” Hamilton had been left frustrated and angry in the car when the strategy was wrongly called and the team took the unusual approach of having chief strategist, James Vowles, take the blame publicly over the radio in a bid to keep their driver focused. Hamilton said he had given Vowles a hug after the race and remained confident in his team. “Ultimately, the guys on the pitwall you have to put confidence and faith in,” he said. “All I can see is the guy in front of me and the guy behind me. In those circumstances you have to rely on the guys on the pitwall. We have to work hard to understand it, everyone will be feeling the pain but we have to take out the positives.” That the team had work to do before Silverstone was also acknowledged by the chief engineer, Andrew Shovlin. “We don’t have any excuses,” he said. “We weren’t reliable enough, we didn’t make the right strategy call, our starts weren’t good enough and we didn’t manage the tyres as well as we could have done.” Hamilton has won five times at Silverstone, including the past four and goes into the race as the strong favourite but Wolff insisted that Mercedes would be working flat out to ensure their driver has the best possible chance at his home race. “We will be in the factory at 8am and get everybody together and analyse what went wrong,” he said. “We need to try not to do it again, how best to avoid it and then get our mind back to Silverstone and race as well as we can.”