Prominent neurosurgeon and former head of the Australian Medical Association Brian Owler is joining the former chief minister of the Northern Territory Marshall Perron to lobby senators in support of a private member’s bill repealing the 1997 ban on Australia’s territories being able to legalise euthanasia. The Senate resolved late in June to debate the private member’s bill brought forward by the Liberal Democratic party senator, David Leyonhjelm, once the federal parliament returned from the current winter recess – but that decision has stirred up controversy within the Turnbull government. The former prime minister Tony Abbott has already fired a broadside at Malcolm Turnbull, claiming a proper internal process had not been followed because Leyonhjelm said he had a guarantee from the prime minister that Liberals would be given a free vote on the bill, and it would proceed for consideration in the lower house. With the Senate debate due in mid-August, Owler, in coordination with broadcaster Andrew Denton’s Go Gentle group, and Perron, who was a driving force behind the territory’s rights of the terminally ill legislation in the mid-1990s, has been attempting to persuade senators to support the Leyonhjelm bill. Owler, who became a supporter of voluntary assisted dying because his father endured a terrible death after suffering dementia, provided technical advice to the Andrews government about its euthanasia regime. Victoria is the first Australian state to pass a euthanasia law, which will come into effect in 2019. The neurosurgeon told Guardian Australia the Leyonhjelm proposal would not legalise voluntary assisted dying, it would only allow Australia’s territories “the right to debate this issue rather than Canberra making the decision”. “It allows a debate,” Owler said. “The idea that there is two classes of Australian citizen whether people live in a state or a territory is something a lot of people feel strongly about.” He said senators were being lobbied extensively by opponents of euthanasia, with a similar campaign to the one mounted in Victoria against the Andrew government proposal. Owler predicted the August vote would go down to the wire. “I think it’s going to be very tight. We are cautiously optimistic, but this is going to come down to a handful of votes.” Despite euthanasia being a conscience issue for the Coalition for two decades, the politically sensitive debate will spark infighting within the government. Abbott declared in late June that Turnbull had made a “secret deals with Senate crossbenchers” without taking the government backbench into his confidence. An Abbott ally, the Tasmanian senator Eric Abetz, also raised objections earlier this year: “I trust news reports that the government traded the issue of state-promoted suicide in exchange for support of other legislation in Senate negotiations is incorrect.” Leyonhjelm has confirmed that his support for reviving the Australian Building and Construction Commission was traded for the government allowing his bill to be debated. The Northern Territory became the first jurisdiction in the world to legalise voluntary euthanasia in 1996, but the federal government overrode the territory law in 1997 through a bill introduced by the then Liberal backbencher Kevin Andrews. Momentum has been growing in the Australian Capital Territory to consider a euthanasia regime since the Victorian proposal passed into law. ACT Labor members of the Legislative Assembly Tara Cheyne, Chris Steel and Michael Pettersson are petitioning the federal government to overturn the Kevin Andrews bill.