Scarlett Johansson has dropped out of her role in fact-based drama Rub & Tug after backlash from the trans community. The actor was set to play the role of crime kingpin Dante “Tex” Gill, who was born Lois Jean Gill but identified as a man. He used his massage parlors as a front for prostitution. “In light of recent ethical questions raised surrounding my casting as Dante Tex Gill, I have decided to respectfully withdraw my participation in the project,” Johansson said in a statement to Out magazine. “Our cultural understanding of transgender people continues to advance, and I’ve learned a lot from the community since making my first statement about my casting and realize it was insensitive.” Since news of the project was announced, with her Ghost in the Shell director Rupert Sanders attached, backlash has followed from trans actors and activists. Transparent actor Trace Lysette called the decision indicative of the industry at large. “Hollywood is so fucked,” she tweeted. “I wouldn’t be as upset if I was getting in the same rooms as Jennifer Lawrence and Scarlett for cis roles, but we know that’s not the case. A mess.” Johansson’s initial response, via a representative, brushed off any criticisms. “Tell them that they can be directed to Jeffrey Tambor, Jared Leto and Felicity Huffman’s reps for comment,” it read. Tambor, Leto and Huffman all successfully played trans roles in, respectively, the TV show Transparent, Dallas Buyers Club and Transamerica. Her latest statement hints at a greater awareness of what the casting meant to many in the community and industry. “I have great admiration and love for the trans community and am grateful that the conversation regarding inclusivity in Hollywood continues,” she said. “According to GLAAD, LGBTQ+ characters dropped 40% in 2017 from the previous year, with no representation of trans characters in any major studio release.” She continued: “While I would have loved the opportunity to bring Dante’s story and transition to life, I understand why many feel he should be portrayed by a transgender person, and I am thankful that this casting debate, albeit controversial, has sparked a larger conversation about diversity and representation in film. I believe that all artists should be considered equally and fairly. My production company, These Pictures, actively pursues projects that both entertain and push boundaries. We look forward to working with every community to bring these most poignant and important stories to audiences worldwide.” In response to Johansson’s statement, Glaad president and CEO Sarah Kate Ellis called it a “real opportunity” for the industry to expand on the “authentic transgender portrayals” that have been seen on the small screen. Actor and trans activist Jen Richards also tweeted: “To exhibit the spirit of generosity I earnestly want to see more of, I am going to take Scarlett Johansson at her word that she listened to feedback, realized that despite her intentions this was going to cause harm, and made the right decision to step down. Well done.” It is unclear whether the film will continue with a trans actor in the lead role.