India’s plans for next week’s first Test against England have been disrupted by concerns over the form of Shikhar Dhawan after the opener was dismissed for a second duck in this warm-up match against Essex. Dhawan was expected to partner Murali Vijay at the top of the order for the start of the five-Test series at Edgbaston before he returned a pair in this drawn three-day encounter in Chelmsford. His place is now under threat after facing only four deliveries in preparation for the challenge of taking on Jimmy Anderson and Stuart Broad with the new ball in Birmingham. Dhawan is likely to be replaced at the top of the order by KL Rahul, who was expected to bat at No 3 in the first Test. That means a possible reprieve for Cheteshwar Pujara, who was expected to be dropped following a poor run of form that has seen him average only 14.33 in six County Championship matches for Yorkshire this summer. Pujara hardly made a compelling case for his inclusion in Chelmsford, scoring 23 on the final day after making one in the first innings. It leaves India with a selection headache at the top of their order. Yet they will have an equally tough decision over their bowling attack. In terms of spinners, Ravichandran Ashwin is assured of his place after overcoming the minor finger injury he sustained batting in the nets on Thursday. After sitting on the sidelines for the first two days, the off-spinner got through five overs on the final morning without any apparent trouble. Ashwin is likely to be partnered by the left-arm wrist-spinner Kuldeep Yadav, who conceded 24 from his sole four-over spell in this match. Despite being kept in the field for 94 overs by an Essex side who eventually declared their first innings on 359 for eight, India sent down only 11 wicketless overs of spin. Ravindra Jadeja, who bowled two, appears the most likely spinner to miss out at Edgbaston. India also have a difficult call over their seamers, with Ishant Sharma, Mohammed Shami and Umesh Yadav fighting for two places. Umesh was his team’s best bowler by some distance in this match, taking four for 35 from 18 overs. Yet Ishant and Shami are still considered favourites to make India’s XI at Edgbaston ahead of a bowler who has not played a Test outside the subcontinent in two years.