Where were we then? Oh yeah, Rachel went off and got married, to Mike in the drama. And in real life Meghan went off with Prince Harry and became the Duchess of Sussex. Suits goes on, though. There are more battles to be fought in court, but mainly in the office. Specter Litt is now Zane Specter Litt – the company merged with Rachel’s dad, Robert Zane. That means a whole new load of power struggles, over who’s going to have which office, make partner, and so forth. “Your job isn’t to ask who he is, your job is to kick his ass,” Harvey, the Specter in Specter Litt, tells senior partner, Alex. Both are plotting to take down Robert’s right-hand man, whoever that might be. Later, Alex tells Harvey: “This is my fight, you asked me to fight it, and I’m not going to step in to the middle of round two.” Suits sure loves a fight metaphor. And a mountain one, too. Chief operating officer Donna tells Harvey he’s been to the top of the mountain. “You’ve proved you can do it, and you may not want to admit it, but you’re getting tired of just sitting up there enjoying the view.” There are even fight-climb combinations, metaphorical biathlons. “You point me up the hill; I’m going to kill whoever’s at the top,” Alex tells Harvey. If you don’t know who any of these people are, it doesn’t matter. All you need to know is that everyone’s trying to get up the mountain and kick everyone else’s ass down it. Catch-up done, now come straight on in to series eight, and hey, you might recognise some faces from the (royal) wedding. Warning, though, it’s stupidly addictive. Who’s this, in an actual boxing ring? Sam, that’s who. Or rather Samantha – Robert’s right-hand man is a woman, and she doesn’t seem to be the type to have her ass kicked by anyone. In fact, she tells Harvey to kiss it. Samantha looks good value, and could fill the void left by Rachel. The ghost of Duchess Meghan does haunt Suits. “We’ll both always feel like outsiders no matter how much we earn their respect,” Sam tells Harvey when they sort of make up. And I wonder if that’s what’s going on in Balmoral or Sandringham or wherever. It must be tough, leaving so much sparkle to go and listen to your new father-in-law banging on about Patagonian toothfish or whatever. Hopefully she’s telling them all to kiss her ass.