Chris Froome believes that the vitriol directed at Team Sky during the Tour de France spurred them on. The four-time winner, who has been booed during almost every stage, spat at and had an unidentified liquid poured on him, said the team had bonded over the incidents. “It brought us together,” he said. “We bonded faster this year. It feels as if it was us against the world. It was amazing how the team pulled through especially when off the bike it’s been more difficult.” Froome, who finished second in Saturday’s 31km time trial from Saint-Pée-sur-Nivelle to Espelette, also paid tribute to Geraint Thomas, who will finish with the yellow jersey in Paris on Sunday. “I didn’t need to give him much advice,” he said. “He was in yellow last year, he’s seen me in these situations. We were always very open and honest with each other. It was clear once we hit the Alps that Geraint was in better physical condition so it was pretty simple.” Dave Brailsford praised Froome for his behaviour towards Thomas. “Chris came here to win,” said the Team Sky principal. “He didn’t come here to get on the podium. There was a moment he realised he wasn’t going to win and it would have been understandable for him to have a little moment. But the first thing he did was to get on the front and help Geraint. “That’s rare. And it sums him up. To have the class to do that when he was most challenged, you can see into the heart and the soul of that guy and you know what he is about. Geraint will be a legend in Britain and Wales, but Chris is a titan.” Brailsford said Thomas had been nervous before the individual time trial, especially given the difficulties of riding on skiddy roads, but that Thomas’s experience of winning Olympic gold had helped keep the butterflies away. “This was a similar type of day to when he has ridden in big Olympic finals,” he said. “You have to keep focusing on the process rather than wonder about whether it rains, whether he crashes, or what your rivals are going to do. “He was nervous. There is always going to be performance anxiety at this level but the way he handled it was the key.” Tom Dumoulin, who won the time trial by one second from Froome, paid tribute to Thomas, who he said was the strongest man in the race. “He was in the shape of his life. He never made any mistakes, he was never put into any trouble in the mountains and I only have big respect for him.”