PhotoEspaña, the annual photography festival that takes over Madrid, is this year infused with the spirit of playfulness. Of the 90 exhibitions that fill the city’s museums and cultural spaces, five core shows have been selected and curated by the photographer Cristina de Middel, best known for her Afronaughts series, a playful reimagining of Zambia’s short-lived 1960s space mission. In Middel’s world, play isn’t a time-wasting, puerile distraction but an essential part of creativity. It is an invitation to stop and think differently. For this show of works by Magnum photographers, Middel and her co-curator Martin Parr searched for the word “players” in the Magnum archive. The resulting images show an unexpected side of the photography agency, bringing up questions about the definition of play and how it pervades everyday life, even in times of hardship. Marking 250 years of the modern circus, this exhibition explores the spectacle and thrill of the art form’s golden age, drawing from the vast collections within the Archive of Modern Conflict. While images of elephants standing on their hind legs and lions jumping through hoops are troubling from a contemporary perspective, they stand as a reminder of how differently joy has been experienced in the past. The show traces the trajectory of the spectacular, from human cannonballs to the nuclear tests in the 1950s. Here, Middel has chosen photographers who play with notions of time, place and scientific reason in unexpected ways. AnaHell’s absurdist series Secret Friends features people in multiple locations around the world, neatly bending their bodies forward to expose their backs. A hastily drawn face and a wig instantly transforms them into comic potato-like caricatures of the everyman. A comprehensive retrospective – and the 2018 PhotoEspaña award – celebrates Nigerian photographer Samuel Fosso’s exploration of identity, gender and colonialism in the African diaspora. The exhibition title references his own extraordinary journey from his childhood in Nigeria via Cameroon to the Central African Republic where he fled as a refugee after losing his parents in the civil war. Still a teenager, he became a photographer’s assistant before going on to run his own portrait studio. Fosso’s sardonic humour shines in his early experimental work and his later stylised recreations of black photo icons. • Players. Magnum Photographers Come Out to Play is at Espacio Fundación Telefónica until 16 September; The Greatest Show on Earth, Grand World Final and Samuel Fosso are at Fernán Gómez, Centro Cultural de la Villa, Madrid until 29 July.