The government is to spend £7m on installing in-cell telephones in prisons across England and Wales as part of a drive to improve rehabilitation and stem the flow of illegal mobiles, the justice secretary, David Gauke, is to announce. The technology is already in place at 20 jails and plans are under way to extend the scheme to another 20 over the next two years, it is understood. Most prisoners queue for public phones on the landings, which can be a trigger for violence or fuel demand for illicit mobile phones, the Ministry of Justice said. Last year, a report by Lord Farmer found that good family relationships are “indispensable” to the government’s prison reform plans. In a speech at an event hosted by the Centre for Social Justice, Gauke will say: “Decency also extends to how we treat prisoners – fairly and consistently, with time out of their cells, activities, and the opportunity to maintain family relationships. “As Lord Farmer made clear in his ground-breaking review last year, supportive relationships are critical to achieving rehabilitation.” Officials emphasised that in-cell phones are subject to strict security measures. All calls are recorded, users can only call a small number of pre-approved numbers and active monitoring can be introduced if there is any suspicion the service is being abused for crime. Prisoners will continue to pay to make calls, the MoJ added. The move forms part of efforts to improve inmates’ ability to maintain ties with relatives after they are jailed, which is seen as a key factor in reducing the chances of returning to crime. The announcement on in-cell phones forms part of a £30 million package to improve safety, security and decency across the prison estate following several years of surging levels of violence, self-harm and drug use. In another step, every prisoner will be given a “risk rating” under plans to choke off the influence of organised crime behind bars. Inmates will be assessed according to their chances of taking part in violence, escapes, disturbances and gang activity. The new digital tool – which is being rolled out following a pilot in 16 jails – compiles data from law enforcement databases and prison incident reports. Gauke will also: The speech comes a day before the government’s record on prisons falls under further scrutiny with the publication of the chief inspector of prisons Peter Clarke’s annual report.