French president Emmanuel Macron has broken his silence over the scandal of his bodyguard who assaulted May Day demonstrators, saying: “I’m to blame.” In a display of bravado during the worst crisis he has faced since his election 14 months ago, he added: “They can come and get me. I will answer to the French people”. Speaking to his party MPs in Paris on Tuesday, a bullish Macron denounced Alexandre Benalla’s behaviour as a betrayal. Benalla, a close presidential aide and member of Macron’s inner circle, has been indicted with “gang violence” and impersonating a police officer after he attacked demonstrators at a May Day protest at which he was supposed to be an observer. The Élysée Palace, which knew about Benalla’s assault the following day, kept it quiet for more than two months. After Benalla attacked two protesters he was at first suspended from his job for two weeks, then allowed to return to his post. It was only when Le Monde newspaper published video footage of the attack that Benalla was summoned for questioning by police and put under official investigation on Sunday. He was sacked after the crisis escalated. Talking to supporters in Paris on Tuesday evening, Macron said: “An exemplary republic doesn’t mean making no mistakes. Nobody around me or in my cabinet has ever been protected or exonerated from the rules. Never.” He added: “If anyone is looking for who is responsible, it’s me and me alone. I’m the one who trusted Alexandre Banalla.” The assaults by Benalla and another member of Macron’s governing La République en Marche party are the subject of four separate investigations: two by parliamentary committees, a criminal investigation and a police investigation. Three high-ranking police officers were also indicted on Sunday after allegedly passing CCTV images of the assaults to Benalla. Macron is under increasing pressure to explain why his office did not report Benalla’s actions to the police. The assault only became public last week when Le Monde published new film of Benalla attacking a demonstrator. As MPs questioned senior officials involved in the scandal in a series of investigative hearings, Macron began his speech to MPs from his La République en Marche party with a joke: “Alexandre Benalla has never had the nuclear codes … Alexandre Benalla is not my lover,” he quipped. In his 30-minute address, Macron said Benalla was a “supporter who was very much involved in the [presidential] campaign”. He admitted he was “disappointed” by Benalla’s behaviour, which he had previous described as “shocking and unacceptable”. His remarks were criticised by Eric Ciotti of the opposition Les Republicains party, who tweeted that the president “preferred to explain himself in the heart of his own little caste rather than give explanations the French are waiting for”. Opinion polls suggest the French want Macron to explain himself publicly and that the scandal has had a seriously negative effect on the president’s popularity.