Lewis Hamilton has insisted that his Mercedes team will have to perform at their very peak in the second half of the Formula One season if he is to claim a fifth world championship. The British driver won the Hungarian Grand Prix on Sunday and now enjoys a 24-point lead over his title rival, Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel. However he warned that the Scuderia had the quicker car, a view backed by an optimistic Vettel. Hamilton won in Hungary after a dominant run from pole position, a big win for Mercedes at a track where they had expected to be weak, the proliferation of slow to medium-speed corners not playing to the strengths of the W09 car. The victory completes a remarkable turnaround for Hamilton over the last two races. At the previous round in Germany he came from 14th to win, while Vettel made an error and crashed out. The lead has changed hands six times this season but the 31-point swing in Hamilton’s favour since Hockenheim has given him the largest lead either driver has enjoyed as F1 heads into the summer break. It has been far from plain sailing however. Hamilton has suffered from three mechanical setbacks and three poor strategy calls, but the British driver believes his team have still had the edge. “This year Ferrari really do have the upper hand pace-wise,” he said. “But I think all around, as a whole, we have hopefully done a slightly better job. We’ve got work to do, we’ve got things to improve. We’ve got to try and catch them – but we’ve got to continue to keep rising with all the other elements, which allows us to beat Ferrari when they don’t bring their A-game.” The Ferrari has demonstrated superior pace in the last two races and the Scuderia has clearly stolen a march in engine development. Given that their car has been the better of the two this season, Vettel could have expected to be in front at this stage but in the opening 12 races he has made four mistakes that have cost him points. He took a grid penalty for impeding Carlos Sainz in qualifying at the Red Bull Ring. In Baku he lost places, too aggressive on the restart, in France he clipped Valtteri Bottas in turn one and then went off into the barriers in the wet in Germany. Nonetheless Vettel remains optimistic that he has the car to challenge and would do so in the second half of the year. “This year the pendulum seems to swing once this side, once that side,” said the German. “Obviously if it’s like this, consistency is the key. Scoring points. I didn’t do myself a favour in Germany but I think it’s part of racing. Compared to last year, we lost the championship because our car wasn’t quick enough to be a match in the final part of the season, despite what happened with the DNFs. This year has shown so far that our car is more efficient, our car is stronger and still has a lot of potential to unleash – I’m quite confident with what’s in the pipeline that we can improve. Should be an exciting second part of the year.” Hamilton, however, has a formidable recent record in the second half of the season. In 2014 he retired at Spa after being hit by Nico Rosberg but went on to win five races in a row between Monza and Austin on the way to the title. In his other two championship-winning years with Mercedes, 2015 and 2017, he took five wins from six races immediately after Hungary and was hopeful of similar this year. “The second half is always exciting, it’s always intense,” he said. “The second half usually gets a bit better on our side so we will go and prepare and make sure we come back even stronger.”