The French presidential bodyguard sacked after being filmed assaulting protesters at a demonstration while police watched has appeared before an investigating judge. Paris’s prosecutor’s office opened a judicial investigation into Alexandre Benalla, a member of Emmanuel Macron’s inner circle, and four others implicated in a violent attack against two members of the public. Benalla, 26, was forced to cancel his wedding as detectives continued to question him. He was taken into police custody on Friday over the attack on a young man and woman at a May Day march in Paris. The Paris prosecutor’s office said Benalla and four others went before a judge on Sunday and charges could be brought in the case soon. Benalla faces possible charges of violence by a public official, illegal use of surveillance video and impersonating a police officer. He was due to marry his fiancee, Myriam, at 11am on Saturday at the town hall of Issy-les-Moulineaux, a south-western suburb of Paris. About 50 guests had been invited to a reception lunch at a restaurant in the chic 16th arrondissement of the French capital. Macron and his wife, Brigitte, were not attending but several of the presidential team were expected. Instead, the groom faced questioning by police while other officers searched his home. The scandal broke last Wednesday when a video emerged of Benalla hitting a demonstrator during the 1 May protest. He was wearing a riot police helmet with visor and a police armband, but no uniform. Benalla, described as one of Macron’s confidants, was reportedly attending the march as an observer with another security officer, Vincent Crase, who works for Macron’s centrist party, La République En Marche. Benalla is seen on the video grabbing and dragging a woman, then threatening, hitting and stamping on a young man who can be heard begging him to stop. Riot police had already hauled the young protester from the crowd and surrounded him when Benalla is seen rushing over to attack the man while police look on. Benalla then walked away. Crase, who was also wearing a police armband, is seen dragging and threatening a man. Public and political outrage has been fuelled by footage showing nearby riot police officers appearing to watch the two men carry out the violence without intervening. Three senior police officers who removed film footage of the attack and sent it to Benalla are also expected to appear before the judge accused of stealing video surveillance images and violation of professional secrecy. The mounting scandal, including allegations of an attempted cover-up, is the biggest challenge to Macron since he took power 18 months ago. The interior minister, Gérard Collomb, is facing calls to resign after claims he knew of the violence but said nothing. He has since “severely condemned” the police officers’ behaviour.