As a teenager, I met a man and had an on-off relationship with him for a decade. He was unfaithful and dishonest, but also handsome, charming and interesting. He moved away but we stayed in touch. For the past year, he has been telling me that he is in love with me and wants to be with me. I’ve made it clear that I want to move on, but I love him and it’s been difficult. Even now, in my late 20s, when I see or speak to him, I feel the way I did when we first met. I feel shame that I love him because he isn’t able to give me what I want: an honest, committed, loving partner, marriage, a child and a home. My friends and family say I should cut him out of my life – yet I have been unable to. I don’t think he really loves or cares for me. Recently, he told me he had a child with a woman last year. He has been living with her and trying to be a family, but says he doesn’t love her. This was a complete shock. My autopilot reaction was to congratulate him, but I felt incredibly angry and hurt. Once the shock subsided, I asked him to leave. I am a successful, outgoing and attractive woman. I live an exciting life and (though you probably can’t tell from the tone of this) I am funny and carefree. I have since found it difficult to look at children or pregnant women and young mothers. Why did I love him? I don’t know if he is a bad person. Is he? I feel sad that I haven’t met the right man; I feel like a failure for not having a family of my own; and I also feel envious of his new life and the fact that he has experienced something very special with another woman. I wonder what you want me to say? That, despite everything, this exciting feeling he gives you is worth it? You know it isn’t. The reason he still makes you feel like this, after all this time, is because you never know where you stand with him. It is a feeling of hope, not a sign of a soulmate. You seem terribly kind you want to say the right thing, and you want to be fair: but I think you need to start getting angry. Is this man a bad person? Probably not wholly, which is what makes him so attractive: you keep trying to sieve out the good bits, the gold among the silt, but it isn’t enough, is it? What is clear is that he’s not a good partner and he makes a mess wherever he goes. Don’t be the person to clean up after him. Most of us have been there (I have), with an entirely unsuitable partner who, at times, can feel so right. And, up to a point, that’s OK: it can teach us who we are, what we want, what we don’t want. It can be fun initially, but ultimately we have to leave because, long-term, these relationships erode your self-esteem. They make you feel wrong because you are never right enough for the other person – but only because nothing is. They can’t even be with themselves, which is why they constantly move on: this way they can see themselves reflected afresh in new partners. Ultimately, a relationship with him would stop being exciting and start to hurt. This see-sawing of emotions is not what adult relationships are built on. Imagine never knowing where you stand? Exhausting. What has probably happened is that hearing about this woman has helped you to zero in on what you really want – and let’s see that as a positive, because now you know, and many people don’t. You so want this man (your first love?) to be the one who provides you with everything on your list – but he’s never going to do that. And he won’t provide it for this other woman, either. I feel for her. The only thing you can do with people like this is never see them again. Cut all contact with him; I wrote a column three years ago that explains what happens to the brain when it tries to get over an ex and why the only answer is abstention. I’m not sure you love him and I think that, perhaps, you are more addicted to the way he makes you feel. It’s always hard to let go when you don’t know what’s next. At the moment you can see only (the good bits of) what you’re missing, not the things that will go wrong. So you need some faith. I know you cannot comprehend this now, but you are the lucky one – to have got out, with no ties to him. I don’t see that as failure. • Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence