Spoiler alert: this blog is published after Sharp Objects airs on HBO in the US and Sky Atlantic and Now TV in the UK on Sunday night/Monday morning. Do not read unless you have watched episode two. If it was heavily suggested last week, then this second episode confirms that Sharp Objects is not for the squeamish viewer. The hot heat of the opener has been replaced by filth, grime, blood and gore, whether it’s the pig’s head having its unexpected dental appointment with Detective Willis, the gruesome morgue scene, or Camille teasing that needle on the tip of her fingernail. It often felt as if they were daring you to keep looking; at times, I have to admit, I found it difficult not to turn away. There were fewer flashbacks this week, and they were sparingly woven into the present day, although we got more a sense of who Camille might have been in her Wind Gap days. She was a cheerleader, we find out from her old school friends (Jackie, ever insightful, calls them “those nasty vipers”), and a “princess of Wind Gap”, according to Willis, who teasingly offers to bow down. But the men at the bar tell a different story, too, a leering nod to “blow job shots”, which feeds back into the women’s warning to “watch the liquor, watch the man” in Camille’s presence. Her dark side is certainly not confined to her life in St Louis. Camille is playing two parts in Wind Gap: the dutiful daughter, who is a member of the community because of her heritage, and the journalist, a natural outsider and observer. The tension between the two is palpable and what the show does so well is convey that small-town closeness – at the funeral, everybody already knows who she is, and there’s a feeling that, like her, they don’t know which role she’s there to play. In a bigger sense, we don’t get to know much more about either Camille’s back story, or the killings, although I would argue that the show’s strength so far has been in its excellent, eerie portrait of a town’s dynamics, rather than its central murder-mystery. Camille picks at her clothes, pulling at threads, and this week is much the same. Natalie’s funeral is decorated with a speech about vengeance. Camille does some reporting from the wake, without permission from the family, despite lying about that to her editor Curry, in another act of self-destruction. In the comments, there has been some talk of the pace being too slow, and there’s not much more acceleration as the story progresses. But I think this languid, heavy pace suits it, and it’s so good-looking that even when Camille is just (drunk-)driving around town, taking in the sights, I’m happy to go along for the ride. The official suspects remain John Keene and Bob Nash, although they are allowing us to suspect that Adora might be the fabled woman in white, driven to heinous acts because of her despair over Marian. It’s hinted towards the end, when Adora says she tried to help Natalie, because she reminded her of Camille, “always running around in the woods, coming home wild and filthy”. The police, however, are convinced it’s a man, due to the sheer brute force required to remove teeth with household pliers (oof). But there are more details of the two girls emerging, too: Ama’s friend sneers that the killer isn’t going after “the cool ones”, and both girls are remembered as tomboys – Natalie’s room is full of football memorabilia and spiders. “My demons are not remotely tackled. They’re just mildly concussed” – Camille, explaining to Jackie that she has some way to go yet when it comes to facing her own problems *If you’ve read the book, please avoid leaving spoilers in the comments for those who haven’t. Thanks.