Is this how we can bridge the absurd gulf between the (mostly) public sector workers who have great final salary-based pensions and the lousy stock market-based pensions for private sector workers? Royal Mail is ditching its final salary scheme, but rather than do what virtually every other privatised company has done and leave its workers at the mercy of under-funded stock market-based pensions, it has found a halfway house between the two. If other companies follow, it might just deliver us from pensions penury. Royal Mail’s problem was that its annual pensions bill of £400m for the final salary scheme threatened to escalate to £1.26bn unless it made changes. Understandably, the Communications Workers Union saw it rather differently, accusing the newly privatised firm of cost cutting and asset stripping to satisfy shareholders. What has emerged out of an at times bitter dispute – a strike ballot of 110,000 won 89% support – is a deal that Frank Field MP said this week is a breakthrough that could transform our retirement prospects. The idea is that the new pension will, like a final salary-based scheme, give postal workers a regular income in retirement, based on their service and contributions, with payments rising every year to take account of inflation. So workers have a safety net in retirement. Compare that to the standard private company scheme, where you and your employer throw money into the stock market, and whatever it’s worth on the day you retire has to last you the rest of your life. At that point, your company washes its hands of any responsibility to you. But unlike the traditional final salary scheme, the new Royal Mail retirement pension won’t be guaranteed all the way through retirement. If it becomes too costly, the Royal Mail can temporarily reduce the benefits paid out. Crucially, that means the company is not on the hook for contractually guaranteed payouts. It is these liabilities, says Kevin Wesbroom, of consultants Aon Hewitt, that have terrified company accountants. It is also why final salary schemes have gone into a death-spiral of investing in bonds – because they are the only sure way of covering future financial liabilities – even though their returns have been miserably bad. With final salary schemes, all the risk is on the shoulder of the employer. With stock market defined contribution schemes, all the risk lies with the employee. Royal Mail’s collective defined contribution (CDC) scheme tries to share the responsibility. It’s an idea borrowed from the Netherlands and Denmark (our fabulous global financial centre in London seems incapable of devising schemes that benefit real people) where they have performed well. But there is an important caveat. Royal Mail has committed to continuing to put large amounts into the scheme. Postal workers have to pay in 6% of their salary, while Royal Mail chips in 13.6%, taking the total to 19.6%. In contrast, the 9 million workers currently going through auto-enrolment only have 5% of their salary going into a pension, rising to 8% next year. If we are going to make company pensions work again, we need Australian-style minimum company contributions (scheduled to rise to 12%) plus Dutch-style CDCs. Usually we shrug our shoulders and say it’s not possible – but Royal Mail shows it can be done. p.collinson@theguardian.com