With a first Tour de France win out of the way, Geraint Thomas will show us in the next few months whether he is a ticker or an accumulator. Some athletes tend to achieve a single goal – ticking a particular box – then move on to something else, the best recent example at the Tour being Sir Bradley Wiggins who won the yellow jersey, then added a world time trial title, an Hour Record, an attempt at a one-day Classic, and finally one last Olympic gold medal. Accumulators have an appetite for repeating their feats, troubling the record books as they do so, the obvious current model being Chris Froome. Thomas has until around Christmas to decide whether to target a second Tour, or direct his talent and drive elsewhere - the Giro d’Italia, or the one-day Classics. That will firstly hinge on whether he signs for a further stint at Team Sky, which is probable given that he has grown up at the team, and that there is no obviously enticing squad which will be able to afford him. Secondly, it will depend on whether he or Froome pulls rank, or whether Sky opt for repeating this year’s two-pronged leadership strategy, which will carry obvious benefits but obvious risks: Thomas will be more ambitious, Froome well aware that time is not on his side. In the short term, there is the hangover. Thomas’s teammate and fellow Welshman Luke Rowe informed social media that he had a sore head on Monday morning, which was understandable given their legendary and well documented joint capacity for celebration. There are other riders with bigger headaches, however. The 2018 Tour left a larger than usual number of team leaders scarred mentally or physically or both, which will lend more piquancy than usual to the Vuelta a España, which comes around with disturbing speed, starting on 25 August in Málaga. Neither Thomas nor Froome are likely to be there. Froome started his season early to target the Giro d’Italia while Thomas will digest his Tour win rather than tackle a race which will suit him less than la Grande Boucle. On which note, the Tour of Britain starts in Wales on 2 September, and it is safe to assume that the organisers have - not unreasonably - already begun to badger Sky to field the Principality’s star. At the Vuelta, however, Sky are expected to blood their young Scot Tao Geoghegan Hart, who performed so strongly in support of Thomas at the Criterium du Dauphiné. The Vuelta will at least see the Movistar “trident” of Nairo Quintana, Mikel Landa and Alejandro Valverde attempt to pull off the victory that eluded them at the Tour, while others who need redemption after an unsatisfactory season include Rigoberto Uran, Richie Porte and the Italian Fabio Aru, who flopped in his home Tour. It is unclear whether Adam Yates will target the Spanish Tour, but his brother Simon, star of the Giro until his epic collapse shortly before the finish, is certainly on the list at present. The Spanish Tour also remains a target for the Tour’s biggest casualty, Vincenzo Nibali, who left the race due to a fractured vertebrae, but has the Vuelta pencilled in as preparation for the world championships in Innsbruck in late September. The Frenchman Thibaut Pinot missed his home Tour due to the illness he picked up late in the Giro, but is another who will attempt to salvage something from his season in late August and September. The Tour also saw a large number of sprinters head for home early on, but the extremely hilly world championship and the relatively small number of flat stages in the Vuelta offer limited opportunities to salvage their seasons. The problem for the likes of Mark Cavendish, André Greipel and Marcel Kittel is that even the Tour of Britain isn’t particularly flat, while the Vuelta offers the prospect of repeated mountainous slogs leavened by only the occasional opportunity for a win. The three senior sprint stars of the peloton face an uncomfortable reality: their fast-moving world is moving on fast, and this season they have been left behind. The sprints at the Tour this year were dominated by the Colombian Fernando Gaviria, tipped as the coming man of the final kilometre for several years, and now in pole position to dominate next year. At the Vuelta, should any of the trio opt to travel there, they will face another fast man of the future, the Australian Caleb Ewan, who has a major point to prove after being left out of the Tour when his Mitchelton-Scott team opted to put all their eggs in the Adam Yates basket. Behind the main battle for the yellow jersey, the 2018 Tour offered its usual pointers to the future. The emergence of another French star in the form of Julian Alaphilippe was welcome, but a more interesting prospect went relatively unnoticed. The Frenchman David Gaudu, who is only 21, showed flickers of talent in the mountains in spite of a troubled build-up to finish just outside the top 30, in between pulling stints on the flat for the Groupama sprinter Arnaud Demare. Alongside Lotto NL-Jumbo’s dynamic duo of Primoz Roglic and Steven Kruiswijk, the 24-year-old Dutchman Antwan Tolhoek also showed promise. However, most speculation focused on another 21-year-old, Team Sky’s Colombian Egan Bernal, who managed 15th overall on his debut while remaining comfortably among the lead group on most of the major mountain stages. If he continues to improve at a similar rate, the question of whether Thomas or Froome is the British team’s anointed leader could become irrelevant in a couple of years.