A new manager has arrived and five players have joined, with key signings in goal, defence and, not before time, defensive midfield. Unai Emery has since declared his squad “complete”, with further arrivals unlikely unless “a big opportunity” presents itself. Simon Burnton In Lucas Torreira (Sampdoria, £26.5m); Bernd Leno (Bayer Leverkusen, £19.2m); Sokratis Papastathopoulos (Borussia Dortmund, £17.7m); Matteo Guendouzi (Lorient, £8m); Stephan Lichtsteiner (Juventus, free). Key outs Santi Cazorla (Villarreal, free); Jack Wilshere (West Ham, free). The 20-year-old Welsh midfielder David Brooks, signed from Sheffield United for an initial fee of around £10m, is the only arrival so far but certainly won’t be the last. A new left-back appears to be the greatest focus, with Leganes’s Diego Rico, Celtic’s Kieran Tierney and Genoa’s Diego Laxalt linked in recent weeks. SB In David Brooks (Sheffield United, rising to £11.5m). Key outs Benik Afobe (Wolves, £10m); Lewis Grabban (Nottingham Forest, £6m); Max Gradel (Toulouse, £1.8m); Adam Federici (Stoke, undisclosed). Chris Hughton has already done some shrewd business. Leon Balogun, an experienced Nigeria international, and Bernardo, a promising Brazilian, will add competition in defence, while there are high hopes for Yves Bissouma after the 21-year-old Mali midfielder’s arrival from Lille. Luring Isaac Hayden from Newcastle would cap a productive summer. Jacob Steinberg In Yves Bissouma (Lille, £15m); Bernardo (RB Leipzig, £9m); Florin Andone (Deportivo La Coruña, £5.3m); Jason Steele (Sunderland, undisclosed); David Button (Fulham, undisclosed); Percy Tau (Mamelodi Sundowns, undisclosed); Leon Balogun (Mainz, free); Hugo Keto (Arsenal, free). Key outs Connor Goldson (Rangers, £3m); Jamie Murphy (Rangers, £1m); Uwe Hünemeier (Paderborn, undisclosed); Steve Sidwell (released); Liam Rosenior (released). Sean Dyche has not signed anyone yet, though it is no secret he would like Swansea’s Sam Clucas, a player he attempted to buy before the midfielder left Hull for south Wales. Burnley have released Scott Arfield and Dean Marney and Dyche admits the squad is “skinny” for a club with Europa League commitments. Bringing Jay Rodriguez back could be on the cards and there is also interest in his West Bromwich teammate Craig Dawson. Paul Wilson In None. Key outs Scott Arfield (Rangers, free); Dean Marney (released). A solid window so far for the promoted side, who have raided four old Championship rivals for additions in key areas. The arrival of striker Bobby Reid from Bristol City is particularly eyecatching. Two more signings are likely though and the Liverpool midfielder Marko Grujic, who spent the second half of last season on loan with the Bluebirds, is being sought for a longer stint. The West Brom winger Matt Phillips is another target. Nick Ames In Bobby Reid (Bristol City, £10m); Josh Murphy (Norwich City, £11m); Greg Cunningham (Preston, £4m); Alex Smithies (QPR, £3.5m). Key outs None. The arrival of Jorginho should help bring the “pinch of quality” Maurizio Sarri wants to add to his midfield, although far more will be needed in what may be a frantic few weeks. Aleksandr Golovin, the CSKA Moscow midfielder, and the Juventus defender Daniele Rugani are among Chelsea’s top targets. Pre-season plans would be thrown into chaos if Sarri cannot persuade Eden Hazard and Thibaut Courtois to stay. NA In Jorginho (Napoli, £50.4m). Key outs Kenedy (Newcastle, loan); Trevoh Chalobah (Ipswich Town, loan); Mason Mount (Derby County, loan). Roy Hodgson says Palace must be frugal but there are areas in glaring need of improvement, particularly at centre-forward. They also hope to persuade Ruben Loftus-Cheek back from Chelsea for another year, a plan that depends on Maurizio Sarri’s views. External interest in Wilfried Zaha will remain until the winger signs a new deal; another forward, Bakary Sako, has rejected a new contract. Brentford’s Ollie Watkins is a potential replacement for the latter. NA In Vicente Guaita (Getafe, free). Key outs Yohan Cabaye (Al-Nasr, free); Damien Delaney (Cork City, free); Lee Chung-yong (released); Diego Cavalieri (released). Marco Silva is still waiting on his first signing as Everton manager, with the much-needed improvements to a poor squad yet to materialise. Interest has been registered in several left-backs, notably Celtic’s Kieran Tierney and Lucas Digne, and Digne’s Barcelona teammate Yerry Mina is a central defensive target. An attacking midfielder is also wanted at a club looking to slash its squad size and wage bill. Andy Hunter In None. Key outs Ramiro Funes Mori (Villarreal, £4.4m); Wayne Rooney (DC United, free); Joel Robles (Real Betis, free). The £30m double deal for Jean Michaël Seri and Maxime le Marchand from Nice was a declaration of intent but there is more work to be done. Most importantly Fulham require a striker, with the on-loan Aleksandar Mitrovic having been instrumental in their promotion before returning to Newcastle. Work continues on a deal to secure his return. SB In Jean Michaël Seri (Nice, £25m); Maxime Le Marchand (Nice, £7.5m). Key outs David Button (Brighton, undisclosed); Ryan Fredericks (West Ham, free). Last season’s goal shortage explains David Wagner’s signing of Monaco’s Adama Diakhaby for around £8m. The France Under-21 striker scored only three goals in 30 appearances last term but Wagner clearly spies potential. Ditto with Egypt’s former Stoke winger Ramadan Sobhi, one of six newcomers to have signed for a collective total approaching £30m. They include marquee buy Terence Kongolo, whose £17.5m permanent move from Monaco makes him Huddersfield’s record signing. Louise Taylor In Terence Kongolo (Monaco, £17.5m; Ramadan Sobhi (Stoke City, £5.7m); Jonas Lössl (Mainz, £2.3m); Adama Diakhaby (Monaco, undisclosed); Juninho Bacuna (FC Groningen, undisclosed); Erik Durm (Borussia Dortmund, undisclosed); Ben Hamer (Leicester, free). Key outs None. Riyad Mahrez’s departure has been partly offset by the addition of James Maddison in creative terms, while Ricardo Pereira and Jonny Evans look excellent defensive additions. The Liverpool goalkeeper Danny Ward has joined, while Lazio left-back Jordan Lukaku has been linked and there is an obvious need for a wide man to help fill the void left by Mahrez. Monaco’s Rachid Ghezzal has been linked and interest in Jack Grealish could be revived. NA In James Maddison (Norwich, £24m); Ricardo Pereira (Porto, £17.5m); Jonny Evans (West Brom, £3.5m); Danny Ward (Liverpool, undisclosed). Key outs Riyad Mahrez (Manchester City, £60m); Ben Hamer (Huddersfield Town, free); Robert Huth (released). Spectacularly done and star-dusted, it would seem. Some £176m has been spent improving last season’s Champions League runners-up, with the midfield overhauled by Naby Keïta and Fabinho, Xherdan Shaqiri offering variety to the attack and, most importantly, Alisson addressing the longstanding goalkeeping problem for a world record fee for that position. A £53m deal for Nabil Fekir is not expected to be revived. AH In Alisson (Roma, £65m); Naby Keïta (RB Leipzig, £52.8m); Fabinho (Monaco, £40m); Xherdan Shaqiri (Stoke City, £13.5m). Key outs Danny Ward (Leicester, undisclosed); Emre Can (Juventus, free); Jon Flanagan (Rangers, free). Pep Guardiola missed out on Jorginho, the midfielder choosing Chelsea, meaning the Catalan has managed only half of his proposed summer business. The word is Guardiola may not chase an alternative as he has Ilkay Gündogan and Fernandinho competing for the one berth, but it is worthwhile watching this space. Jamie Jackson In Riyad Mahrez (£60m, Leicester). Key outs Angus Gunn (Southampton, £10m); Pablo Maffeo (Stuttgart, £8.1m); Angeliño (PSV Eindhoven, £5m); Olarenwaju Kayode (Shakhtar Donetsk, £2.6m); Yaya Touré (released). José Mourinho set out to upgrade his full-backs and though the 19-year-old Diogo Dalot is untested the manager is now thought to be content with the position on each flank. Dalot will understudy Antonio Valencia on the right, and Luke Shaw is to be given the chance to challenge Ashley Young on the left. Romelu Lukaku apart, those charged with scoring – Anthony Martial, Marcus Rashford and Jesse Lingard – can be enigmatic so he may strengthen here, too. A player of Mahrez’s ilk would have been perfect so why Mourinho never moved for him is a puzzle. JJ In Fred (£55m, Shakhtar Donetsk); Diogo Dalot (£19m, Porto); Lee Grant (£1.5m, Stoke). Key outs Daley Blind (Ajax, £14.2m); Sam Johnstone (West Brom, £6.5m). Rafael Benítez anticipated spending around £45m but has now been told he must sell to buy. A striker is his priority yet Salomon Rondón’s potential £16.5m move from West Brom remains contingent on Newcastle selling Aleksandar Mitrovic to Fulham for £20m. So far £4.5m has been invested on making the former Sparta Prague goalkeeper Martin Dubravka’s move permanent. Chelsea’s Kenedy has rejoined on loan and Ki Sung-yueng arrived for free from Swansea. Mikel Merino has gone to Real Sociedad for £10m and Benítez covets Crystal Palace’s Andros Townsend. LT In Martin Dubravka (Sparta Prague, £4.5m); Ki Sung-yueng (Swansea, free); Kenedy (Chelsea, loan). Key outs Mikel Merino (Real Sociedad, £10m); Massadio Haïdara (Lens, free). Southampton have been proactive after last season’s relegation scare. They will expect Angus Gunn to take the No 1 spot off Alex McCarthy, Jannik Vestergaard to strengthen a leaky defence and Mohamed Elyounoussi to fill the creative void left by Dusan Tadic, while Stuart Armstrong could also be a smart addition. However, Guido Carrillo’s loan to Leganés is a reminder of recent failings. JS In Jannik Vestergaard (Borussia Mönchengladbach, £18m); Mohamed Elyounoussi (Basel, £16m); Angus Gunn (Manchester City, £10m); Stuart Armstrong (Celtic, £7m). Key outs Dusan Tadic (Ajax, £15m); Guido Carrillo (Leganés, loan). There was relief when Mauricio Pochettino ignored Real Madrid’s interest, but otherwise much of the focus has been on the move into the new White Hart Lane. The pace should pick up when the departures of Toby Alderweireld, Mousa Dembélé and Danny Rose are finalised, with Pochettino targeting Wilmar Barrios, Jack Grealish, Antony Martial and Wilfried Zaha. JS In None. Key outs Keanan Bennetts (Borussia Mönchengladbach, £2m). Gerard Deulofeu and Ben Foster are well known to the Premier League and, as former loanees, to Watford fans, but of the new arrivals Adam Masina, who is expected to become the first-choice left-back, could be the most important. A new striker is still required but with a bloated squad Watford are looking to sell first. SB In Gerard Deulofeu (Barcelona, £11.5m); Ben Foster (West Brom, £4m); Adam Masina (Bologna, £3.5m); Marc Navarro (Espanyol, £3m); Ken Sema (Östersund, £1m); Ben Wilmot (Stevenage, undisclosed). Key outs Nordin Amrabat (Al-Nassr, £4m); Mauro Zárate (Vélez Sarsfield, £2m); Costel Pantilimon (Nottingham Forest, £2m). Manuel Pellegrini has wasted no time restructuring his squad since replacing David Moyes. West Ham broke their transfer record to sign Felipe Anderson in a deal worth up to £42.5m and hope that Jack Wilshere will prove a worthwhile gamble. Their business is largely done, but they could still target a striker and a defensive midfielder. JS In Felipe Anderson (Lazio, £33.5m); Issa Diop (Toulouse, £22m); Andriy Yarmolenko (Borussia Dortmund, £17.5m); Lukasz Fabianski (Swansea City, £7m); Fabian Balbuena (Corinthians, £3.5m); Ryan Fredericks (Fulham, free); Jack Wilshere (Arsenal, free). Key outs Reece Burke (Hull City, £1.5m); Ben Wells (QPR, undisclosed); James Collins (released); Patrice Evra (released). An offshoot of the Portuguese league is establishing itself in the West Midlands, with goalkeeper Rui Patrício arriving from Sporting Lisbon as the headline signing of the summer and the Mexico striker Raúl Jiménez joining him on a season’s loan from Benfica. Wolves have been linked with Manchester City’s young Ukrainian prospect Oleksandr Zinchenko, though given what has already happened a move for Inter’s João Mário (briefly seen on loan at West Ham last season) seems more likely. PW In Diogo Jota (Atlético Madrid, £12.6m); Benik Afobe (Bournemouth, £10m); Willy Boly (Porto, £10m); Léo Bonatini (Al-Hilal FC, £5m); Rúben Vinagre (Monaco, £2m); Rui Patrício (Sporting CP, free); Paulo Alves (Liverpool, free); Raúl Jiménez (Benfica, loan). Key outs Benik Afobe (Stoke, loan); Jonathan Flatt (Scunthorpe, free).