Lewis Hamilton took pole for the Hungarian Grand Prix with another masterclass in the rain. His Mercedes teammate Valtteri Bottas was second with Ferrari’s Kimi Räikkönen third. Hamilton’s title rival Sebastian Vettel, who had expected to be strong at the Hungaroring, could manage only fourth. In difficult conditions amid thunder and lightning echoing around the circuit with rain falling almost throughout the session, Hamilton once again proved his command of a treacherous track. He set the fastest time on his first hot run in Q3 on full wet tyres and given the conditions, the teams remained out rather than pitting for fresh rubber. The British driver then went quicker again and he was over half a second clear of his competitors before Räikkönen found some pace taking the top spot by four-tenths from Hamilton. Vettel looked to be struggling for grip, the pace he had in the dry just not there for the German. Hamilton pitted for a new set of full wets for one final dash at the death and it paid off, he nailed an absolutely superb lap to take pole from Bottas. Hamilton’s fifth pole of the season is his sixth at the Hungaroring, a circuit where he has enjoyed remarkable success. His first pole here was in his rookie season in 2007, a race which he went on to win, the first of his five victories, the most by any driver at the Hungaroring. However the circuit has not proved a happy hunting ground for Mercedes in the turbo-hybrid era during which time they have won only once, Hamilton in 2016. It is his 77th career pole and will be of huge importance to the driver given that Mercedes expected to struggle in Hungary. Hamilton leads Vettel by 17 points in the world championship and will have been hoping to minimise the advantage Red Bull and Ferrari were expected to have on a track that does not play to the strengths of the Mercedes. The twisting challenge of slow-to-medium speed corners is not what their car has been optimised for and in practice they appeared to be on the back foot. Hamilton was fifth in the first two sessions and fourth on Saturday morning. However with the rain a great leveller he pulled a remarkable result out of the bag. Overtaking will once again be very difficult at the Hungaroring. Hamilton has been explicit in stating the team had been working on the starts since the British Grand Prix and he will want to make the best of his pole to stay out of trouble on the run into the tight right-hander of turn one in what are expected to be dry and sunny conditions. The rain was very heavy for the second session and intermediate tyres were used to open on a track that quickly became treacherous. Daniel Ricciardo was caught out when, with yellow flags deployed, he was not able to set a quick enough time before full wets were required and went out in 12th. Vettel was quickest in the limited running that took place as conditions worsened. It had rained before the opening session started and the teams opened on the intermediate tyres but the circuit was quickly drying and a switch to slicks was made. The big three teams were the last to change but all the front runners did manage to put in good times, with Vettel on top as the rain just held off, before descending properly for Q2. Red Bull’s Max Verstappen was in seventh. The Renault of Carlos Sainz Jr was in fifth in front of the Toro Rossos of Pierre Gasly and Brendon Hartley, who made the most of the difficult conditions and finished in sixth and eighth respectively. The Haas of Kevin Magnussen was in ninth in front of his teammate Romain Grosjean. The two Force India drivers both took part in qualifying and will compete in the race despite the team being put into administration on Friday evening. Sergio Pérez was in 19th place with Esteban Ocon in 18th. The team can continue operating while a deal is sought with a potential new owner. The team is understood to owe money to several creditors including their engine supplier Mercedes, team sponsor BWT and Pérez himself. Pérez referred to the financial situation as “critical” on Thursday but potential buyers have been linked with the team. The most high-profile being the Williams driver Lance Stroll’s father Lawrence, who provides major investment but is known to be disappointed at how uncompetitive the Williams is this year. The team principal and major shareholder, Dr Vijay Mallya, said at the British Grand Prix that he had yet to receive a credible offer to buy the team but it has now been removed from his control, by the high court in London. McLaren’s Fernando Alonso was in 11th, with Renault’s Nico Hülkenberg in 13th. Sauber’s Marcus Ericsson was in 14th with Stroll in the Williams in 15th. Stoffel Vandoorne in the McLaren was in 16th in front of the Sauber of Charles Leclerc. The Williams of Sergey Sirotkin was in 20th.