I am a guy in my late 20s. I’m writing because a recent incident made me reflect on my thought process and how my behaviour reflects my values. Recently a new girl in our friendship group – a self-proclaimed feminist – called me out, saying that I treat women badly, and that I’m not a feminist. She was referring to the fact that I have one night stands; that I sleep with multiple women and lie to them about it, and that I often lead women on, making them think I like them more than I do. I know these things are bad, but I never saw them as having anything to do with my broader views about women. I know that I have held women to different standards than I hold myself – for example, I once shouted at my ex because she slept with someone we knew, even though I’d done the same – but honestly, I knew it was bad, I just couldn’t control it. I know I’m disingenuous, but I have never before considered this to be sexist; I thought I was just being selfish, and I don’t think I treat women badly in other walks of life. To be honest, I was quite outraged by this woman’s comments, and initially I was very defensive. In my group of friends – who are your typical group of laddish guys who go to Ibiza – I’ve always been the one who takes feminism seriously while they dismiss it. I don’t think I objectify women, I think I treat them well. I always try to talk to women and men on the same level, I try to confront sexism in the office, and not to use sexually demeaning words about women. I don’t have an issue with consent or coming on too strong. Women have never called me pushy or aggressive. I don’t even tell sexist jokes. I don’t want to be perceived as misogynistic or sexist when I’ve made a conscious attempt since I was 17 or 18 to combat that. Having said that, I’m confused and in retrospect I am taking my friend’s comments more seriously. Can you treat women badly in your sex life but still be a feminist? Is lying to women another form of sexism? Am I a hypocrite? I feel like I would be less inclined to behave this way if I thought I was doing something wrong. I’m just not sure that I am. It is brave of you to open yourself up to scrutiny, and to ask yourself how the personal is political: sexism is as much a community issue as it is an individual one. You recognise that women aren’t treated equally – you have called out sexism on a number of occasions, and see how it operates on a regular basis. But when a woman has called you out, you have used the bad behaviour of your male friends as a benchmark for your feminism. Why is that? Psychotherapist Silvia Dutchevici says: “The people we spend time with often reflect something we are working through.” You clearly want to work through this – I sense genuine soul-searching in your letter. But you have dehumanised women for your personal gain, ignoring their feelings and lying to get what you want. Are your friends validating your belief that you are a feminist without requiring you to do the work? As Dutchevici points out: “If he hung out with men who are ethical towards women, and treated them as human, would his feminism dismantle in comparison to those men?” Your question focuses on you feeling undermined, being confused about your identity, and the perception you think others have of you. Have you considered the feelings of women here? And how you may contribute to their oppression? Indeed, have you considered how your status as a feminist operates? Does it give you certain privileges to be viewed as a feminist? If so, is part of your fear of having been called out about losing those privileges? Treating women badly in your sex life may cause you to internalise disrespect towards women. It is interesting that you get angry at women for doing the same as you. Do you really see them as equals? As a man, what privileges allow you to be angry, when your partner had to be understanding? You may see this as simple selfishness, but Dutchevici points out that sexism is all about power: “Sexist or patriarchal structures give you this power and encourage you to want to behave this way towards women. Perhaps you want to assert your dominance, impress your mates, or remind yourself that you are wanted – but all of these things have a relationship to your place in the world as a man who is allowed to do these things, and women who aren’t.” People don’t become feminists overnight. It’s about undoing a lifetime of sexism. “Thinking about the theoretical side of it is the first step, and it’s great he’s got there, many people never do. But now it’s about how he shows up to the world,” says Dutchevici. I think you are trying to show up differently. Dutchevici gives a solid piece of advice to take this forward: “Tell him to ask the people who count for advice: not his sexist friends, but women. When they give their feedback, tell him to listen.” • What do you think? Or have you got a question for Poppy and readers to consider? Post your responses below or email them to in.it.together@guardian.co.uk