At least three thousand people in Laos are still in need of rescue, clinging to trees and sitting on rooftops, after a dam in a southeastern province burst, flooding villages and killing at least 19. The local authorities and rescue teams are still dispatching boats across the Attapeu area to try to save those who have been stranded by the flash flooding. A reported 2,851 people have already been rescued. However, the remote nature of the region, which is in the southeastern tip of Laos, has meant it is difficult to get supplies and emergency assistance to the thousands who are stranded and displaced. District governor Bounhom Phommasane told English language newspaper the Vientiane Times that said more than 3,000 people still “require rescue”. Hundreds were reported missing after the Xe-Namnoy hydropower dam burst its banks on Monday night, flooding the surrounding region with five billion cubic metres of water. It swept through seven villages, displacing an estimated 6,600 families. According to a record from the Attapeu Administration office, 19 people have been found dead and dozensremain missing. An evacuation effort for local villagers had begun 24 hours before the disaster, after the South Korean company constructing the hydropwer dam discovered a fault in the structure on Sunday night. SK Engineering & Construction said in a statement they had “immediately alerted the authorities and began evacuating (nearby) villagers downstream.” The company had attempted to relieve pressure on the dam, which it is believed was caused by unprecedentedly heavy rain and flooding over the past few days. Staff had attempted to release some of the water from the dam into the river on Monday morning and had begun moving people from their homes around midday. However, repairs were hampered by bad weather and water-damaged roads and the dam’s walls broke on Monday night. By Tuesday morning, seven out of 12 villages located downstream were flooded and water levels were still rising overnight on Tuesday. Aerial photos reveal the whole area underneath muddy brown water, while images from the ground showed families gathered on rooftops and in trees, waiting for rescue. Those who did escape the flooding gathered in nearby villages, where they were brought bags of donated food and dry clothing by local villagers. 193 families sheltered overnight on Tuesday in Paksong village, and by Wednesday afternoon, 800 people had arrived and gathered together for a meal cooked by women from the village. SK Engineering & Construction said it had sent a crisis team to the site, dispatching helicopters, boats and rescue workers. “Currently, SK E&C is actively working on personnel recovery and damage relief with the Laotian government,” it said. The $1.2 billion dam located near the border with Cambodia is part of a project by Vientiane-based Xe Pian Xe Namnoy Power Company, or PNPC, a joint venture formed in 2012 between a Laotian, a Thai and two South Korean companies, according to the project’s website. The 410 megawatt capacity plant was supposed to start commercial operations by 2019. AFP contributed to this report