There is a lot of nature on Björk’s stage. It is a visual representation of the sampled sonic landscape of forest animals and snarling wild cats that underpins her most recent album, Utopia, and includes inflatable blooms, a wall of greenery and a golden orchid with a flautist hidden inside. The Eden Project, with its sci-fi biomes full of real plants from around the world, is probably the only venue on her tour that dwarfs her ambition to make a theatrical presentation out of the natural world. Björk may be dressed like a DayGlo insect, but Eden Project has a massive wasp. It’s a meeting of minds. That includes her audience. This singular creature has attracted a gathering of peacocks in floral headdresses, some barefoot, faces ablaze with paint and glitter. One man wears a tricorn hat, although perhaps this is inspired by Poldark. On the same day as Pride events, a rainbow coalition stands very still before a stageful of shrubs, as if something unearthly is happening. Björk arrives on stage on a rotating plinth decked out in long grass. She has described the utopia that inspired Utopia as an island full of fantastical, freakish mutations, and so here she wears a DayGlo solid mesh dress that distorts her figure and a mask with antennae. She is flanked by the flute septet Viibra, who are dressed in fairy pink. They dance as they play, swaying in unison to the ecstatic reverie of Arisen My Senses, giving the lie to the idea that this abstract music is impossible to dance to. Not that anyone else tries. As Björk sings, Eden’s tribes stand still, spellbound on their feet. She is tender and bashful in Blissing Me, then fragile and devotional in The Gate. Her voice is full of charm and hurt, an elemental howl that appears to affect the fabric of time. On a huge screen behind her, orchids bloom and rot, seabirds preen themselves and Björk herself appears as a mythical animated creature in some timeless fable. The air of a classical recital is further undercut by rude blasts of bass, which detonate under these stuttering torch songs. Conventional pop bangers are few and far between, but this is more of a workout for the heart than the feet. That said, moments of old-fashioned four-to-the-floor – old favourites Isobel and Human Behaviour – come as a relief. The emotional intensity and unorthodox structure of the Utopia songs take a back seat to familiarity, breaking the spell long enough to allow outbreaks of dancing and air-punching. Then the bedazzlement resumes as Viibra pick up long, illuminated tubes and whirl them around their heads, creating ghostly tones and spinning discs of light around their singer for a stark and bass-less Features Creatures. Here in dreamy Eden on a midsummer’s night, surrounded by enchanted creatures, Björk is Titania. She plays romantic tragedy as an act of personal defiance, in a voice of total solemnity. With the silly costumes, inflatable plants and cuteness – she says little beyond a polite and adorable “thank you” after every song – she is a bewitching mix of Proms and Panto.