Although Paul McCartney became, in 1964, the last Beatle to move away from his home town, lately he doesn’t seem to be able to keep away from the place. Last month he played an impromptu gig at the Philharmonic Dining Rooms pub on Hope Street, where he entertained disbelieving drinkers with Fab Four and Wings classics. Then – for a special edition of the Late Late Show With James Corden’s Carpool Karaoke – he nipped to his teenage home on 20 Forthlin Road, where he wrote songs with John Lennon – and bashed out When I’m Sixty-Four. Now, here is he again, with a secret gig at the Cavern. This isn’t – quite – the building that triggered the start of Beatlemania, and thus effectively the birthplace of the most famous rock’n’roll quartet in history. The original Cavern was flattened to make a car park before being rebuilt in the 1980s. But nobody here is splitting hairs. Beatle Paul is back on Mathew Street and the 300 people crammed into this sweltering little club are almost close enough to touch a living Beatle. “Liverpool! Cavern! Two words that go together,” he begins, although some things have changed. He’s halfway through Eddie Cochran’s Twenty Flight Rock (the song with which he auditioned for John Lennon in 1957) when he stops it to admonish people filming on mobile phones. “It’s purrin’ me off,” he says, sounding more Cilla than Macca, but moments later, a storming version of Magical Mystery Tour – with the crowd on impromptu backing vocals – offers the first taste of what they came for. In truth, the setlist is a bit magic, a bit mystery as it careers from post-Beatles combo Wings’ big hits (Jet and Band on the Run), well-chosen album tracks (Wings’ Let Me Roll It), Beatle reggae (Ob-La-Di Ob-La-Da), unexpected gems (pre-Beatle band the Quarrymen’s In Spite of All the Danger), lesser-loved solo songs (Hi, Hi, Hi) and a chunk from his forthcoming album, Egypt Station, which this filmed shebang is promoting. Who Cares is more pedestrian than its subject – bullying. But the keyboard-driven Valentine (an unashamed, unconditional love song for McCartney’s third wife, Nancy) is really lovely. At 76, he’s suddenly singing about sex as playfully as a young Beatle. Come on to Me is cheeky. The piano stomping on Fuh You is rather naughty. “A woman at the American label said it would be too much for the religious bodies,” he quips. “I said, ‘Fuh her.’” The songs are interspersed with crowd banter (“Chuck ’im out”), dollops of emotion (“It’s amazing for me, being back”) and dips into a very deep well of anecdotes. There’s one about the time the fledgling Beatles clubbed together £5 to make one copy of their own single and each kept it for a week. There is another from their first show at the Cavern, then a blues club, when the furious owner handed them a note reading: “We don’t play rock’n’roll in here.” Beatles songs come along like buses – an All My Loving here or Lady Madonna there. Things We Said Today is beautifully, magically reflective. Get Back sees him being told, “Get back to where you once belonged” by 10 rows of vocal scousers. Love Me Do and I Saw Her Standing There offer an authentic Cavern-in-the-60s experience, before – around the two-hour mark – a raucous Helter Skelter threatens to do for what’s left of the sweat-soaked singer’s now hoarse voice. Perhaps one or two more Beatles big guns wouldn’t have gone amiss, but the busker standing outside the venue helpfully obliges.