Liu Xia, the widow of Chinese dissident Liu Xiaobo, has left Beijing after eight years of living under house arrest and days before the anniversary of her husband’s death. Amnesty International researcher Patrick Poon, who focuses on China, confirmed Liu’s departure, which was first reported by BBC Chinese. Poon, citing an unnamed source, said Liu had been allowed to leave but her brother, Liu Hui has to remain in Beijing. Her brother was convicted on fraud charges over a real estate abuse in 2013, a case activists believed was retribution against the family, and a way to pressure Liu Xia. “It’s really wonderful that Liu Xia is finally able to leave China after suffering so much all these years. However, it’s still worrying that her brother Liu Hui is still kept in China. Liu Xia might not be able to speak much for fear of her brother’s safety,” he said. BBC Chinese, citing unnamed sources, said Liu had left Beijing on a Finnair flight to Germany on Tuesday at around 11am local time. Her brother, Liu Hui, posted on WeChat that his sister had flown to Europe to “start her new life.” He wrote, “I am grateful for people’s concern and assistance these past years.” Chinese authorities have insisted Liu Xia, who has not been formally charged of any crime, has been free to move as she wishes. She has been under de-facto house arrest since 2010 after her husband, Liu Xiaobo was awarded the Nobel peace prize in absentia for his activism in China. Liu Xiaobo had been jailed in 2009 for subversion, for his involvement in Charter 08, a manifesto calling for reforms. He died last year from liver cancer while serving an 11-year prison sentence. Friends and advocates have been calling for Liu Xia’s release so she can seek medical help for severe depression. In May, Chinese writer Liao Yiwu released a recording of a phone call with Liu where she describes the mental torture of her situation. “If I can’t leave, I’ll die in my home,” she said. Her release comes a day after European and Chinese officials held a human rights dialogue in Beijing. “Hopefully she will be able to recuperate and receive much needed medical care, but China is effectively holding her brother hostage so she may not speak out about her ordeal. The Chinese government has already shown its willingness to ruthlessly deploy collective punishment against their family,” said Frances Eve, a researcher at Chinese Human Rights Defenders.