Jon Sopel has been the BBC’s North American editor since 2014. His previous roles there include Paris correspondent and chief political correspondent, and he has also hosted The Politics Show and Newsnight. His book, If Only They Didn’t Speak English: Notes from Trump’s America, has now been published in paperback with a new chapter charting the 45th president’s first tumultuous year in office. Have you got used to reporting on President Trump yet?I’ve got used to the idea that he is president, but it’s still astonishing that the leader of the free world has these impulses that make him behave in extraordinary ways, of which I will give you a recent classic example. But sometimes it’s easy to think: oh, my blood pressure is rising. You’ve got to resist the temptation to think you’re in a fight [with a man who loathes the media]. Facts are more important now than ever. We have to steer a path between holding the administration properly to account and not making ourselves the enemy. What is the recent classic example?In London earlier this month, when he said he had been at his golf course in Turnberry the day before Brexit, and had predicted it [a vote to leave] would happen. Well, he wasn’t. He was there the day after the vote. When I pointed this out on Twitter, to my amazement, Stephanie Grisham, who is Melania’s communications director, came back and said: yes, he was, and I’ve got photos to prove it. I had to dig out the presidential flight manifest and the tweet from 24 June 2016, saying he’d just arrived in Scotland. Why would she do that?My guess is that those around him feel that Trump loves people who would die in a ditch with him. She probably thought: I’d better back him up. This encourages an atmosphere where people will say anything. The one thing you can’t do if you are part of his circle is to say: yes, I got that wrong – because that is giving ground to the state news media, and it’s the enemy. Is it frustrating, having to spend so much time on things like this?The other day, as we trudged to the White House for another live shot, I asked Ron, the cameraman, how often he’d done this with my predecessor. “Oh, about 12 times,” he said. He meant over four or five years; I do it three times a week. I feel I have to go to all the White House briefings, and I wake up at six because I want to see if Trump has tweeted. But we, the media, also have to be careful not to chase after every shiny object that’s thrown. Some of what goes on is diversionary. If nature abhors a vacuum, Donald Trump abhors silence and calm. He likes it when there are fights going on. He will create noise. I’m much happier reporting the news than making it. I found the whole thing ​absolutely ​ghastly on a personal level. Now the dust has settled, what did you make of his trip to Europe?He came to Nato, and hated it; he came to the EU, and hated it; he came to London and undermined Theresa May with that astonishing interview in the Sun; and then he meets Putin, and he’s a pussycat. I’ve never seen a conspiracy theory hold up; usually we’re just talking cock-up. But can anyone explain why he has no word of criticism for Putin, given the way he speaks about other leaders? I get that he thinks that if he accepts the word “interference” in terms of the election, then that undermines its legitimacy. But I can’t for the life of me work out why he’s not able to criticise, say, what the Russians did in Salisbury, or by shooting down that airliner [Malaysia Airlines flight MH17]. He just can’t seem to say it. The BBC’s reporting of Brexit has come in for heavy criticism. Some feel its determination to be seen to be impartial is getting in the way of the facts. What do you feel? Does it apply to reporting Trump, too?You cannot allow, in the name of impartiality, your journalism to say: “one person believes two plus two is four”, then add: “but another person believes two plus two is six – and only time will tell who is right”. In the age we’re living in, we need aggressive impartiality. When we think our judgment is right, we should say: the overwhelming evidence is that this will happen. People don’t want me to tell them that some people say Trump arrived on 23 June 2016, when he arrived on the 24th. I think that kind of impartiality ill serves our audience. There is huge debate within the BBC over this. If timidity is what we choose in the end – and I’m sure it won’t be – that would be a wrong judgment. We’ve got to be bold. If I feel something is right, I think we’ve got to say it. After Carrie Gracie [the BBC’s former China editor] revealed the discrepancy between her salary and those of other BBC foreign editors, you were caught on tape having a jokey conversation with John Humphrys about the pay gap. What was it like, finding yourself at the heart of that particular story?It was obviously incredibly uncomfortable. I’m much happier reporting the news than making it. I found the whole thing ghastly on a personal level. I was quietly minding my own business – I had no idea what other people earned – and then suddenly I was in the spotlight. I hated it. I haven’t said a word about any of this before. So far as Carrie went, I thought: her fight is with the BBC, not me; I’ll leave her to fight it, which she did effectively. The conversation with John Humphrys was nuts. John is a big figure. I’m quite a senior journalist, but [when you’re with him], you are in the court of King John. If you listen, you can hear that I’m trying to shut it down. I’m thinking: stop it, stop it. I was in Washington at 11.30 at night, about to go to bed, and suddenly I was thrown a curve ball. Were you shocked that some women earned vastly less than their male counterparts?Of course I was – though it is more complicated than that. If you look at home news rather than foreign, the highest-paid editor is Laura [Kuenssberg, BBC political editor], and it was all the men who were on less than £150,000: Dan Roan, Will Gompertz, Simon Jack. But if the end result is that disparities are dealt with, then hallelujah. If Donald Trump wins a second term, will you be there to report it?It is the reporting job of a lifetime. There’s no way I could have imagined this four years ago. On air, I’ve talked about grabbing pussy, shithole countries, and being spanked with a rolled-up magazine. I want to do it a while yet, but it is exhausting as well as exhilarating. It’s both my privilege and my curse. • If Only They Didn’t Speak English is published by BBC Books (£9.99). To order a copy for £8.49 go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99