There was a time when the pyramid bag was the height of sophistication. Now, there’s a tea for every feeling and need – and there are teas just for women, too. Gendered brews are on the rise; where once they might only be found in health food shops or at gong baths, now, around the country, they are on sale from Boots to Waitrose, Sainsbury’s and the corner shop. There are teas designed with women’s general wellbeing in mind – Pukka’s Womankind, the brand’s bestseller in the gendered-genre, is blended “to help women balance and bloom”; its cranberry, rose, shavatari and vanilla are intended, so the packet reads, to stir the flowers in you into life. It tastes a bit like Christmas. Sebastian Pole, the master herbsmith who came up with the blend 10 years ago, says that “by including a few good plants in your life it helps you fit into the natural rhythms [that are] very relevant because of the monthly cycle”. There are teas with specific targets – Yogi’s Balance blends thyme, lavender blossoms and raspberry leaves in “a tribute to the wonderful women” while its Women’s Energy tea contains hibiscus leaves and angelica root, blended with the subtle power of women in mind. Then there are teas for specific life or cycle-stages, such as Pukka’s breastfeeding brews and Yogi’s Moon Cycle teas for women on their periods. The rise in teas for women has been in sync with the “wellbeing economy,” according to Lucie Greene of trend forecasters The Innovation Group. They “can be consumed as a compliment to yoga and pilates,” she says. And they’re proving popular with the millennial market, who, according to Greene, “see mind, body, spirit, fitness, beauty, as one big connected eco-system”. Pole thinks it’s also a reaction to the disempowerment of women’s health: “There has been a cry, from young women especially, to take a bit more charge of their own health. They don’t just want to be put on the pill because of period pain.” So should all women be drinking these teas? Will we, as Yogi suggests, “especially enjoy the ingredients of ginger, orange peels and angelica root” because “women and plants are supposedly similar in their inner relationship to the changing phases of the moon”? Flowery language to one side, many of the ingredients in these teas “are very traditional herbal products that have been used for centuries across the Asian subcontinent and the Far East,” says Ghazala Yousuf from Harley Dietitians. While “in terms of scientific evidence it’s lagging behind...there’s a lot of anecdotal evidence about their properties”. Before somebody says, “But what about the men?”, Yogi has a tea just for them; it tastes like a compost heap. The packaging is a no-nonsense brown – in contrast to many of the women’s teas pinky hues – and has a big root on it. But if you’re all out, can blokes drink women’s teas? “Well I make them. And I drink them,” says Pole. The herbal mix of Womankind “will just be calming and soothing for a man”. The big question: do teas for women single us out as the weaker sex, in need of our women-only brews as well as train carriages, and workspaces, too weak to cope with the company of men or the musky notes of builders’ tea? I’ll get back to you after this cuppa.