Between 1997 and 2001 the combat trouser-sporting, Met Bar-dwelling All Saints, AKA Mel Blatt, Shaznay Lewis and sisters Nicole and Natalie Appleton, were one of Britain’s best bands. As well as gifting the pop canon two era-defining classics in the shape of 1997’s Never Ever and 2000’s Pure Shores, they also made being in a girl group look like a lot of fun. Not perma-grinning, heavily choreographed, we’re-so-happy-to-be-here fun, but actual sick-on-your-shoe, snogging peak-era Robbie Williams, drunk-crying at the Brit awards fun. In 2001, however, a row about who got to wear a specific jacket at a photoshoot became the catalyst for an acrimonious split. A brief reunion in 2006 was followed by a second “hiatus” (“All Saints are never ever getting back together again,” lied Mel in 2009) before they reunited in 2016 with the actually really good Red Flag album. Two years on and they’re back with a new LP, Testament. Having survived an on-off 20-year career, who better to offer up a guide for other future girlbands, right? Right. Do start with a dream“We wanted to do two things,” remembers chief songwriter Shaznay Lewis about the band’s early goals. “We wanted to perform on Top of the Pops and go to Japan.” Alongside appearing in sorely missed pop bible Smash Hits, which they did in 1997, their dreams were surprisingly small-scale. “To be honest, fame was never on the list,” continues Shaznay. “Fame is so different now – everyone wants to be famous – but back then, we didn’t really think about it.” In fact, for some, the ambition when it came to fame was quite localised. “I just wanted to be famous in [west London enclave] Ladbroke Grove,” snorts Mel. Don’t panic if you can’t danceMost girlbands have one member who can’t – or won’t – dance, whereas All Saints have four. “I actually have nightmares about forgetting the moves,” says Nat. “We were quite relaxed with our dancing because our songs are quite mid-tempo, but now you have to go all out,” adds Shaznay. “We were all right at it early on when we could do two things at once,” laughs Mel. “Multi-tasking’s not so easy any more. I can’t even breathe when I’m stood still. Jeez.” Do treat it like being at university“The early days were sort of like being at uni,” laughs Mel. “You fuck about, you do a little bit of work, but you mainly fuck about. We spent a lot of time doing that. Top of the Pops was our common room.” “We had a lot of fun with ‘NSync,” says Nat. “They were lovely boys. Then there was Aqua, Savage Garden, Ocean Colour Scene.” There’s a pause as memories float to the surface. “Sean Maguire!” laughs Mel, as everyone else tries to remember the name of the ex-EastEnder’s musical output. “What a legend,” she adds. Do enjoy a drinkThe tabloid narrative was that All Saints were the permanently hungover flipside to the shiny innocence of “rivals” the Spice Girls. It turns out that was only half true. “[The Spice Girls] were drinking with us at the Met Bar,” says Nic. “Everybody [went out loads]; it was just focused on us. They were the good old days.” This being the late 90s a certain label was attached to them. “I wasn’t into being called a ladette,” sighs Shaznay. “I withdrew from that.” For Nicole, meanwhile, it was more about the drink that was associated with the moniker. “I always saw it as meaning that you drank pints and I didn’t drink pints! That’s why I didn’t like it. I had beer, sure, but I drank champagne and margaritas. I was a champette,” she adds before high-fiving the rest of the band, high on the thrill of wordplay. So were they ever hungover on duty? “I had a very embarrassing morning on CD:UK once,” remembers Nat. “We were talking to Ant and Dec and we all had sunglasses on because we couldn’t see. We went to a commercial break and I had to go because I couldn’t breathe, it was really bad, and I got this phone call from my mum being like: ‘What’s the matter with you!’ Then they came back from the break and I wasn’t there.” With the pregnant Mel watching at home, the band were suddenly down to a duo. “I remember pissing myself because with the studio lights you could see behind the glasses,” she cackles. “We ended up bringing everyone with us from the night before,” remembers Nic. “Our hairdresser was throwing up in the toilet,” adds Nat. “I was throwing up before we actually went live. Mortifying.” What did you think, Mel? “I thought it was funny. I was proud.” Do let your bandmates squirmOccasionally journalists will focus their questions on a particular girlband member, trying to get a good quote about a breakup, some made-up beef or Brexit. Obviously, it’s important for the other members to rally around and defend their friend, right? “No, we let them suffer,” laughs Shaznay. “We’ll all just turn and stare,” agrees Mel. “We’ll watch them crumble. It’s like [mimes eating popcorn]: ‘Go on, tell us,’” adds Nicole. “Usually we’re dying to ask them those things ourselves,” says Natalie. Seriously? “No, I mean, we don’t need to do that because we’re old enough to deal with things ourselves,” says band mum Shaznay, “but we’d never let anyone take the mickey.” Don’t sell outWhile for today’s girlbands brand partnerships are as commonplace as a Sean Paul featured vocal, it is important to remember integrity. “We turned down a lot of lucrative branding offers,” says Mel. “The main problem I had with the Spice Girls was all the endorsements. It’s a way of life now, but they were kind of the first people to put their names on everything. When we were being compared to them I was like: ‘No, no, no.’ We write our own music and we’re here to perform. We wanted to be a band, just a band.” Ridiculously, they claim to have never been approached to front their own range of combat trouser. “Never,” says Shaznay. “I’d have done that, for sure!” This new era finds them ditching the looser trouser for nice two-piece suits. “Chic,” is how Nic describes it. Or perhaps a bit “business casual”? “Do we look like we work in a fucking office, is that what you’re trying to say?” “laughs” Mel. In general, they say they’d recommend looser trousers for girlbands. “Well, girlbands don’t seem to be wearing trousers these days,” says Shaznay. “Bonus tip: just wear some trousers!” Do communicate with each otherMore than most bands, All Saints know surviving a band breakup is tricky. “It took us a really long time to get back together again so maybe we’re not the best people to ask,” sighs Mel. Asked what they’d do differently, the mood darkens. “I just wish I’d had them at my wedding [to the Prodigy’s Liam Howlett in 2002],” says Nat. “Just things like that. Other than that I think everything happened for a reason.” Would more than one jacket per photoshoot have helped? “I don’t think so,” Nat replies. “It’s not the jackets. Communication broke down. We were exhausted. That’s ultimately what happened.” The key to the success of All Saints Mk III is that they don’t let things fester, choosing to take some time out before airing their issues. “You need your own space,” says Shaznay. “That’s a must for anybody in any relationship. Also, we all sit at a table and talk and it’s great.” So far so good. “We empty the baskets,” adds Natalie. Huh? Is that a euphemism? “It’s just things you pick up along the way that you need to let go of,” she explains. “The best advice we can give is empty your baskets together.” It really is the best way. Testament is out on Friday