A close adviser to Pope Francis has strongly condemned a proposal by Italy’s far-right League party to make it obligatory for crucifixes to be displayed in all public spaces, including ports, schools, embassies and prisons. The bill, introduced for debate in parliament earlier this week, would include fines of up to €1,000 (£890) for failing to comply. In a tweet that went viral on Wednesday, Reverend Antonio Spadaro, the editor of the Jesuit magazine La Civiltà Cattolica, wrote that the crucifix should never be used as a political symbol and said politicians should keep their hands off. “The cross is a sign of protest against sin, violence, injustice and death. It is NEVER a sign of identity. It screams of love to the enemy and unconditional welcome. It is an embrace from God without defences,” he said. The League has made similar attempts to ensure crucifixes are hung in public spaces in the past, but the latest is all the more pertinent given the drive by the party’s leader, Matteo Salvini, to close Italian ports to migrant rescue ships. The southern German state of Bavaria passed similar legislation in May in an attempt to reinforce “Bavarian identity” after an influx of migrants. The law, which made it mandatory for crucifixes to be displayed in the entrance of all public buildings, came into effect despite strong opposition from the Catholic church. The League has a strong following among devout Catholics, and Salvini – who is also Italy’s interior minister and deputy prime minister – often brandishes a rosary during public speeches. Italian priests, however, have been the strongest opponents of his vitriolic anti-immigration stance since his party took power in coalition with the populist Five Star Movement in early June. The leading Roman Catholic weekly, Famiglia Cristiana compared him to Satan on its front cover on Wednesday. “The bishops’ conference, individual bishops, religious groups: the Church is reacting to the aggressive tone of the interior minister. Nothing personal or ideological, it is just the Gospel,” the publication said. Salvini hit back. “They are comparing me to Satan? I don’t deserve that,” he wrote on Facebook. “I am comforted by the fact that I receive daily support from many women and men of the Church.” Salvini, whose popularity has surged since general elections in early March, often exploits religion to galvanise support. During a speech in early July he swore on the gospel to be “loyal to his people” while pledging to create a European-wide alliance against mass immigration. “It’s ridiculous,” Gianfranco Formenton, a priest in Italy’s central Umbria region whom Salvini attacked in 2015 after he banned racists from his church, said. “He knows that by using the cross he gets consensus among voters. Spadaro said it perfectly.”