It was 70 minutes after the final whistle when Gareth Southgate re-emerged from the tunnel at Moscow’s Luzhniki Stadium after completing his post-match team talk and media duties. Hundreds of fans had remained following defeat by Croatia in extra time. At full volume they sang an adaptation of the Atomic Kitten hit Whole Again. “Southgate you’re the one, you still turn me on,” they serenaded. Throughout this unexpectedly successful campaign, Southgate has sought to deflect praise away from himself and on to the players, support staff, anyone but himself. He looked slightly embarrassed but clapped along and performed a worship signal. Kieran Trippier limped on to the pitch, suffering with a groin injury, to applaud the supporters. Jesse Lingard and Marcus Rashford – who had been crying – wiped their tears to show appreciation. Trippier said the “bond” created between the players was mirrored by a new-found mutual respect with the fans. It is this, he said, that would be the great lasting legacy of Russia 2018. “We have all come together, like a bond,” Trippier said. “This team is very special. It all comes from the manager, an unbelievable manager for the way he handles the team. I can’t speak highly enough of him. He sets the tone, it comes from him, he’s brought this team together. I hope the fans see this. I think we are communicating with the fans a lot better, maybe than over the years. We just tried to do as well as we could for the whole nation.” Harry Maguire travelled to France with a group of childhood friends to watch Euro 2016 from the stands. Two years on, they were in the crowd to watch him as one of England’s standout performers, making runs into midfield, dominating in the air and scoring his first international goal. The 25-year-old believes the goodwill felt from travelling fans will extend to Euro 2020, when seven matches will be held at Wembley. “There is one thing, for sure,” Maguire said. “When the Euros come around the fans will be really excited again. We set out at the start of this tournament and our main objective was to connect with the fans and make sure they are proud of the team at the end and we feel we have done that. “At the moment we are still really disappointed as it was a great opportunity for ourselves. We didn’t want it to end. We wanted to be celebrating at the end. It was so hard looking at the fans all singing and chanting and seeing how proud they were of us all, it was hard to take in.” In the approach to the World Cup, members of England’s so-called golden generation including Rio Ferdinand and Frank Lampard spoke of the suffocating fear they felt playing for their country. They reflected on the club rivalries which meant they prized domestic success over international victories, even feeling joining up with England – in Ferdinand’s case – was a bit of a chore. Trippier does not recognise that attitude in the current squad. “I can speak on behalf of every single one of the players: every time they get called up for England, they all love coming here,” he said. “There are no egos, no nothing, everybody wants to play for England. “I’m very confident of this team,” he added. “Everybody might have written us off before this tournament, believing we wouldn’t get to the quarters or whatever, but I think we showed great character. In the future, with this manager, with these players, the team is only going to progress. “I think we will go far in the next tournament because we have got great chemistry, great team spirit, a very young team, who wants to succeed and do the country proud.”