The relationship between Ariana Grande and Saturday Night Live’s Pete Davidson is moving at lightning speed. They announced their coupledom on 21 May, announced their engagement on 12 June and now tattoos are involved. Davidson has Grande’s bunny mask inked behind his ear and Grande has a tattoo that pays tribute to Davidson’s father, who died on 9/11. This is all very touching as long as the couple sticks together, but that isn’t exactly guaranteed. Below, you’ll find other examples of celebrity couple tattoos, ranked from most to least successful. The pair had “IV” tattooed on their ring fingers after getting married. The numerals symbolise their birthdays (4 September and 4 December), wedding day (4 April), albums (Beyoncé’s 4 and Jay-Z’s 4:44), daughter’s middle name (Ivy) and line of successful mid-price activewear (Ivy Park). But that didn’t stop Beyoncé from changing the tattoo to look more like a “4” last year. Cyrus and Hemsworth have been engaged twice now, commemorating their relationship with tattoos that quote Theodore Roosevelt’s 1910 Citizenship in a Republic speech. Hemsworth’s reads: “If he fails, at least fails while daring greatly,” while Cyrus’s reads: “So that his place shall never be with those cold and timid souls who neither know victory nor defeat”; both very long-winded ways of saying: “Haterz go home.” In 2016, Drake used an awards ceremony to declare his undying love for Rihanna. They kissed and then got matching shark tattoos. Did their love stand the test of time? Listen to Drake’s new album about the son he secretly fathered with an adult-film star in October, and you tell me. When Perry and Brand got married, they both had “Anuugacchati Pravaha” – “Go with the flow” in Sanskrit – tattooed on their biceps. They have since split, but the tattoos remain; proof that love is temporary, but slightly cringeworthy gap-year slogans are for ever. Last year, Payne revealed that he had had an image of Cheryl Cole’s eye tattooed on his forearm. It was a beautiful declaration of love that would stand the test of … what’s that? They split up? They just split up? Oh, that’s awkward. Sheen and Richards had each other’s name tattooed on their bodies while they were married, but both have since been altered. Richards now has a pixie where her Charlie was and, with almost cosmic inevitability, Sheen changed “Denise” to “Winning”. In the 90s, when he was dating Winona Ryder, Depp got a “Winona forever” tattoo. Then they split up and he changed it to “Wino forever”. Years later, when he started dating Amber Heard, Depp got a “SLIM” tattoo, reportedly his nickname for her. Then they split up and he changed it to “SCUM”. Depp needs to stop getting tattoos.