Lewis Hamilton and Mercedes have accepted that the accident involving Kimi Räikkönen at the British Grand Prix was a racing incident and have retracted suggestions Ferrari had been intentionally targeting their cars. Hamilton referred to his comments as “dumb”. Hamilton was clipped by Kimi Räikkönen’s Ferrari on the opening lap of Sunday’s race. The Mercedes driver was sent spinning and did well to recover from the back of the field to finish second. The race was won by Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel, who leads Hamilton by eight points in the world championship. Two weeks ago during the French Grand Prix Vettel hit the Mercedes of Valtteri Bottas, inflicting damage that impeded his race. Hamilton had referred to the incident at Silvertone as “interesting tactics from their side”, adding that “it’s now two races Ferraris have taken out one of the Mercedes”. He has now accepted his comments were not fair. In a post on Instagram he wrote: “Kimi said sorry and I accept it and we move on. It was a racing incident and nothing more. Sometimes we say dumb shit and we learn from it.” The Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, had also questioned the incidents, in conversation with his technical director, James Allison, who had worked for Ferrari between 2000 and 2005 and between 2013 and 2016. “It is the second time we got taken out, a lot of construction points,” he said. “In James Allison’s words: ‘Do you think it is deliberate or incompetence?’” Mercedes have since clarified on Twitter there was “no accusation” against Ferrari. “Nobody is seriously suggesting it was deliberate. Kimi made a mistake. Admitted it and apologised to Lewis,” Mercedes wrote. The Ferrari team principal, Maurizio Arrivabene, had already strongly dismissed any suggestion his team had been deliberately attempting to take out their rivals. Arrivabene had been scathing in his response to Allison’s reported comments. “Who is incompetent? Kimi? Who is he to judge what the drivers are doing in the car?” he said. “If he really said something like that, he should be ashamed. “Allison worked at Maranello for many years but now we are here in England teaching him to be a gentleman. I accept it from Jacques Villeneuve because he was a driver. But this guy?” In France Vettel was given a five-second penalty and Räikkönen received 10 seconds at Silverstone. Räikkönen admitted it had been his fault after the race. He had gone up the inside but locked-up and was unable to stop his car from catching Hamilton. He denied it had been anything other than a racing incident. Vettel, too, was scornful of the suggestions, dismissing them as “silly” and “unnecessary”. Wolff accepted the penalties were consistent with what the stewards were able to apply but questioned whether the way of dealing with incidents that may have an impact on the world championship was sufficient. “What we need to discuss among all of us is, if certain incidents occur and they have massive outcome on the race win, what the consequences will be,” he said. “I was not comfortable at all with incident because it is tiresome to be taken out in the first lap.”