This is a wonderfully underrated road-trip destination. From Bucharest, take Road 1 towards the Carpathian mountains, to the well-preserved medieval towns of Braşov and Sighişoara. On the way, you’ll often be surrounded by dense, dark woodland and craggy peaks, where there are bears and wolves, and pass the time spotting castles and horse and carts. In Zărneşti, we stayed at Pensiunea Hora cu Brazi (doubles from £28 room only) near Piatra Craiului national park and enjoyed a slower pace of life, sitting in the farm’s garden and enjoying the homemade and traditional food, wine and spirits. Sam Wallis A meditative journey of almost 2,900km that passes through the austere beauty of southern Siberia. The way is utterly peaceful, passing swamps and large swathes of larch, spruce and silver birch trees through which the sinuous road offers panoramas stretching to the horizon. Come after mid-April to avoid icy roads and keep to the speed limit (to evade the keen attention of Russian police). Try couchsurfing.com for stays in Chita, Khabarovsk and Vladivostok. There are cheap guesthouses in the small settlements of Chernyshevsk, Skovorodino and Belogorsk and substantial meals of borscht with slabs of fresh bread are served at any of the welcoming, if on occasion brusque, roadside restaurants along the route.Jonathan Hancock Every week we ask our readers for recommendations from their travels. A selection of tips will be featured online and may appear in print, and the best entry each week (as chosen by Tom Hall of Lonely Planet) wins a £200 voucher from hotels.com. To enter the latest competition visit the readers' tips homepage I recommend the drive from Houston to the Cajun country of Lafayette along the Gulf coast and the Creole Nature Trail. From Houston, travel east and cross into Louisiana on the LA 82. The trail takes you through towns built on stilts to avoid storm surges, through wildlife sanctuaries, and to beautiful beaches. Eventually you reach Cajun country and Lafayette where crawfish, bayous and alligators await. There is accommodation to suit all budgets in Lafayette, or you can push on down to New Orleans.George Anderson From Puerto Montt, we travelled 2,000km north on the Pan American Highway. Lined with volcanoes and empanada stalls, there was always a reason to stop. Too many places to mention but the rodeo at Rancagua was a unique insight into cowboy culture. We ended in the stunning Elqui Valley, after visiting the Mamalluca Observatory camp on the hillside. Alone, you’ll be stargazing all night. Eat at Tatul Diaguitas for the amazing humitas (corn cakes). The Copec petrol stations on the highway have great showers, free parking and wifi.Gonzalo Despite being one of the smallest countries in Europe, Montenegro has it all; glorious beaches, bustling historical towns, blissful lakes and rugged mountain ranges. It’s the perfect place for a road trip. Pick up a car in Herceg Novi and head south along the coast, stopping off to bask on sandy beaches and explore the enchanting old towns of Kotor and Budva. Head inland to Lake Skadar for boat trips, bird-watching and delicious local food. Next, climb north-east, along spectacular mountain highways, arriving in Durmitor national park. Stay in a cosy cabin and explore glacial lakes, canyons and tremendous peaks.Matilda The 828-mile Route 1 (AKA Ring Road) follows the circumference of this unique, otherworldly island. From Reykjavík, we drove across the south to the east and Höfn. Once away from the more popular Golden Circle, the real road trip began, and we often did not see another car for hours. Remarkable sights lined Route 1, including the glacial lagoon Jökusárlón and Skógafoss waterfall (which turned out to be a great proposal spot!). The highlight was just being alone, with incredible wilderness all around on this thin strip of pothole-free tarmac. The best place we stayed in was the Road 201 guesthouse near Hvoll (doubles from £110). Kirby First stop, the idyllic Periyar River Lodge and then up early the following day for guided tour at Thattekkad Bird Sanctuary. On to the hill station of Munnar, staying at the beautiful Windermere Estate. A spectacular route then took us to the Wildlife Sanctuary at Kumily, where vistas were reminiscent of Jurassic Park. Down to the coast and the Arabian Sea at Varkarla, staying at the chilled-out Villa Jacaranda, eating fresh fish at beachside restaurants, while watching the twinkling lights of fishing boats out to sea. At the Alleppey backwaters, we paddled quietly past families at work or play, spotting abundant birdlife on the way. Our final stop was the city of Kochi. Just by chance the biennale festival of art was on – an unexpected bonus to end our memorable road trip.Chris B It may be close to home but it’s worth driving around west Cornwall – including Land’s End – taking in the tiny hamlets with great names (Zennor and Morvah, for example). There are ancient granite hedges ready to give you a scrape if you’re distracted – and those views really do distract. Plus old tin mines, wild countryside dotted with farms and cottages and, to cap it all, that backdrop of the wild Atlantic. It’s worth parking and taking a short walk to the clifftops, if you want to feel even further away from civilisation.There’s a breathtaking vista at every turn.Howard Starting out at the airport, pull over for a pit stop at Casa Goyo, a fantastic local seafood cafe (originally set up for workers at the airport). Then head up the LP-301 into the hills and emerge into the beautiful lush scenery and epic views in the Cumbre Vieja national park. Pick up the road south towards Fuencaliente through a gigantic banana plantation to end amid the desolate beauty of the volcanic landscape at the southern tip of the island. This felt like a post-apocalyptic beach resort. The most fantastic contrasts in landscape in just one day. Katie Mcgill The 115-mile Waterfall Way is a great New South Wales drive between the seaside city of Coffs Harbour and Armidale university town, taking in parts of five national parks. Complete the trip in one day or stop over in Bellingen for the market. Visit the skywalk in the Dorrigo Rainforest and marvel at the waterfalls, but take care on the very winding road.Heather This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.