Manchester United have pledged to back José Mourinho in the transfer market despite the manager voicing public disquiet at an underwhelming summer of recruitment so far at the club. The coach has been told there are still finances to strengthen his squad, with there being no need for Mourinho to sell before making any purchase. The Portuguese’s unhappiness at making only two major outfield signings in midfielder Fred and untested fullback Diogo Dalot caused an extraordinary outburst following Saturday night’s 4-1 defeat to Liverpool in Michigan. Yet he still retains the full backing of United, with the hierarchy understanding the manager’s frustrations regarding transfers and the number of players missing from the US tour – the board believing the latter complaint to be responsible in the main for Mourinho’s discontent. His unease was underlined by criticism of the United captain, Antonio Valencia for not being fit and Anthony Martial for failing to return to the US tour after the birth of his child. Mourinho also claimed Alexis Sánchez could not be happy because of the number of youngsters in the side, due to those on post-Russia 2018 holidays while making the odd claim that officials for the Liverpool game had been sourced from baseball. Regarding those absent, Mourinho began the trip without 13 senior footballers and has been particularly hampered by France, England and Belgium all reaching the final weekend of the World Cup as this ruled out seven frontline squad members from travelling: Paul Pogba, Romelu Lukaku, Marouane Fellaini, Marcus Rashford, Ashley Young, Phil Jones and Jesse Lingard. After the Liverpool loss, Mourinho branded the start of the season as potentially “very bad” due to the missing players and the uncertainty over whether he might be able to sign even one of the wide forward and centre-back wanted – Internazionale’s Ivan Perisic and Leicester City’s Harry Maguire among the targets. There remains optimism that Mourinho could still make a fourth signing, at least. The transfer window closes on 9 August and United’s Premier League curtain-raiser with Leicester at Old Trafford is the following evening.