Organisers of the inaugural Athletics World Cup say they are “unconcerned” that a host of big names have opted to swerve the competition and dismissed suggestions of poor ticket sales as “complete nonsense”. The British team, announced on Thursday, is missing Dina Asher-Smith, Laura Muir, Reece Prescod, Zharnel Hughes and every one of Britain’s 4x100m gold medallists from last year’s world championships – while a number of top Americans, including Noah Lyles, the fastest man in the world this year, are also absent. China and Germany will field weakened teams. However UK Athletics’ chief executive Niels de Vos denied those attending the two-day event, which takes place on the same weekend as the World Cup final and Wimbledon singles finals, would not be short-changed as a result. “It is an interesting sideline but it doesn’t concern me,” he said. “We always knew that a couple of athletes wouldn’t be able to make it because they had signed contracts for Diamond League events. But the overall quality is going to be astonishing. Of the six teams that have been announced, there is 113 current Olympic or World medallists and 23 world or Olympic champions.” Insiders have also told the Guardian that UK Athletics are struggling to fill the 50,000-seat Queen Elizabeth Stadium four times in eight days – first for the Athletics World Cup and then the Anniversary Games. Sources have also suggested that UKA need to sell 32,000 tickets for the Athletics World Cup to break even. However De Vos insisted that it was “complete nonsense” that ticket sales had gone sluggishly. “It’s not going to be Olympic standards with people hanging from the rafters,” he admitted, “but it’s pushing 30,000 for the Saturday and a little less on the Sunday.” While accepting that not everything had gone smoothly – the Guardian understands that some footwear brands were furious they only heard about the competition in the papers – De Vos insisted that UK Athletics deserved credit for its “bold” decision to set up a new competition. “It is frustrating when people look for the weak points rather than the fabulous points but that is the nature of the world,” he added. “We would be rightly criticised if we didn’t try to innovate – yet we are putting the World Cup in four months, having only announced it in February. Will everything be spot on? No. But will the public notice? Absolutely not. They will see a fabulously well-put-on event.”