For women, the act of getting clean is about glamour. For men, it’s about heroism. Or so Radox would have you believe. A priest, teacher and father of two girls has called out the brand for gendered labelling on some of its shower gels that tells men they can “feel strong” with mint and tea tree or “powerful with the scents of punchy caffeine and guarana”, while women can “feel gorgeous with coconut kiss” or “bubbly with passion fruit”. The Rev Philip Green has called on Radox to remove the labelling, saying: “Women can be strong and powerful and men can be fabulous.” A Unilever spokesperson rebutted: “We have a wide range of products available that can be used by both men and women.” An investigative snoop at a local Boots confirms what has long been known, that the world of toiletries is firmly stuck in a gendered rut that often infantilises women while making men out to be nothing short of navy Seals. In one aisle, industrial-looking bottles offer the promise of manly cleanliness via “hydra power”, “mountain water” and “charcoal + clay”. A few aisles over, ambling among the women’s shower gels feels like being enveloped in a slice of battenberg with all the pinks and yellows on display. Imperial Leather offers products decorated with unicorns, cherry bombs, strawberries and marshmallow. Women can be strong and powerful and men can be fabulous From “silky” female razors versus “xtreme” ones for the lads, to “pink blush” deodorants for the gals and “quantum dry” for men, gendered marketing in the grooming world extends beyond shower gels. Based on certain adverts, you would be forgiven for thinking that if a women’s shampoo doesn’t come with an orgasm then she’s using it wrong. It is no surprise: advertising in general has been slow to catch up to the wider conversation about gender stereotypes and the rise of gender neutrality. “The gendered approach to categories such as personal care and fashion has been highlighted a lot recently,” says Alex Fisher, a senior beauty analyst at Mintel. “Sixty-four per cent of men and 67% of women think advertising too often resorts to gender stereotypes.” These views have, she says, “stimulated unisex product launches or relabelling”. A new “female-first” beauty brand in the US recently became the first to show women actually shaving hair in an advert for its razors, because who shaves already smooth legs? The Advertising Standards Agency is making moves to ban adverts that perpetuate sexist stereotypes. Even Britney Spears is releasing a gender-neutral scent. Of course, it doesn’t take a trip to a pharmacy to remind you that we are not living in a feminist utopia – whether you smell like strawberries or musk.