The Republican congressman Jim Jordan denied accusations that he ignored claims of sexual misconduct at a former university job and attacked some of the alleged victims for presenting “bogus” allegations as part of a “vendetta”. Jordan was on the defense on Fox News on Friday night following a series of public accusations that when he was an assistant wrestling coach at Ohio State University in the 1990s, he was aware of allegations of sexual misconduct by the team doctor, Richard Strauss, but did nothing about it. Five former wrestlers, including the former UFC world champion Mark Coleman, told the Wall Street Journal this week that Jordan knew of the misconduct. “There’s no way unless he’s got dementia or something that he’s got no recollection of what was going on,” Coleman said. “I have nothing but respect for this man … but he knew as far as I’m concerned.” In response, Jordan told Fox News: “I never saw, never heard of, never was told about any type of abuse. If I had been, I would have dealt with it.” His repeated denial, which included specific attacks on the characters and motivations of the men sharing their stories, came one day after Donald Trump spoke out in Jordan’s defense, telling reporters on Air Force One that he was an “outstanding man”, adding, “I believe him. I believe him 100%. No question in my mind.” On Thursday, Trump also mocked the #MeToo movement raising awareness about sexual misconduct. The former Ohio State athletes told the Journal that the abuses of Strauss, who has since died, were well known on numerous sports teams, and that the doctor would inappropriately touch them, unnecessarily conduct full-body examinations for minor injuries, and frequently watch them shower. Dunyasha Yetts, a former Ohio State wrestler, told the newspaper: “I complained more than three times. I came across Strauss and I had a thumb injury and ended up getting a physical.” Politico also reported Friday that six former wrestlers said they were regularly harassed in their training facility, and that although some said Jordan was not to blame, they also said “it would have been impossible for him not to notice the pervasive toxic atmosphere surrounding the team”. Jordan said Friday night: “If in fact there are victims, they deserve justice.” When Fox News’ Bret Baier asked Jordan about the claims that he was aware of the abuse from conversations in the locker room, the congressman responded: “Conversations in a locker room are a lot different than allegations of abuse.” When asked whether the athletes may have described conduct that might not have been considered abuse at the time, but would be now, Jordan also said no. Jordan said one of the men speaking out had a “vendetta” against the university, adding: “I think the timing is suspect.” Jordan is a co-founder of the House Freedom Caucus and potential candidate to replace retiring speaker Paul Ryan. Jordan also criticized CNN for repeatedly airing the accusations. “It’s been the toughest week,” he said toward the end of the Fox interview. “It’s just been an emotional week.”