It was another fine day for Roger Federer, even though he spent it relaxing with his young family. A cheer must have gone up in the Federer household when news of Marin Cilic’s demise filtered through on Thursday afternoon. There is a sense of calm in the Swiss veteran’s kingdom, where the outlook could hardly look more serene after another would-be usurper met a grisly end. The challengers to the champion’s reign are teetering like Neymar at his theatrical worst, with one of the main obstacles blocking Federer’s path to a ninth Wimbledon title removed after Cilic succumbed to a second-round defeat by Guido Pella, an Argentinian who took advantage of a rain delay to fight back from two sets down. Here was proof that Federer, who plays Germany’s Jan-Lennard Struff on Friday, does not always have to pick up a racket in order to prosper on these lawns. The top seed has already seen Borna Coric, who stunned him in the Halle final last month, and Grigor Dimitrov depart from his side of the draw and the 36-year-old’s route to a 12th final looks even more inviting now Cilic no longer stands in his way. The caveat is that dangers still lurk. A quarter-final against the No 8 seed Kevin Anderson, who reached the third round with a four-set win over Italy’s Andreas Seppi, would be awkward for Federer, who could also be inconvenienced by Milos Raonic, the 13th seed. But Cilic was the main threat. The third seed was a possible semi-final opponent for Federer and many had tipped him to gain revenge for his humiliation in last year’s final. Instead the affable Croatian tripped himself up, losing 3-6, 1-6, 6-4, 7-6 (3), 7-5 to a 28-year-old who had never tasted victory at Wimbledon before. It was a dreadful disappointment for Cilic, who was cruising at 6-3, 6-1, 3-2 before being held up by a rain delay on Wednesday evening. That was the turning point. While play had been called off on the outside courts because of slippery conditions, they were more optimistic on No 1 Court. Cilic must have thought he had time to finish the job against the world No 82. Yet when play resumed after a long and slightly farcical inspection of the grass, it was Pella who seized control, breaking to lead 4-3 after a Cilic slip. “It’s no good,” Cilic told the umpire, who decided to call it a night. They returned on Thursday and Pella took the third set, dominated a tie-break and held his nerve in the decider. Cilic, by contrast, was riddled with anxiety near the end. The former US Open champion’s footwork deserted him and he had to save two match points with some excellent serving in the 10th game. Pella, who faces the USA’s Mackenzie Macdonald next, kept pushing. A third opportunity went begging when he hit long off a second serve, but there was no escape for Cilic, who folded after netting a tight forehand. Cilic, who beat Djokovic in the final at Queen’s last month, did not criticise the All England Club for Wednesday’s mood shift. “We were waiting just behind the court,” he said. “When we came back, it was not raining. When we warmed up, it started to rain again. The court was not as dry. We were talking with the referees. They said if we want to keep on we can. We decided to give it a try. But the court was still quite slippery. It was a bit unfortunate to finish the day like that. We had the choice. We just gave it a try.” Pella’s reward for giving it a go was the biggest win of his career. “It’s not my favourite surface but I am trying to improve,” he said. “The rain came and today I felt much more confident.” There is hope for the underdogs, then, and there was another upset when Thomas Fabbiano, an Italian qualifier, rounded off a 7-6 (7), 6-3, 7-6 (6) over Stan Wawrinka, who was not quite as fortunate as Switzerland’s other maestro.