It started as a rebellious trend: a stylish stand against the march of technology and the fast pace of the digital age. But now the vast range of independent magazines on offer in Britain is being hailed as a modern publishing phenomenon. A smart new breed of print titles is growing fast, with numbers more than tripling in five years. Some of the publications, such as Accent, a magazine that celebrates “misfits and free spirits”, make a virtue of their niche appeal. Stitch, Bitch!, which aims to “make fashion better and fairer for young people”, and the London-based Sonshine, offering tips for those “raising boys for an equal world”, also fall into this category. Others tackle the broadest of topics. Ernest, biannually printed “for curious and adventurous gentlefolk”, takes “curiosity and slow adventure” as its theme. Yet, whether readers are choosing to read a magazine about travel, food or feminism, the real attractions are a maverick editorial attitude and high design values. “It is the sheer quantity and quality that is astonishing,” said Claire Catterall, co-curator of Print! Tearing It Up, a London exhibition celebrating the boom in independent journals and setting it in a historical context. Popular titles include Delayed Gratification, an “antidote to throwaway media”; Mushpit, written by and for young London women; Burnt Roti, for south-east Asian women; and gal-dem, a London culture magazine run by a volunteer team of black and minority ethnic women. These are competing on newsstands with the Amorist, founder Rowan Pelling’s journal of love and sex; the London-based journal the White Review, focusing on art and literature; and Slightly Foxed, a reader’s quarterly that “prides itself on its personal and high-end service”. There are far too many to be featured in one exhibition, and all follow in the wake of more established independent titles such as Private Eye, the Oldie, the Idler and the London Review of Books, which are picking up a renewed cachet. Even Facebook, the ostensible enemy of print, has just entered the crowded marketplace with the launch of its new title, Grow, “a quarterly magazine for business leaders” that appeared in business-class airport lounges last month. And next month the LRB will be joining the Wilderness Festival in Oxfordshire for the first time, offering “a space for some of the world’s best thinkers to explore a wide variety of subjects in exhilarating detail – from culture and politics to science and technology via history and philosophy”. A discounted subscription of £6 for six issues will be available to revellers. Such magazines are generally purchased on subscription, perhaps through a specialist service such as Stack, which boasted a 76% increase in subscribers in 2014. Or they might be bought at a dedicated store, like Magazine in Brighton. This now sells three times as many titles than it did when it opened just three years ago. Notable titles include the Gourmand, which speaks for itself; women’s style bible the Gentlewoman, founded in 2010; the travel journals Migrant and Cereal; Irish arts and literary magazine the Moth; film magazine Little White Lies; Another Escape (“inspired by individuals who are creative and inquisitive”); and the alternative architecture magazine, Real Review. Magazines espousing the counter-cultural idea of “slow journalism”, such as Ernest or Delayed Gratification (which was founded in 2011 to review news events “after the dust has settled”, has 5,000 subscribers and a print readership of 24,000), are funded by fairly expensive subscription charges. Ernest starts at £21.50 for two issues a year, while Delayed Gratification costs £36 for an annual subscription of four issues. Whether they prioritise elegant looks or go for a samizdat-like underground style, they all share the appeal of the tactile experience of printed paper. “It is hard to say why people buy them. But the magazines are usually run and read by people who are enjoying the fact they have a voice and a place to go,” said Catterall. It is a theory backed up by one magazine’s title: OOMK stands for One of My Kind. Catterall also detects an editorial desire to make a substantial journalistic contribution. “Bertie Brandes of the Mushpit said they like print because it feels more anonymous,” she said. “People cannot tell what else writers and editors have been watching and where you have been, like they can online.” Many of these magazines are reporting circulation increases, albeit from a low base. However, circulation is a relative thing. “Condé Nast’s Glamour used to sell around 260,000 a month and was considered a failing magazine, so they wound it up,” said Catterall. This weekend, Nicholas Coleridge, the chairman of Condé Nast, welcomed the fresh interest in print but pointed out that these small titles are run by editors with other jobs. “And they don’t have to cover all the costs mainstream magazines do,” he said. In fact, Condé Nast has its own entry in the field. The biannual British style magazine Love was founded in 2009 by its editor-in-chief, fashion journalist Katie Grand, and has a readership of 400,000. Like the fillip in vinyl record sales, this indie magazine glut speaks of internet fatigue – despite the fact it is technological developments that have made small-scale publishing possible. And, since many readers of these niche titles are young, the boom must be fed by a feel for the exotic nature of print, rather than by nostalgia.