A British man named as one of the UK’s most wanted after allegedly posing as a banker and spy to trick a woman out of her life savings has been tracked down to Switzerland, police have said. Mark Acklom, 45, was found in a luxury apartment in Zurich following an operation involving Avon and Somerset police, the National Crime Agency (NCA) and the Swiss authorities. Avon and Somerset police said on Tuesday he was in a police station in Switzerland awaiting extradition proceedings. The investigation into Acklom began after Carolyn Woods, now 61, alleged he posed as a Swiss banker and MI6 agent during their year-long relationship and tricked her into lending him her life savings of £850,000 for renovation work at a number of properties in Bath. Acklom was named as one of the UK’s most wanted fugitives as part of Operation Captura, a multi-agency initiative involving the NCA and Crimestoppers to track down British fugitives abroad. Senior investigating officer DI Adam Bunting, of Avon and Somerset police, said: “The arrest of Mark Acklom is the direct result of the coordinated efforts of our officers, the NCA and the Swiss authorities and we’re grateful for the professionalism and expertise of all those involved in this international search. “Acklom thought he could continue to evade capture by moving around Europe but we were determined to locate him and bring him back to this country. “We’ve updated Carolyn Woods on the latest developments and will continue to work with the relevant authorities to ensure he is extradited as soon as possible.” Ian Cruxton, the head of international operations for the NCA, said: “The hunt for Mark Acklom started in Spain but as soon as intelligence indicated he had moved to Switzerland, we utilised our assets there and worked closely with the Swiss authorities and Avon and Somerset police to track him down. “Our international reach means there is no safe place to hide. He was arrested late on Saturday night after the apartment where he was living under a false name was identified. “I’m really pleased for Carolyn Woods as she’s been waiting a long time for news of his arrest. We have a well-established extradition treaty with the Swiss authorities and court proceedings will now begin.” Roger Critchell, the director of operations for Crimestoppers, said Acklom was the 82nd person arrested as part of Operation Captura.