Hello, I’m Warren Murray. There is some breaking news this morning that police sources have told the Press Association they have identified two Russian suspects in the Salisbury and Amesbury novichok poisonings. More on that further down … US prosecutors have given more details of an alleged Russian spy’s efforts to infiltrate the National Rifle Association and the Republican party. Maria Butina was in contact with suspected Russian intelligence officers and a billionaire oligarch linked to the Kremlin; maintained a sham relationship with an American conservative and gun rights activist, who knowingly aided her efforts; offered sex in return for a position within an activist group; and was watched by US agents dining with a Russian diplomat believed to be an intelligence officer, a Washington court has been told. “The defendant is a foreign agent who loyally acted on behalf of the Russian government,” said Jessie Liu, the US attorney for Washington DC. In one message a senior Russian official accused of directing Butina likened her to Anna Chapman, a notorious undercover Russian agent who was arrested in the US in 2010 and deported. “You have upstaged Anna Chapman. She poses with toy pistols, while you are being published with real ones.” The court filing said Butina had been preparing to move out of her apartment in the capital when she was arrested last Sunday. Butina pleaded not guilty to the charges at a court hearing in Washington on Wednesday. Judge Deborah Robinson ordered she be detained and denied bail. The next hearing is scheduled for next Tuesday. ‘Sure they are Russian’ – Police are believed to have identified the suspected perpetrators of the Novichok attack on Russian former spy Sergei Skripal. Officers think several Russians were involved in the attempted murder of the former double agent and daughter Yulia in Salisbury and are looking for more than one suspect. A source with knowledge of the investigation told the Press Association: “Investigators believe they have identified the suspected perpetrators of the Novichok attack through CCTV and have cross-checked this with records of people who entered the country around that time. They (the investigators) are sure they (the suspects) are Russian.” Investigators are working to the theory that the substance was left in a discarded perfume bottle found by Dawn Sturgess, 44, who died earlier this month, and her partner Charlie Rowley, 45, who is recovering after falling critically ill from the effects of novichok. Johnson’s Brexit posture – Boris Johnson has used his cabinet resignation speech to tell MPs it is “not too late to save Brexit”. The former foreign secretary warned fellow leavers against accepting a “botched” treaty with the EU in the belief they could “break and reset the bone later on”. David Davis called on the prime minister to publish the Brexit paper he commissioned before resigning the portfolio; while former Brexit minister Steve Baker warned May she faces opposition to her Chequers white paper from significantly more Tory MPs than the figure of 40 that has been cited. Talk of a leadership challenge appeared to quieten after May warned a meeting of her backbench MPs of the risks of a general election. MPs on the 1922 Committee gave May a warm reception, according to sources. One cabinet minister said afterwards: “Whatever the differences are, we hang together and support the prime minister.” One Brexiter MP said: “Lots of people said they were putting in letters [to trigger on a challenge] but it was all puff.” Senior Conservatives predicted May would survive to resume battle with Brexit hardliners after the summer recess. May will also have to counter a frosty reception from Brussels to her Chequers plan. “The white paper is not going to form the basis of the negotiations,” one senior EU diplomat told the Guardian. It was Putin after all – Donald Trump is now saying he holds Vladimir Putin personally responsible for Russia’s meddling in the 2016 US election. The president affirmed that he believes US intelligence agencies’ assessment that it happened (the opposite of what he said on Monday when standing next to Putin). But then he contradicted his own intelligence chief by saying “no” when asked if he thinks Russia is still targeting the US. Then his press secretary said that’s not what he meant. Then Sarah Sanders said the president had discussed letting Russia question a former US ambassador about discredited allegations. The president has also trashed Nato again and suggested Montenegro might cause world war three. We asked US voters what they thought of the president’s behaviour at his meeting with Putin. Here is what they definitely said – and here’s what the internet thinks of Trump’s would/wouldn’t defence. Windrush not over – Caribbean officials warned the UK government about the developing Windrush scandal at least as far back as 2013, the Guardian has learned. Elements of the controversial hostile immigration environment have been suspended but victims are still waiting for financial assistance. Some are understood to have been paid some compensation by the Home Office, but asked to sign non-disclosure agreements. “I can’t function day to day,” said Hubert Howard, 61, who has lived in the UK since the age of three. He lost his job, was denied benefits, got into debt and had his credit rating ruined after being wrongfully branded an illegal immigrant. Amelia Gentleman continues her investigation of the saga.  Work less, get more done – A New Zealand firm has claimed success in letting staff work a four-day week on full pay. Perpetual Guardian (no relation) ran the trial overseen by academics who measured a 24% improvement in employees’ sense of work-life balance. Employees enjoyed and performed better in their jobs, while stress levels decreased. Andrew Barnes, boss of the trust and estate management firm, said he would take the results of the trial to the board. “Are you likely to get fewer mental health issues when you have more time to take care of yourself and your personal interests? Probably ... if you have fewer people in the office at any one time, can we make smaller offices?” In an age of astonishing wealth, nothing reveals the lives of the ultra-rich like the FT’s unashamedly ostentatious luxury magazine. Back in 1967, How to Spend It first announced itself as a monochrome page of featurettes on central heating, electric coffee makers and how best to select and cook a pheasant. Today the glossy magazine – published 34 times a year and distributed worldwide with the Financial Times – is a directory of the desires and pleasures of the 1%, from superyachts to the most expensive fashion, travel, food, interior design and other consumer goods imaginable. Andy Beckett samples its offerings. Four-time Tour de France winner Chris Froome has praised Sky teammate Geraint Thomas after his Stage 11 win saw the Welshman take the yellow jersey. Team Sky director Nicholas Portal was at pains to emphasise that Froome remains team leader despite trailing Thomas by a minute and 25 seconds. The Open gets under way today in Carnoustie, with Rory McIlroy keen to roll back the clock after four lean years without a major: “I’m trying my best every time I tee it up and it just hasn’t happened.” Meanwhile, Tiger Woods could be the beneficiary of a tough, dry course, writes Ewan Murray. And in football, Liverpool’s season has already taken a huge knock with news that Alex Oxlade-Chamberlain appears set for up to 12 months on the sideline. Japan’s trade surplus jumped 66% year on year in June on strong growth in shipments to China and other Asian countries, though exports and imports with the US weakened. Asian stock markets drifted overnight in mixed trading as investors awaited further moves in global trade disputes. Sterling traded at $1.307 and €1.122 overnight. The Guardian leads with “Johnson attacks ‘miserable’ Brexit plan”. “It is not too late to save Brexit,” says the Express. The Telegraph has “It’s not too late to save Brexit from this disaster” and the i says “Boris twists the knife”. The Times has “May to woo grassroots Tories over Brexit deal”. The Mirror asks “Is a good day for Sir Cliff a bad day for justice?” The Mail headline is “Tearful Cliff: BBC heads must roll”. The Sun says the ruling “threatens to gag free speech” and runs a headline that spoofs the lyrics of one of Sir Cliff’s songs: “It’s not funny ... we can’t talk anymore”. The FT splash is “Google turns on Brussels after record €4.3bn euro fine”. The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. For more news: www.theguardian.com