On 25 July, Pakistan’s 106 million registered voters will have the chance to choose a new parliament and provincial assemblies. Parliament sits for a five-year term, and the majority party or a coalition chooses a prime minister. If the ruling Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz party is defeated, the country could see only the second peaceful democratic transition of power in its history, after the 2013 handover. The campaign period has been marred by allegations of military interference and by deadly violence including a bombing that killed 150 people. There have also been concerns about large numbers of extremist and militant sectarian groups on the campaign trail, including an international terrorist leader who has a $10m (£7.6m) US bounty on his head. Pakistan is the world’s sixth most populous country, and one of just nine nuclear powers. It struggles with violence, extremism and poverty, more than a third of the population are illiterate and per-capita annual income is below £1,150. It has endured decades of instability, including periods of military dictatorship. Its democracy and its economy are both fragile, under siege from fraud and destabilised by the outsize influence of the military. Although the country achieved its first peaceful democratic transfer of power in 2013, no prime minister has yet served a full five-year term. Nawaz Sharif, who came to power in the 2013 election, was ousted over corruption allegations a year ago. Economic growth is the highest in a decade, but corruption and tax avoidance are both rampant, hampering government finances – barely 1% of the population are taxpayers. The rupee has been devalued three times since December, the central bank is burning through foreign currency reserves, and speculation is mounting that politicians may soon have to go cap in hand to the IMF asking for more money, less than two years after the last bailout. Pakistan is plagued by power shortages and is fast running out of water. With swathes of desert and hot summers, it is particularly vulnerable to the impact of climate change and rising temperatures. High birth rates have also made it hard to consolidate social and economic gains. The population has increased fivefold since 1960 and the growth shows little sign of slowing. Pakistan has an extremely tense relationship with its neighbour and long-term rival India, and is an influential player in Afghanistan’s decades-old civil war. Its lawless borderlands are a refuge for militants, including the leadership of the Afghan Taliban, although Pakistan denies providing safe haven. Parties are competing for 272 elected seats in the national assembly. There are also 60 seats reserved for women, and 10 for minorities, allocated on a proportional representation basis. The makeup of this parliament will be slightly different from the last one, after a 2017 census led to a shifting of boundaries to create at least 15 new constituencies. Voters will also be selecting provincial assemblies, which have become more influential since the devolution of considerable powers in 2010. There are three main parties competing for power, and many expect the vote to result in a hung parliament. If it does, some of the 27 smaller groups may hope to play kingmaker. The populist Pakistan Tehreek-e-Insaf (PTI) party, also known as the Justice party, led by the former cricketer Imran Khan, has had some success at provincial level but has never been able to convert it into national power. This time things may be different, not least because Khan, 65, is believed to have the support of the military. However, Khan has been accused both of lacking a coherent political philosophy and of sympathising with extremists. He has described the Taliban’s fight in Afghanistan as a holy war, and accused “liberals” who support Nato’s war on the group of being “thirsty for blood”. The Pakistan Muslim League-Nawaz hopes to win control of parliament again, even though Sharif is in prison for corruption. Tried and sentenced in absentia, he returned to the country this month to serve his sentence, hoping to revitalise the campaign before the election. Now led by Sharif’s brother Shehbaz, the party is focusing on its economic success and promises of energy and infrastructure investment from China. However, efforts to increase tax revenues have faltered. The centre-left, secular Pakistan People’s party (PPP), is led by Bilawal Bhutto Zardari, son of the assassinated former prime minister Benazir Bhutto. The party lost ground after his mother was killed in 2007 but the family name still carries considerable weight. The third-generation leader appears to be playing a long game, rebuilding support in its heartland with an eye on future elections. If it does well in this vote, the PPP could potentially serve as a junior partner in a coalition.