With the launch of his new book imprint with publishing giant Random House, announced on Thursday via Instagram, the grime rapper Stormzy joined a growing list of entertainers and musicians who have parlayed their celebrity into the world of literature. Where it was once standard for stars to pen a memoir or book of essays, or have a ghost writer do it for them, many have in the last several years opted to join forces with publishing houses to launch high-profile imprints, essentially offshoots of large publishers that offer curated selections of titles. Stormzy’s imprint, #Merky Books, expands an entertainment network that already includes a record label (#Merky Records) and a music festival (#Merky Festival). It also puts him in the company of Hollywood power players such as Oprah, Sarah Jessica Parker and Johnny Depp, each of whom have made literary inroads of their own. In the last decade, in fact, the celebrity imprint has become something of a cottage industry, an endeavor mutually beneficial to publishing houses in pursuit of stars and their lucrative fanbases and celebrities looking for another feather in their cap. Lena Dunham’s Lenny Books, an imprint of Penguin Random House, spawned from the actor-writer’s Lenny newsletter, a weekly feminist bulletin she launched with collaborator Jenni Konner in 2015. Aiming to “to push the ball forward … with wit and style”, the imprint launched in 2017 with Jenny Zhang’s Sour Heart, a collection of coming-of-age tales about young immigrant women in America. Lenny Books’ next release was Courage is Contagious, a series of essays by marquee authors about former first lady Michelle Obama, which was followed this summer by Caroline Kepnes’s novel Providence. As the editorial director of the recently launched SJP for Hogarth, another imprint of Penguin Random House, Sarah Jessica Parker published Fatima Farheen Mirza’s timely novel A Place for Us, about an Indian Muslim family navigating life in California. While a follow-up has yet to be announced, Parker, the honorary chairman of the American Library Association, selected Jonathan Miles’s Anatomy of a Miracle as the organization’s Book Club pick this year. Depp’s cryptically named Infinitum Nihil – meaning “nothing is forever” – was launched in 2012 as a division of HarperCollins. The actor, unsurprisingly, pledged to green-light “publications that might ordinarily never have breached the parapet”, but in six years the partnership has borne little fruit: projects such as a Bob Dylan biography and a Yoko Ono photo-biopic have been indefinitely delayed. But Depp did release and write the introduction for a long-lost novel by Woody Guthrie, House of Earth, which came out under Harper Perennial. As the natural extension of her uber-successful book club, Oprah Winfrey and Flatiron Books announced An Oprah Book in 2016, the media mogul’s first publishing imprint. Oprah’s memoir, originally titled The Life You Want (now maybe titled The Path Made Clear), was slated to be its flagship release but has since been in limbo. In its absence, though, An Oprah Book led with Food, Health and Happiness, the former talkshow host’s first cookbook. The collection of 115 nutritious, Oprah-approved recipes sold like hotcakes. Though it will close once it’s published all books under contract, the late Anthony Bourdain’s imprint with the publishing house Ecco, Anthony Bourdain Books, has been the most prolific of all celebrity-sanctioned imprints, with almost a dozen releases to its name since launching in 2011. Bourdain, of course, was as much a writer as he was a chef, with a refined taste in literature and an eye for stories, people and places on the margins. That’s reflected in Anthony Bourdain Books, which has published LA Son by Roy Choi, Prophets of Smoked Meat by Daniel Vaughn and Marilyn Hagerty’s Grand Forks, a “history of American dining in 128 reviews”. Before it closes, Anthony Bourdain Books has several more releases in the pipeline, including Jose Andres’ forthcoming We Fed an Island, about the renowned chef’s time in Puerto Rico after Hurricane Maria, and Prisoner by Jason Rezaian. Gwyneth Paltrow’s imprint with Grand Central Publishing and Hachette – goop press – is the marginally less pretentious, more affordable sister of her Goop lifestyle brand, boasting self-help titles such as The Food Therapist, The Clarity Cleanse, The Sex Issue and The Postnatal Depletion Cure. Launched in late 2015, goop-with-a-lowercase-g releases several books a year by Goop-approved doctors, scientists, and health gurus, plus Paltrow’s own reliably gung-ho titles, such as It’s All Good and It’s All Easy. Also with Grand Central Publishing, Handler inked her imprint deal back in 2010, before such forays were the ambition du jour of celebrity bibliophiles. Her first release with Borderline Amazing/A Chelsea Handler Book was Lies that Chelsea Handler Told Me, a collection of humiliating tales delivered, as the book jacket states, by Chelsea’s “friends, family and other victims”. The imprint seems to have been dormant since then, with no additional titles to its name, but Handler herself has penned five books with Hachette, including My Horizontal Life, a series of dispatches from the comic’s one-night stands, and the bestselling Are You There, Vodka? It’s Me, Chelsea, the book that confirmed Handler’s literary bona fides. One year before retiring from baseball in 2014, legendary Yankees shortstop Derek Jeter made sure he’d have his hands full by signing a deal with Simon & Schuster’s Gallery Books for his own imprint, Jeter Publishing. It’s turned out to be one of the most marketable and consistent of high-profile imprints, with almost a dozen titles to its name including Jeter’s own bestselling autobiography, Jeter Unfiltered, plus memoirs and photo books by athletes such as Rob Gronkowski, Muhammad Ali and Derrick Coleman, the first legally deaf offensive player in the NFL. Now it seems Jeter Publishing is looking beyond the sports world: Rob Scheer’s highly anticipated upcoming memoir, about overcoming abuse, homelessness and a broken foster care system, is slated for a fall 2018 release.