Sweden’s librarians have spoken: a wonderfully eclectic lineup of authors has emerged on a long-ish longlist for the New Academy’s alternative to the postponed 2018 Nobel prize for literature. Traditionally awarded in autumn by the opaque and austere Swedish Academy, the Nobel was called off in March due to an ongoing sex scandal – and swiftly replaced when a group of the country’s cultural figures decided that the “world’s greatest literature prize” should still be awarded. “In a time when human values are increasingly being called into question,” the New Academy’s solemn opener read, “literature becomes an even more important counterforce to stop the culture of silence and oppression.” The New Academy asked Swedish librarians to nominate an author from anywhere in the world who has told the story of “humans in the world” – and the resulting longlist is surprisingly surprising. Yes, some of the perennial Nobel contenders are here, and deservedly so: Cormac McCarthy is nominated, as are Margaret Atwood, Ngũgĩ wa Thiong’o, Amos Oz and Haruki Murakami. But the librarians have also added some fresh faces to the usual suspects: we have the fiction of Finnish rising star Sofi Oksanen, the fierce originality of Polish Man Booker International prize winner Olga Tokarczuk and the sizzling fantasy of Nnedi Okorafor (I love Who Fears Death and The Book of Phoenix so much I think Okorafor’s going to land my vote, but I’m not quite decided yet. How many lineups – for anything, let alone a literature prize – feature Neil Gaiman, JK Rowling, Thomas Pynchon and Don DeLillo alongside each other? As well as Patti Smith, rather more celebrated for her music than her books. Could she be this year’s Bob Dylan, the New Academy’s contender for controversy who will befuddle all by blurring the line between lyrics and poetry? Perhaps the most striking detail of all is found not in the names, but the fine print. The New Academy is enforcing a gender quota on the shortlist stage, stipulating that it comprises two men and two women. How different this is to the Nobel, which counts among its 114 winners just 14 women. Could a win bring the pseudonymous Elena Ferrante, also nominated, out into the open? The only thing to do is to cast your vote and see: the New Academy is now asking the public to vote by 14 August. The shortlist will then be put to the New Academy’s judging panel. How open. How inclusive. I can’t wait to see who they end up with.