If I were an artist invited to exhibit alongside Rembrandt, what would I say? I hope I’d have the humility and good sense to refuse. The bit of me that likes the paintings of Glenn Brown wishes he’d done the same. This artist, whose ornate, glossy oils pastiche everything from the covers of sci-fi novels to the paintings of – you guessed it – Rembrandt, said yes. He also agreed to appear in a film that introduces the Scottish National Gallery’s blockbuster exhibition tracing how British collectors, critics and artists have seen Rembrandt over the last four centuries. Who cares what Brown thinks about Rembrandt once you’ve seen his glib postmodernist exercises near to some of the most profound works of art ever created? Where Rembrandt used oil paint to probe the deepest recesses of existence, Brown creates self-conscious, fussy parodies full of perverse arabesques that stay steadfastly on the surface. His true master is not Rembrandt but Salvador Dalí, who might have happily put his signature to Brown’s ingenious yet utterly empty etchings of Rembrantesque heads. Then again, Dalí would sign almost anything. Brown’s chic art-world nonsense does, however, serve a purpose in this ambitious and flawed show. It makes you ponder what Rembrandt has that is so elusive. For Brown is technically clever. He homes in on a real quality in Rembrandt: his painterly indulgence and extravagance. The golden robe of the ruler of Babylon bulges with jewels of light in Belshazzar’s Feast, lent by London’s National Gallery. It is one of the richest surfaces ever painted. Yet here it is mirrored by other Rembrandt masterpieces. A Man in Armour (Achilles), painted in 1655 and today owned by Glasgow City council, is a stupendously atmospheric image of a knight. Arthurian dreams glimmer in the reflected light on this sombre warrior’s twilit armour as his face broods in shadow on dragons and damsels. Even to describe these works is to glimpse what Brown is missing. Rembrandt’s fancy effects are never just fancy. He doesn’t do art for art’s sake. Portrait of an Elderly Man was painted in 1667, two years before his death, when mortality filled his mind. There’s a slapdash freedom to the way Rembrandt has laid on the fleshy colours to build a flushed face and meaty hands that bulge out of black sleeves and white cuffs like smears of paté. Is he having a laugh? There was a genre of painting in 17th-century Holland called the tronie, a kind of fictional portrait or fantastical head. This painting has a tronie-like aspect but it brings you tragically to earth. It is a study of a florid, unhealthy looking man who relishes life but could quit it any second. This painting will probably have a heart attack before the exhibition ends. Portrait of an Elderly Man is a loan from the Mauritshuis in The Hague, but it was in British collections until it was sold to the Dutch museum in 1999. Where was the export ban and Save It for the Nation appeal? The UK has some of Rembrandt’s greatest paintings, yet the loans from abroad reveal we once owned more. The saddest of those departures was the sale of Rembrandt’s greatest landscape, The Mill, in 1911. This incomparably atmospheric vision of a solitary Dutch windmill catching the last rays of the sun on its sails under black clouds that spread like ink through a green and blue sky was painted in the 1640s and came to Britain in 1792. When its aristocratic owner decided to sell, an appeal to save it for the National Gallery failed and it is now owned by Washington DC’s National Gallery of Art instead. It was when I saw The Mill in the catalogue for this exhibition that I knew I had get to Edinburgh quick. It is a wondrous blot of colour that stays in your mind like a ghost. It even anticipates Monet in the impressionistic way Rembrandt observes a tree-lined horizon and its reflection in a river. JMW Turner felt the same: he revered and set out to rival this painting, whose daring helped him on his own artistic journey towards abstraction. This, unfortunately, is the kind of trick that Rembrandt: Britain’s Discovery of the Master misses. Interspersed with a stunning yet smallish gathering of Rembrandt’s paintings, it tells a slightly rambling story of how the British have seen his work since his own time. But when it gets a chance to show a real creative spark between the Dutch master and his British fans, it fluffs it. The Mill could easily have been shown next to paintings by Turner and Constable to demonstrate how it helped inspire a Romantic revolution. Instead we get too much detail about collectors and their minutiae of taste. Ludicrous as Glenn Brown looks here, I don’t think he would ever do what Joshua Reynolds, the first president of the Royal Academy did and actually paint over Rembrandt’s works. It is both funny and sad to see how Reynolds retouched and ruined Rembrandt’s The Vision of Daniel. You could come away thinking the British are not good enough to deserve all the Rembrandts in our collections – were it not for the very end. If Brown looks daft next to Rembrandt, there are two British greats here who more than survive the comparison. That’s because Leon Kossoff and Frank Auerbach have looked deep into Rembrandt’s darkness all their lives. The manic thickness of their paint, pitched between abstract expressionism and raw reality, is a contemporary answer to Rembrandt’s unmasked pathos. The almost childlike intensity and vulnerability of Kossoff’s 1982 painting From Rembrandt: A Woman Bathing in a Stream shows why, in his ability to see and portray the fragile wonder of being alive, Rembrandt will always be our contemporary.