Her big sister Beyoncé might have missed a trick in not teaming up with R Whites to launch 2016’s Lemonade album – just imagine the most fabulous secret lemonade drinker adverts that could have been! – but Solange is evidently a far more savvy businesswoman, with news of her Ikea collaboration recently sweeping the interior design/R&B crossover world. Yes, Solange’s amorphous Saint Heron “cultural hub” is teaming up with global meatball’n’sofa hub to, we can only hope, make reasonably priced bits of furniture that will make our one-bed flat in Tottenham resemble Solange’s outrageously tasteful New Orleans pad. This isn’t the first time Ikea have teamed up with musicians, but they’re usually on the more under-the-radar side of things. There was electro-lad-ska duo Man Like Me’s performing Jona Lewie’s You’ll Always Find Me in the Kitchen at Parties for the brand back in 2010 and, earlier this year, indie types Teleman playing their single Repeater against a backdrop of rotating rugs and tiny living-room teepees (for children? dogs? misbehaving partners?) through gritted teeth and the assurance that yes, this will fund the third album. This is the first time, however, that Ikea will actually be churning out products – rather than just aggressively colourful promotional videos – with a musician. And an actually famous musician at that. Gosh. The products, too, look set to push the boundaries of Ikea’s usual discreetly functional wares. So step aside lowly CHOSIGT cheese grater and BILLY bookcases with your tired, old, singular uses and say hello to a dazzling new range that will be “exploring architectural and interior design objects with multifunctional use”. We can only imagine the wondrous objects that Solange and Ikea will conjure up over their many meetings in the glamorous surroundings of the Ikea cafe, sipping lingonberry juice and nibbling Daim bars as the creative sparks fly. Our hopes for the range include: 1) A huge squidgy pink jacket that is also a cosy daybed for one, in tribute to the Michelin woman candy floss-styled outfit by designer Nadine Goepfert that Solange rocks in the opening few seconds of the Cranes in the Sky video. 2) Some nice plants from the garden-centre bit of the shop that, instead of slowly dying in a dark corner of the living room, you can sometimes wear as a bra (again, pls see Cranes in the Sky video for reference). 3) Naturally, a boxing ring that also doubles up as an elevator – perfect for giving philandering brothers-in-law a light thrashing. The ads for all of these must-have home improvements should be, much like the video Solange directed for SZA’s The Weekend, be shot from bloody miles away. Bring it on.