Donald Trump has tweeted his golfing plans for the weekend as close to thousands of people took to the streets in Edinburgh to protest against his UK visit. The US president said he had arrived in Scotland for “meetings and some golf”. Trump and his wife Melania arrived in Scotland on board Air Force One on Friday evening, before travelling by motorcade to his Trump Turnberry resort in Ayrshire. I have arrived in Scotland and will be at Trump Turnberry for two days of meetings, calls and hopefully, some golf - my primary form of exercise! The weather is beautiful, and this place is incredible! Tomorrow I go to Helsinki for a Monday meeting with Vladimir Putin. By lunchtime, about 50 protesters had congregated on Turnberry beach. Just before 2pm, the US president appeared on the golf course and waved at the gathering on the beach, to be met with booing and chants of “no Trump, no racist USA”. Meanwhile, close to 10,000 marchers were streaming through the streets of Edinburgh, ending up in the Meadows park to the south of the city centre, where families sat in the sunshine and enjoyed picnics, music and speeches from local activists. Environmentalist Paula Baker, 35, attended with her partner Emily, 38, a nurse, and their seven-month-old baby Fallon. “It’s a very inclusive atmosphere,” said Baker. “People are willing to make a stand, and we want Americans to see that we are willing to stand by the people who are protesting over there too.” Gwen and Rob Irving, 68 and 71, had travelled from Glasgow to display their banner reading: “Trump is a disgrace to the office of US President”. “I’ve never been moved to protest before,” said Gwen, “but he is a frightening development, and he is trying to foment division across Europe. “The atmosphere is good-humoured but serious. It’s inspired some hope. We’ve spoken to a lot of Americans about our banner. They’re pleased to see it because this isn’t anti-American.” Towards the back of the crowd, the six-metre Trump baby balloon was straining against its tethers in the wind. Organiser Leo Murray described how a crew of “babysitters” had travelled up from London overnight on the sleeper train to fly the blimp at Saturday’s protest. Murray had originally hoped to fly the balloon, which depicts Trump as an angry baby wearing a nappy, at his Turnberry course, but Police Scotland denied permission on security grounds. Murray said: “People in Scotland have been so enthusiastic. I’ve been in activism all my life but this has crystallised something in the public mood. It will be the defining image of this disastrous visit.” He added that the Trump baby was now planning a world tour, starting in Australia. Meanwhile, police are continuing to search for a paragliding Greenpeace protester who broke through the no-fly zone surrounding Turnberry on Friday evening, to fly past the US president as he entered the Scottish hotel. Despite efforts to keep protesters away from the presidential party, the paraglider flew past police snipers and in front of the hotel, apparently in view of the president, trailing a banner reading “Trump: well below par #resist”. Police Scotland said on Saturday morning that “inquiries were ongoing to trace the person responsible” as more protesters began to gather for a second day of demonstrations. By 8.30am, people were congregating by the police cordon around the resort carrying banners and placards, with thousands more expected to attend demonstrations across the country. Greenpeace said it had alerted police to the protest minutes in advance. The group’s spokesman Ben Stewart said: “Theresa May should not have dignified Trump with a visit to the UK. The vast majority of British people are appalled by his words and deeds. He is, simply, the worst president ever. That’s why we flew over him with a message branding him well below par.” Popular Scottish comic Janey Godley, whose earthy anti-Trump sign went viral when she protested at his last visit to Scotland in 2016, was standing with friends and a more demurely worded placard at the police cordon on the beach at Turnberry on Saturday. Godley said: “I’m here to protest Trump because I think it’s important for women’s voices to be heard against someone who shows absolute disrespect for women. His policies are divisive and he has enabled racism and rightwing opinion across Europe as well as in the US. The Americans who voted for him have every right to do so, but wait until they get sick and need healthcare.”  The secretary for Scotland, David Mundell, briefly greeted Trump as he and his wife, Melania, disembarked from Air Force One at Prestwick airport near Glasgow on Friday evening. No members of the Scottish government were present. Trump had not requested a meeting with the first minister, Nicola Sturgeon, an outspoken critic of his policies who, according to a former staffer, the US president “totally hates”. Instead, Sturgeon will spend Saturday in Glasgow leading an LGBT Pride march. At a rally in Glasgow on Friday evening, more than 2,000 protesters gathered and Scotland’s political parties set aside their constitutional differences to present a united opposition to Trump’s presence in Scotland.  Turnberry, which Trump described as a “magical place” earlier this week, has undergone a £200m transformation over the past four years. It is made up of three links golf courses, a golf academy, and an elegant hilltop hotel, built in 1906, which looks out across the sea to the rock island of Ailsa Craig. Inside, it is lavishly decorated with glittering chandeliers, leather sofas and a discreet portrait by the reception desk of Trump in a relaxed pose taking a golf swing.