We flew over Jurassic China, and the pristine forest stretched endlessly towards distant mountains. A river meandered below and we sank down to skim across its surface like a dragonfly. A pterosaur swooped in front. The tip of its wing caught the glistening waters’ surface and sent up a spray of water. The audience of scientists gasped as the water hit their surprised faces, droplets spattering their 3D glasses. They held up their hands as a second spray shot out of the seat in front, followed by a hard puff of air as the pterosaur wheeled up into the sky. Most of these specimens have never been seen first-hand by anyone except curators and the research teams who found them This was the world of Chinese mammals in the Jurassic era, brought to life in 4D cinema, complete with automated water spray, air jets, and mechanisms in the seat to poke you at co-ordinated moments. No-one could resist the charm as we followed a young Juramaia – a 160m year old fossil mammal from the Tiaojishan Formation – as he navigated a world of Jurassic dangers to find his way home. The serious men and women of science who sat in the auditorium of the Beijing Museum of Natural History (BMNH) experiencing this cinematic novelty, giggled and gasped like schoolchildren. I was lucky enough to be part of a small group of mammal palaeontologists invited to China for a symposium celebrating the opening of an exhibit like no other. The 4D film was part of this landmark event. The BMNH, working together with eight museums and universities across China, have brought together over 50 complete mammal fossils for a world first: an exhibition dedicated solely to the jaw-dropping Mesozoic mammal fossils of China. Most of these specimens have never been seen first-hand by anyone except curators and the research teams who described them. They comprise a role-call of world-changing discoveries, and an opportunity to take stock of China’s leading role in mammal palaeontology. Professor Zhe-Xi Luo from the University of Chicago was one of the key organisers of the exhibition and symposium in Beijing. I asked him how this exhibit came together: “it was not so easy that many local museums would donate their specimens for a common public exhibit. I must credit Dr Meng Qing-Jin, BMNH Director – he personally contacted the owner museums to secure their agreement to share their fossils for public exhibition, and to make them available for international experts to examine.” The cast of the film included all the star specimens of mammal palaeontology. In the last 20 years these fossils from China – complete skeletons laid out like Egyptian hieroglyphics – have revolutionised our understanding of mammals from the Mesozoic, between 251-66m years ago. Few skeletons of mammals from this time were known previously, and so their study was restricted to a fossil record dominated by teeth – the hardest parts of the body and therefore the mostly likely to survive fossilisation. These new specimens are celebrities: their images splashed all over the scientific tabloids: Nature and Science front covers, multipage spreads, the intimate details of their lives poured over by a dedicated palaeontologist-fanbase. The shear number of complete skeletons of early mammal fossils from China is astonishing. From the auditorium we were led downstairs and through a hall of dinosaurs into the exhibition. We flitted like hummingbirds from case to case. In each one the little bones of our ancestors and cousins glinted under the spotlights. Artists’ reconstructions hung above: rich colourful scenes of almost-familiar creatures. Among the exhibits, Docofossor brachydactylus terrorised its stone slab grave like a tiny Nosferatu. I admired its wide mole-paws. Luo was one of the first to examine this fossil: “I couldn’t believe it when I saw that it was missing one digit segment on each finger. I thought wow, we really have something special here.” Luo led the research describing how these shortened paws - perfect for digging - are caused by genetic changes in these ancient creatures. These are the same mechanisms we see at work in the evolution of later lineages of digging mammals, like moles. It’s the kind of adaptation no-one had imagined happened so early in mammal evolutionary history. And this story is not unique. Every specimen in the room is its own palaeontological revolution. Twenty-three are holotypes, the fossils that define a new species. Their skeletons tell us that mammals were much more than the ‘shrew-like’ animals portrayed in tired old narratives. They weren’t shivering in dark corners waiting for dinosaurs to have their day. Mammal history begins over 200m years ago, and charts the emergence of a dynamic group that grew to a wide range of body sizes, occupied multiple ecological niches, and evolved anatomical specialisations that heightened their senses of touch, smell and hearing. All of this came long before the so-called ‘age of mammals’ had even begun. These animals were no mere rough drafts, they were the complex debut novels of mammal macroevolution. “The Mesozoic mammal exhibition is truly special,” said Dr Simone Hoffman, assistant professor at the New York Institute of Technology who attended the symposium. “There is no other place in the world that preserves such a diverse fauna of early mammals and it was great to see this diversity showcased” Earlier in the week we’d been given a chance to have a one-to-one with these specimens. In a square windowless room at the BMNH filled with the aroma of coffee, we sheltered from the punishing heat of the city. Around the large wooden table we each had our own microscope. Under the lens: the most complete fossil mammals the world has ever seen. Prize among them were the haramiyidans. One of the biggest debates in Mesozoic mammal research is whether haramiyidans belong to crown Mammalia – which includes modern mammals – or if they are the survivors of a side-branch of mammaliaforms with more ancient roots. We spent much of the day in debate, cross-examining the evidence in their anatomy. The haramiyidan debate may sound like a meaningless quibble, but it has repercussions for the big picture of mammal evolution. Their remains are among the earliest in the mammaliaform fossil record and include creatures with impressive specialisations for tree-dwelling, gliding, and different diets. Which interpretation you take on their ancestry either places them among our modern mammal relatives, or outside of them. If they are from our crown group, this places our origins all the way back into the Late Triassic, over 200m years ago. Not all the specimens we saw as part of the symposium were at the BMNH. Participants were also transported by bus to the Institute of Vertebrate Paleontology and Paleoanthropology (IVPP) on the other side of bustling Beijing. Like the BMNH, IVPP is one of the world’s leading palaeontological research institutions, and a co-sponsor and contributor to the symposium and exhibition. We were led through the air conditioned building and released into a palaeontologists’ playground of mammal fossils. Participants jostled around the first known gliding mammal, Volaticotherium. Its specialised skin membrane, called a patagium, looked like a brushed ink mountain over a jumble of limbs. In life, this patagium stretched between fore and hind limbs to allow Volaticotherium to glide between the trees for foraging or escaping predators, beating modern gliding mammals to this innovation by 70m years. People often assume all mammals in the so-called time of dinosaurs were tiny. Among the fossil treasures, my attention went straight to a character I had long hoped to meet. Curled up like a snoozing dog in front of the fireplace was Repenomamus giganticus: the biggest Mesozoic mammal yet discovered. It lay on a red-brown volcanic tuff bed, tail curled and neck outstretched, deep in geological slumber. This animal was around a metre long and weighed 12-14kg, like a chunky Cretaceous pitbull. It wasn’t only the size that astonished those who first examined it. Inside another Repenomamus specimen, researchers discovered the stomach contents still preserved: its last supper was a feast of bite-sized baby dinosaurs. We left at the end of the week realising that the discoveries from China are just the tip of the iceberg. As they continue to explore the hidden layers of their vast country, there will undoubtedly be many more world-changing fossils to discover. Not only did these mammals take to the trees, burrow into the earth, and dive in rich prehistoric waters, but they made dinner of the animals we once assumed were their masters. References Hu Y, Meng J, Wang Y, Li C. 2005. Large Mesozoic mammals fed on young dinosaurs. Nature, 433:149–152. Luo Z-X, Yuan C-X, Meng, Q-J, and Ji Q. 2011. A Jurassic eutherian mammal and divergence of marsupials and placentals. Nature, 476:442–44. Luo Z-X, Meng Q-J, Ji Q, Liu D, Zhang Y-G, Neander AI. 2015. Evolutionary development in basal mammaliaforms as revealed by a docodontan. Science, 347:760-764. Meng J, Hu Y, Wang Y, Wang X, Li C. 2006. A Mesozoic gliding mammal from northeastern China. Nature, 444:889–89.