Amid all the effort of balancing motherhood with trying to win an eighth Wimbledon title, there has been a calmness about Serena Williams, something that has not always been the case with the 23-times grand slam champion. It may not last – her fire has been a major part of her stunning career – but here at least, it is serving her well. On Tuesday, she dropped her first set of the tournament but dug in, lifted her game and got the job done. Her 3-6, 6-3, 6-4 win over Camila Giorgi, the hard-hitting Italian put her into the semi-finals for the 11th time and the last four of a grand slam event for the 35th time, a record Andy Murray, who popped into the BBC studios, described quite simply as “ridiculous”. Just over 10 months after giving birth to her first daughter, Williams has lost none of her fight, none of her competitive spirit and none of her belief, eventually taming Giorgi, who played well above her world ranking of 52. In her first grand slam quarter-final, trying to become the first Italian woman to make the Wimbledon semi-finals, she went toe to toe with the 36-year-old Williams, slamming groundstrokes and for a while even pushing her back, a rare sight. Giorgi stood inside the baseline to return the Williams serve, never yielding ground. It was a brave tactic and one that worked as she took the first set, holding from 0-40 down in the eighth game and then two games later, serving out the set. But amid all that pressure, and in front of a Centre Court crowd that included Justin Timberlake, Jessica Biel and Drake, Williams remained poised. Serving beautifully, and breaking through the 120mph mark for the first time here this year, Williams figured out the Giorgi serve and once she had broken in the fourth game of the second set, the momentum changed. From then on, the result was seemingly inevitable as she levelled the match and then, after a stunning backhand to break for 2-1 in the decider, she eased through the rest of the set, serving out to love to take her place in the last four. “It’s weird, sometimes I feel, man, I’m in trouble, sometimes I feel, I can fight,” Williams said. “For whatever reason, today I was so calm. Even when I was down the first set, I thought, Well, she’s playing great. I’m doing a lot of the right things. It is what it is.” Only two wins away from a 24th grand slam title, which would equal the all-time record held by the Australian Margaret Court, Williams knows she is close to an incredible achievement. In just her fourth tournament back, the first on grass and the first since she pulled out before her last-16 battle at the French Open against Maria Sharapova, she looks every inch the champion and is the overwhelming favourite. That in itself brings pressure and Williams admits the calmness may not be permanent. “Just to be clear, that was just today,” she said, laughing. I’m hoping this is a new thing. Honestly, I highly doubt it. “It was just the way I felt. I never felt it was out of my hands. It’s weird. I can’t describe it. I just felt calm. Hoping I can channel that all the time but one day at a time.” Williams will play Julia Görges, the No 13 seed from Germany, who is into her first grand slam semi-final after ending the run of Kiki Bertens, from the Netherlands, with a 3-6, 7-5, 6-1 victory. “Probably I don’t have many words today to describe the moment I’m going through right now,” Görges said. “It’s pretty unreal for me at the moment to get to that stage at a grand slam. It’s been always a dream for every player, to be in a semis at Wimbledon. “ I’m just very glad the way I handled everything, because it wasn’t an easy match at all. It was quite tough. I thought I was maybe the better player in the first set but didn’t actually take the chances “I would have loved to take. But still found a way to somehow come back and close out that match.” Williams hammered Görges when they met at the French Open last month and is on the way back to her best, quicker perhaps than anyone expected. There is work to be done but she is on the right track, with her ranking due to rise from 181 to at least 51. “Well, it’s better than 183 or whatever I am,” she said. “Got to keep trekking on, though. Serena Williams, 51, eh. It doesn’t have that same ring to it. The ’1’ part does, but not the ’5’. Keep going.”