The Week in Patriarchy is a weekly roundup of what’s happening in the world of feminism and sexism. If you’re not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. ThinkProgress has published a piece about the move to try to decriminalize self-induced abortion – in large part because of the assumption that Roe will be overturned, abortion will be illegal, and women will start to perform their own procedures. Activists don’t want scores of women going to jail after taking matters into their own hands. (Something which is already happening, in fact.) Now, self-managed abortion isn’t always dangerous and experts are finding that there are a lot of women who would prefer to end their pregnancies in their own homes, without medical intervention. But the fact that we’re already planning for the end of Roe – and the criminalization of women for having abortions – is beyond distressing. It occurred to me the other day that my daughter, now eight years old, might be 14 before Trump is out of office – and that she might grow up in a post-Roe world. I don’t want her activism to have to be the activism of desperation. I’m glad that there are people thinking ahead; I just wish they didn’t have to. Mae Ryan and Mona Chalabi - of Emmy-nominated Vagina Dispatches fame - have made breast exams beautiful in Touch Your Tits. We need more of this in the world right now. Gender divide in American politics right now is, if I’m not mistaken, completely unprecedented. https://t.co/jnTr2Cu42H are we sure it didnt just explode in embarrassment https://t.co/OHOZwRZRQO Keep this in mind:Children are still in cages. Parents still don’t know where their children are. Some were coerced illegally into leaving the country. The media isn’t writing as many stories but the problem has not gone away.Please RT, call your rep, don’t let up. https://t.co/OyL2bSqHSK Not only did Trump tell us. Not only did Pence tell us. Not only did Leonard Leo tell us. Brett Kavanaugh told us IN HIS OWN WORDS that he wants to criminalize abortion. It’s time for senators to stop pretending that he doesn't have a clear record. #StopKavanaugh pic.twitter.com/4XOg4T2P6j Monica Burton at Eater about people who don’t tip; ProPublica on the sexual abuse running rampant at immigrant youth detention centers; and Amanda Fortini’s moving profile of Michelle Williams at Vanity Fair. Enough to give me some hope again. In a time when it’s clear that American boys are in urgent need of intervention, what feminists can do to help. Brock Turner is trying to get his rape conviction overturned by claiming he wasn’t trying to penetrate his victim, just have “outercourse” with her. On a scale of one to ten, I’m basically at a flaming mad 20. Late to the game with this one, but bingeing Queer Eye on Netflix is doing wonders for my soul and my complexion.