The Resistance Now is a weekly update on the people, action and ideas driving the protest movement in the US. If you’re not already receiving it by email, subscribe. Occupy Ice Portland emerged spontaneously after a protest outside the city’s Immigration and Customs Enforcement (Ice) building in June. The camp has grown to around 80 people over the past two weeks and inspired other activists around the country to set up their own Occupy Ice encampments. The activists have a solid aim – to see Ice abolished – and say they’re not going anywhere. And some of them are being guided by a wave of protests from seven years ago. “People have passed down knowledge from Occupy Wall Street, so that, I think, helps. So some of the lessons from that organization have been learned to make this more sustainable,” a Portland occupier, Whitney Handrich, told the Guardian. The Portland camp has already succeeded in shutting down the Ice building for a week. People there and in camps in other cities said they weren’t going anywhere. Read our full report here. Pro-choice advocates in Massachusetts are scrambling to overturn a 19th-century law in the state that criminalizes abortion – as the threat of a Roe v Wade repeal becomes more realistic. A number of outdated laws still exist in Massachusetts which, among other things, threaten to imprison anyone “with intent to procure the miscarriage of a woman”, WGBH radio reported. Even if Roe v Wade were to be overturned – which some fear could happen if Donald Trump appoints a hardline conservative to the supreme court – the state has other laws supporting abortion rights. Still, activists say the outdated laws should go. A bill to that end – the Nasty Women Act – passed the Massachusetts Senate in January but is yet to clear the House. “It is more pressing than ever before because of Justice Kennedy’s retirement, and I think taking the laws off the books is both practical in protecting abortion care but also symbolic in that it sends a message that the Commonwealth believes that women have the right to choose,” Rebecca Hart Holder, executive director of Naral Pro-Choice Massachusetts, told WGBH.