The contented one versus the disgruntled one was an accurate billing for the latest instalment of English football’s fiercest rivalry given the pre-match moods of Jürgen Klopp and José Mourinho respectively. It was certainly fitting afterwards as Manchester United were comprehensively beaten by Liverpool on the latest leg of their US pre-season tour. Xherdan Shaqiri marked his first appearance for Liverpool with a stunning overhead kick and also set up Daniel Sturridge for a cool finish, while penalties from Sadio Mané and Sheyi Ojo added to Mourinho’s problems in the International Champions Cup. The United manager had another dig about the strength of his travelling squad, plus his opponents, before kick-off in the magnificent setting of the ’Big House’. “It’s Liverpool first team versus Manchester United kids,” he said. “For the last two years they have not been able to beat us, today they will think they have a chance.” It was a bit of a stretch considering United started with Alexis Sánchez, Juan Mata, Ander Herrera as captain and Eric Bailly, a late replacement for Chris Smalling, who injured himself in the warm-up, but his prediction about the game itself was prescient. Liverpool, with Mohamed Salah and Mané starting for the first time together this pre-season, were the sharper and more dangerous side throughout. The Egypt and Senegal internationals showed an understanding that United struggled to match with Mata and Sánchez often isolated, although the Chilean forward was a threat whenever he did receive possession. He was less than happy with a series of fouls from behind, however, berating the referee on several occasions. Klopp’s team created three decent openings before taking the lead. Dominic Solanke saw a back-heel flick blocked at the front post and Lee Grant, the United goalkeeper, twice saved from Salah headers. The first was an excellent save from a flick off the back of Salah’s head that seemed destined for the roof of the net. Liverpool edged ahead when Salah, oozing confidence, was felled inside the area by a clumsy challenge from Demetri Mitchell. Mané drove the resulting penalty low and hard beyond Grant’s right hand. During the drinks break that followed in the sweltering heat Mourinho came on to the pitch to complain to referee Ismail Elfath, possibly about the clear penalty, but his team levelled in style only three minutes later. Andreas Pereira enjoyed a strong, disciplined game in the centre of United’s midfield and capped his display with a superb free-kick, swept into the top corner from 25 yards, after Mitchell had been fouled. The flow of the game remained unchanged despite a raft of Liverpool substitutions in the second half, however, with Klopp’s team continuing to dominate. Shaqiri was highly impressive, setting up Sturridge for a fine finish into the bottom corner with his first touch of the game. A second penalty decision, awarded when Herrera was wrongly adjudged to have tripped Andy Robertson, gave Ojo the opportunity to roll a confident penalty past Joel Pereira. Shaqiri then put a stunning overhead kick beyond the United keeper to give the scoreline an accurate reflection of Liverpool’s superiority.