Over the years, I’ve been lied to a lot. It is part of the business of journalism. At the milder end of the scale you come across the careful omissions: the not-quite-honest responses to questions not thoroughly enough asked or not well enough informed, deliberately designed to distract. Then there are the barefaced lies that resonate over the years, whose sheer, staggering dishonesty still has the power to shock, even in a cynical and imperfect world. The two parliamentary reports on the involvement of the British intelligence services in torture and rendition released last week fall into the latter category. Many journalists have written stories alleging essentially the same thing – that in the years following the 9/11 attacks, British functionaries including soldiers, civil servants and intelligence officers with both MI5 and MI6 not only knew about, but participated in, human rights abuses committed during the interrogation of terrorism suspects. What is striking about last week’s disclosures, however, is the detail broken down in the bald statistics. On 232 occasions, UK intelligence officers were found to have continued to supply questions to foreign agencies between 2001 and 2010, despite knowing or suspecting that a prisoner was being tortured or mistreated. On 198 occasions, UK intelligence officers received information from a prisoner they knew was being mistreated. In a further 13 cases, UK intelligence officers witnessed an individual being tortured or mistreated. But to understand a lie, it is necessary to understand how it is framed, the subtle grammar of untruth and how the liar in the shape of officialdom appeals to journalists individually and as institutions. The official denials are what our readers get to see – the carefully formulated statements written in government press offices often after a period of to-and-fro. This ends up in print. What readers don’t get to see is another kind of to-and-fro. The direct appeal to editors and reporters. The insistence that our secret services “don’t do this kind of thing”, are bound by rules, by UK, EU and international law, are “crown servants”, and in any case are bound by a sense of decency. Except, as it is now quite clear, it was all a bloody lie. The answers given to journalists at the Observer over the years, as well as colleagues at the Guardian and those at other news organisations, as they investigated these allegations, were rotten with untruth and evasion. British intelligence officers, despite all the denials, were aware of mistreatment, they benefited from it and even supplied their own questions for the victims of mistreatment, despite knowing those being interrogated were being brutalised. At the very least, the kindest and perhaps least credible explanation is that UK intelligence gamed its own rules to cross almost every one of its self-professed red lines, to enjoy the benefits of other people’s torture and rendition, and drive a cart and horse through legal due process. More likely, as the reports suggest, is that it was worse than that: nothing short of a long-running cover-up that persisted for a decade and a half, that saw British officials tell lie after lie over the years for British public consumption, to sustain the impression that torture is something that only happens in other countries. Instead, British officials knew early on, as the reports make clear, that they were dealing with material tainted by mistreatment, even as they funded rendition – a kind word for kidnapping – in two cases. And as Dominic Grieve, chair of the Commons intelligence and security committee, has made clear, even now Britain’s security services have failed to come entirely clean about what occurred because of the prime minister’s failure to make key intelligence officials available. A fundamental test of a functioning democracy is that all of its citizens should be accountable to the same scrutiny and laws, yet it appears that the government continues to protect MI6 officers in particular who may be implicated in wrongdoing. The wrapping up of the intelligence and security committee’s work on this subject is not enough. It is starkly clear that there are questions still to be answered, including by Labour’s then foreign secretary, Jack Straw, and the former home secretary, David Blunkett, about what they knew at the time and why they weren’t more curious. Most urgent of all is that Britain’s intelligence agencies not only give a full account of their behaviour but that new safeguards are put in place to ensure that British officers stick to the letter of the laws they claim to uphold.