The transgender section had yet to be added to the prison shopping catalogue when Lady Jae arrived in San Quentin in 2013. Unable to order makeup, what did she do? “We had to become prison chemists,” says the inmate, in a voice oozing sass. “You take a plastic razor. You burn the razor. Then you hold up a piece of paper and let all that black vapour get on the paper. Take white toothpaste, mix it all up with a dab of grease, then apply it to your eyes.” Lady Jae, AKA Jarvis Jovan Clark, is one of the many startling characters who populate Ear Hustle, a podcast made by and about the inmates of the infamous San Quentin prison in San Francisco. While she’s the star turn of The Workaround, an early episode devoted to the importance of looking and feeling good while incarcerated, that instalment also introduced us to Big Zo, a barber who can do a high-top fade so perfect “you’ll be getting saluted for a week”, and Bucci, a creator of luxury soaps ranging from orange zest to dried mango, raisin and oatmeal. In the exploding world of podcasts, with every show now carrying an advert for another three you’ll like, true crime series are nothing new. But Ear Hustle stands out, not only for its steady stream of preconception-busting revelations (violent books aren’t very popular in the library) but for also being largely devoid of waffle and affectation. Like its cast, Ear Hustle – jail slang for eavesdropping – sounds like the real deal. All of which make its origins seem even more unlikely. Back in 2011, a well-spoken woman called Nigel Poor started teaching photography at San Quentin, undeterred by the fact that inmates weren’t allowed cameras. “The first time I walked into the classroom,” says Poor, “I was nervous. There were no guards, which surprised me. Then the guys started filtering in, about 25 of them, and I thought, ‘Oh God, what have I got myself into?’ “But when I got into teaching mode and started talking about the history of photography, it really wasn’t scary. I’ve been fortunate, though. I’ve never seen anything awful happen. There are definitely fights, people get hurt, but it doesn’t happen in the areas I’m allowed in. Honestly, I’ve never felt afraid in there.” Poor, a visual artist and professor of photography from the Bay Area, had another surprise: what great storytellers the inmates were. This was the germ that led to Ear Hustle, which now has almost 10 million listeners – including British inmates, the show having just been picked up by the UK’s prison radio service. “There’s an assumption that people in prison are hostile and angry and resentful, always involved in negative activity,” says Poor. “But I was shocked by what great students they were. I didn’t expect them to be so educated. They go to a lot of groups where they have to talk about what they’ve been through. And if there’s a lockdown, they’ve got nothing to do but talk, tell stories and make up stories – there are no computers or phones. So the guys are incredibly articulate.” This is certainly reflected in the scope of Ear Hustle, which has just completed a triumphant second series, even further-reaching and more assured than the award-winning first. Its aim is to go behind the cliches and show the realities of life in San Quentin, without judging the inmates or bashing the system. The episode Thick Glass tackled the issue of parenting, via a father who found himself incarcerated with his son. The Boom Boom Room told us how inmates can get intimate with a visiting spouse. The SHU, which stands for Security Housing Unit, dealt with life in solitary, as related by four men who spent between eight to 28 years banged up there. And then there was Looking Out, which focused on Rauch, who loves animals so much he takes them in, caring for them in his cell or in the yard: mice, bats, cockroaches, swallows, even tarantulas. “He’s the critters man!” says Poor, who was particularly fond of that episode. “I think it shows a very different side of prison, a tenderness.” We encounter Rauch out in the yard, where he sits barefoot with a lizard under his hat, sniffing his dreadlocks. “My relationship with people is pretty strained,” he says. “I don’t trust them. From early on, they have been a source of pain for me. When I was a child, before I was removed from the care of my mom’s custody, she tried to drown me a couple times in the tub.” Isn’t there a danger, I ask Poor, of turning the inmates – from Rauch to Big Zo to Lady Jae – into performing prisoners? “Well, that’s a really good question,” she says. “But Lady Jae can take care of herself. She’s been in prison as a woman for 25 years. And people hear tape after tape of the interview and only once they sign off do we do the story. I would kill even a great story if I thought it would get someone in trouble.” Poor is especially proud of Dirty Water, a season-two episode in which Sara Kruzan, who was groomed and then forced into sex work at the age of 13, comes to San Quentin to confront a pimp – or rather a trafficker, as she takes issue with the glamourising term pimp. This is part of a restorative justice programme: both survivor and offender relate, in harrowing detail, their upbringings, then we hear their charged confrontation. “Have you inflicted violence upon young girls, children?” asks Sara. “Yes, I have,” replies LA, the trafficker. “Yes, I have.” “Was there violence imposed on you as a kid?” “Of course there was. I was beat with extension cords, rubber hoses.” For Poor, the episode represented several breakthroughs. “It was the first time we’d brought a woman in, the first time a woman had been the main character, the first time we’d really concentrated on somebody’s crime. Sara was incredible – strong and present – and it wasn’t easy for her to go there.” While Ear Hustle is not out to bash the system, that’s not to say Poor isn’t interested in reform, though her aim is to show rather than preach. The opening episode looked at getting the right cellmate, which can be a life-or-death matter given that two men have to share a space 10ft by 5ft, which also houses their lockers, a sink and a toilet. “The first time I saw one, I almost passed out,” says Poor. “It’s not just that they’re small – the light really is awful. Originally, the cells were for one person but with overcrowding they have become shared.” If you stick “notable prisoners” and “San Quentin” into Google, you are immediately confronted with the more familiar side of the American jail. How does Poor respond to people who says these are criminals who don’t deserve classes or roomy, well-lit cells? “Well, that’s a hard one,” she says. “Personally, I feel like prison should be about reform, not just punishment. But I speak from the position of never having been the victim of a violent crime. I realise I could feel differently if I, or someone I love, was. But I hope I would still have that attitude.” Poor co-hosts Ear Hustle with Earlonne Woods, an inmate at San Quentin who, under prison rules, is not allowed to speak to the press. Their to-and-fro banter, pitching from her teacherly curiosity to his drawling voice of experience, is one of the show’s great strengths. It comes as a surprise to learn that Woods is serving a 31-year sentence – for attempted second-degree robbery. “Sentencing is crazy,” says Poor. “California has the three-strikes-and-you’re-out law. One guy we did a story on – his third crime was stealing $40 and he’s in his 25th or 26th year.” This adds to Poor’s belief that people inside aren’t so different from people outside: they just end up having to live the life. “That’s one of the things we want to show,” she says. “Of course, there are some very sick people who need to be in a locked-up facility. But there’s plenty who have been in prison for way too long, who could be out on the street. And with these disproportionate sentences, they don’t have a chance.” San Quentin has changed a lot since 1969, the year Johnny Cash made the jail famous by recording an album there. Back then, as one Ear Hustle inmate recalls, you’d take books out of the library and wear them under your clothes for stab protection. These days it’s a medium, rather than a maximum, security prison. “You’d be surprised walking in,” says Poor. “It feels a bit more like a college campus, in that there are classes happening, activities going on in the yard. It’s not as scary as you’d think, or at least not in the areas I can go to.” We get hundreds, if not thousands, of emails. Maybe five said these people shouldn't have a voice' She puts a lot of this down to San Quentin’s location. “It’s in the Bay Area, near cities, in a very liberal part of the US. There are about 3,000 volunteers who go in and out every year. So many prisons in the US are in the middle of nowhere – there aren’t people going in.” I’m keen to know what sort of feedback Ear Hustle has had, given that liberal America seems in danger of becoming a forgotten concept. “We get hundreds, if not thousands, of emails,” says Poor. “Out of that, there have been maybe five negative comments, saying these people shouldn’t have a voice, or that I shouldn’t be involved, as a white woman. “But that aside, there’s been an outpouring of real curiosity, affection and support – from federal judges, prosecutors, victims of really horrible crimes, family members of people in prison, professors. I was braced for a barrage of negativity but it hasn’t happened.” As for Lady Jae, she makes a dazzling return in season two, dominating a fascinating episode about what it’s like to be LGBTQ in prison. “I have boobs a go-go,” she says, “and weigh none of your business.” Lady Jae even gets to introduce the episode, vamping it up with the words: “The following podcast contains language and sexual content that may not be appropriate for all listeners. Discretion is advised. I mean, be very careful what y’all listen to on this podcast – because Lady Jae is hot, hot, hot, hot!”