Just under a year ago in London Usain Bolt grabbed the relay baton for the final time in his career, swapped it from his left hand to right and then pressed down hard on the afterburners. First he soared. Then he hopped before, as the pain from a torn hamstring hit, dropping to his knees. It could have been a metaphor for the next 11 months of the sport: the thrill of the 2017 world championships, with its stadiums packed and 10 million watching Bolt’s and Mo Farah’s farewell, replaced by a slowing down and indifference from casual observers. Right now athletics feels like a sport fumbling uncertainly in the dark, trying to find a way to make the public care in the post-Bolt world. The Jamaican was not only its biggest weapon but its greatest crutch. And so to Saturday night in the Olympic Stadium, for the inaugural Athletics World Cup – a new and much-hyped eight-nation event. Once again as the first day drew to a close the British, American and Jamaican teams were squaring off in the 4x100m. Only this time the names were very different. None of the British team who set a national record of 37.47 to take gold at last year’s world championships was there. Nor was any of the Americans who finished second or, indeed, the Jamaicans. In fact none of Britain’s 10 fastest 100m runners was competing – with the team led out by Reuben Arthur, who has the 23rd-fastest time in the UK in 2018. Does this matter? You might think so. After all the British Athletics chief executive, Niels de Vos, had promised that the overall quality would be “astonishing”. But many of Britain’s stars, including Dina Asher-Smith, Laura Muir and Reece Prescod, were missing – along with many other marquee names including Caster Semenya and American sprinter Noah Lyles, fastest man in the world this year. Imagine having a World Cup with no Ronaldo, Neymar and Messi, and with Jermain Defoe up front for England. It wouldn’t fly, would it? And yet British Athletics would argue – with some justification – that filling more than half of the London Stadium on a Saturday when England’s footballers and cricketers were in action, as well as the Wimbledon women’s singles final, was a decent first stab. Sunday had fewer fans, but they still enjoyed seeing the US team run away with the trophy and the sight of a makeshift British team battling to third. Perhaps there is something to the idea of team competition. After all, racing’s Shergar Cup does not attract the best horses yet its team-based event attracts big crowds to Ascot. Certainly those in the stadium seem to enjoy the action. A friend of mine who had spent £70 on his ticket seemed happy enough for a one-off – although he admitted the athletics was “far from world-class”. That seemed to sum up the general mood. Reasonably entertaining, interesting format, quality and TV coverage leaving a lot to be desired. But the final judgment needs to wait: until UK Athletics’ balance sheet has been properly assessed and scrutinised, until after the impact on the crowd for this week’s Anniversary Games is known, and – in the longer term – on whether it brings new fans to the sport. Ultimately it also needs to create a genuine legacy. There is talk of China being interested in hosting in 2020. But how many stars will be tempted to turn up in an Olympic year? We can certainly say there were far too many teething problems. Why was the competition announced after athletes had signed kit deals for 2018 – often meaning their priority was elsewhere? And why did some kit manufacturers, whose sponsorship provides athletes with the majority of their income, only find about the event in the newspapers? There is a potential parallel here with Nitro Athletics, a new competition launched with great fanfare in Australia in 2017 with the help of Bolt. The media coverage was extensive. The crowds decent. There was talk of it saving the sport, despite warnings that people were simply coming to tick seeing Bolt off their bucket list. And in its first year Nitro – which was run as a subsidiary company of Athletics Australia – lost $1.826m (£1.02m). The event was not held in 2018 and its future is uncertain. I hope the Athletics World Cup has a rosier future, for track and field needs a shot in the arm. There are some diehard fans who insist this is only a minor post-Bolt lull, and the sport has had similar wobbles before. That is not the sense I get from speaking to athletes, administrators and agents. Appearance fees are down. TV coverage is shrinking. And they fear sports such as MMA are more appealing to younger audiences. One influential voice told me last week that athletics was in danger of becoming a sport people care about only once every four years during the Olympics. While Greg Rutherford warned recently: “It’s probably a sign of the times that more people want to talk to me about Strictly Come Dancing. Can you imagine that happening in the era of Seb Coe and Steve Ovett, or even Sally Gunnell and Linford Christie? Now nobody cares about athletics.” According to preliminary research conducted by the International Association of Athletics Federations, 75% of respondents said the sport has to change – both in the stadium, and in how the sport is shown on TV and online – in order to fight back. The increasingly urgent, and perhaps impossible, question is: how?