When Damian Collins and his colleagues on the Commons digital, culture, media and sport select committee were in the US taking evidence for their inquiry into disinformation and fake news, they were struck by the priorities of the FBI officials they met. Yes, it was of the greatest importance to pursue and uncover manipulation of the 2016 presidential election, not least by Russian state actors. But the Feds’ primary focus had already shifted to the speed with which digital technology had advanced since Donald Trump’s unexpected victory, and the new methods of electoral disruption that might be deployed in the 2018 congressional midterms – and in subsequent contests. The lesson? To pursue past injustice without fear or favour, but never to settle for fighting the last war. Happily, the interim report of the inquiry does not make this mistake. The committee has collated and distilled a huge amount of information, and its recommendations have teeth: an admirable example of how parliament can use its powers to frame public policy and urge legislature and executive to respond with equal vigour (full disclosure: I gave evidence to the committee). Inevitably, the 2016 EU referendum has exercised a powerful gravitational pull on Collins and co: the deeper they dug, and the more the Observer’s Carole Cadwalladr revealed about the abuse of data by the pro-Brexit campaigns, the clearer it became that what started as an inquiry into the general pathologies of “fake news” was also becoming (and remains) an investigation into a specific case of electoral vandalism. It is indeed nauseating to learn that Vote Leave was busily planning its targeted ads even while the national campaigns were officially suspended as a mark of respect to the murdered MP Jo Cox. The report is no less robust in its scrutiny of Arron Banks, the businessman behind the Leave.EU campaign, who contributed a record £8.4m to the cause but “failed to satisfy us that his own donations had, in fact, come from sources within the UK”. Indeed, the committee is openly supportive of the National Crime Agency’s investigation into Banks’s alleged links with Russia. In sum: the stench of electoral manipulation, dark money and weapons-grade disinformation is as depressing as it is unmistakable. But it is important that the test of the inquiry’s success is not the overturning of the referendum result or the holding of a second vote – however appealing either outcome might be to remainers. The overriding purpose of the report is to initiate a comprehensive reassessment of, and response to, the impact of technology on our democratic structures and values. It seeks to begin the process of future-proofing a system that is – at present – alarmingly and increasingly open to digital subversion and pay-as-you-go disruption. Clearly, the law governing elections, campaigns and referendums is in urgent need of overhaul – not least as it was passed four years before the invention of Facebook. The committee’s call for “absolute transparency of online political campaigning” is as ambitious as it is ethically correct. It is no exaggeration to say that the credibility of the democratic process depends on this objective being pursued by government and lawmakers. This is the civil defence of the future, the means by which we shall be given at least a chance of spotting falsehoods As I and others have already suggested, the committee recommends that social media giants be classified neither as “publishers” nor “platforms” but legally redefined in a new, third category that radically enhances their accountability for the content they host, without imperilling free political discourse. Striking the right balance in this jurisprudential task will not be easy. But who expected it to be? The committee also sensibly recommends a new system of “credible annotation of standards, so that people can see, at a glance, the level of verification of a site” – essentially, kitemarking of the sort that is standard in almost every other sector of consumption. I am less sure that the government should “initiate a working group of experts” to oversee this process. If there is one thing worse than what the committee describes as the “wild west” of today’s digital prairies, it is anything that even resembles a Ministry of Truth, or an Oftruth regulator. Better that independent charitable bodies perform this grading task – gaining the public’s trust incrementally, as the admirable Full Fact and other fact-checking organisations have done in recent years. Best of all, though least likely to generate headlines, is the committee’s insistence that, from childhood, we all “need to be equipped in general with sufficient digital literacy”, and that social media companies pay “an educational levy” to fund this formidable social undertaking – from primary school onwards. This is the civil defence of the future, the means by which we shall be given at least a chance of spotting the proliferating falsehoods, pseudo-science, cheap conspiracy theories and outright cyber-attacks we will encounter every day online. These are the new tools of contemporary citizenship. The paradox of digital technology is that it is both ubiquitous and invisible: not literally so, of course, but in the sense that the detail of algorithms, data sets and bot frameworks is mind-numbingly technical, and often dismissed as the land where geeks go to bore one another to death. But consider this: there could easily be a general election in the next 12 months. In May, voters will go to the polls in 270 English local authorities. It is at least conceivable that a second EU referendum will be held in the foreseeable future. If you are not concerned by the extent to which these contests are vulnerable to digital sabotage, then you should be. Which is why, most unusually, this particular select committee report really should be read by everyone. • Matthew d’Ancona is a Guardian columnist