David Ospina believes the Colombia team to confront England on Tuesday are better than the one that reached the World Cup quarter-finals four years ago and will be lifted by the backing of around 40,000 supporters in Moscow. José Pekerman’s team were inspired by James Rodríguez before being eliminated by the hosts, Brazil, in 2014. The Bayern Munich forward, on loan from Real Madrid, expects to feature at some stage at Spartak Stadium after scans on the leg injury sustained against Senegal revealed he had not suffered a muscle tear, and Ospina is confident England can be beaten to force passage into the last eight. “We are a better team than four years ago,” the Arsenal goalkeeper said. “We are together, more experienced and a stronger squad of players than we were in Brazil. We have experience and good quality. Our players play in the best clubs, the best leagues, and are used to playing in matches of this size, so nothing will frighten us. England are a good team but we did not mind who it was we would face. We just know we will give everything for our country and take strength from the support. We always give everything for our country. It’s such an honour to play for Colombia.” Around 30,000 Colombian fans have been in Russia and another 10,000 are apparently heading to Moscow for the country’s third appearance in the knockout stages of the competition. They will heavily outnumber their English counterparts. “The support has been incredible,” Ospina said. “It’s been our inspiration. There are Colombians all over the world but the support here, in Russia, has meant everything to us. “It shows the passion and belief that we have in our country. It’s just amazing how many people have come here to support us. It has felt like a home game in every game for us. They make more noise, have more colour and we always have more supporters than the rest. It shows how much football means to our country. It’s not pressure, it’s strength for us.” The 29-year-old, capped 89 times, is to discuss his future at Arsenal after his tournament ends, having been linked again with a move to Fenerbahce in search of more regular football. The Premier League club have bought Bernd Leno for £19m from Bayer Leverkusen and the Germany international will surely compete with Petr Cech to be first choice.