The cherries have been extraordinary this year. There have been bag after bag of them in the fridge since the first Turkish fruits arrived at my greengrocer’s in May. A cherry at room temperature doesn’t do it for me. I like mine hot and syrupy under a soft pastry crust, or ice-cold, so their skins tighten and their juice spurts down your shirt like blood from a deep cut. There have been bag after bag of them in the fridge since the first Turkish fruits arrived at my greengrocer’s in May We have eaten cherries all summer long. There have been cherry compotes, the stoned fruits stewed with (very little) sugar and water, or perhaps a dash of elderflower cordial to add depth and effervescence. Those compotes were stirred, in deep crimson swirls, into breakfast yogurt or dishes of chilled custard. I tossed the early Italian fruits into roast chicken salads or perched them on sheets of crisp puff pastry and ricotta. There were three varieties this week: fat, glossy gobstoppers from the US, a box of small, sharper fruits from Turkey and a tray of dark-fleshed beauties from Britain. The greengrocer insisted I taste them all. The American fruits tasted like boiled sweets – so I bought the others, devouring a bagful on the way, arriving at my front door with a pocket full of stones. If cherries are perfect, I do very little to them, tipping the fruit into a bowl of water and ice cubes for 20 minutes before we eat – a process which makes their juice all the more refreshing. Once I have had my fill I will take a tray of them into the kitchen for a pie, crumble or jam. This week my plan had been to make a cherry Bakewell, a wide, round tart with a layer of jam and another of thin, golden icing, but instead I made small ones we could tuck into our lunchboxes for a train journey to Scotland. Tiny tarts travel better and are easy to tuck in between our sandwiches and scarlet-wrapped Tunnock’s wafers. May I suggest a jug of cream here? Makes 18 For the pastry:butter 100gcaster sugar 100gegg yolks 2plain flour 250gbaking powder 1 tspwater 2 tbspFor the filling:ground almonds 200gicing sugar 200gplain flour 2 heaped tbspcherries 300gegg whites 3For the icing:icing sugar 70gelderflower cordial 2 tbsp You will also need a tray of patty tins each 7cm in diameter Dice the butter, put it into the bowl of a food mixer and add the caster sugar. Using a flat beater, cream the two together until they are light and fluffy – the colour of vanilla ice cream. Alternatively, cream the butter and sugar together with a wooden spoon. Mix in the egg yolks then fold in the flour and baking powder, thoroughly but gently, adding as much water as it takes to form a soft but rollable dough. Bring to a ball with your hands then wrap in greaseproof paper or clingfilm and chill for 20 minutes. Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Place a metal baking sheet in the oven to heat up. Roll the pastry out to the thickness of a 10p piece then use a biscuit cutter to make discs of pastry, pressing each into the patty tins as you go. You will probably make about 18 with a little rerolling of the offcuts. Place them in the fridge. Make the filling: mix together the ground almonds and icing sugar then stir in the flour and set aside. Halve and stone the cherries, then stir them into the dry ingredients. Lightly whip the egg whites with a balloon whisk. They should be a soft froth rather than have the capability of standing in stiff peaks. Fold the egg whites into the cherries and almonds, then spoon into the pastry cases. (The mixture will be fine left to stand while the first batch bakes.) Bake the tarts for 25 minutes, the tray sitting on the heated baking sheet to ensure the bases cook crisply. Remove from the oven when the filling is lightly firm and the pastry golden brown. Leave the tarts to settle for 5 minutes before carefully removing them for their tins to a cooling rack set over a tray. Sieve the icing sugar into a small bowl and stir in the elderflower cordial. Trickle the icing over the tarts and leave to lightly set. The tarts are best eaten just warm or certainly the same day, but will keep for a day or two in a biscuit tin. Serves 4 For the compote:cherries 200gcaster sugar 4 tbspwhite vermouth 4 tbspTo serve:flaked almonds a large handfulgoat’s curd 250glemon zest 1 tspcrispbread or flatbread Simmer until the cherries are soft and the juice is a deep burgundy colour, almost like jam Remove the stems from the cherries, halve the fruits and remove the stones. Put the cherries in a small saucepan with the sugar and vermouth and bring to the boil. Lower the heat, let the cherries simmer for about 10 minutes, until they are soft and the juice is a deep burgundy colour and almost jam like. Remove the pan from the heat and leave to cool. Scatter the almonds in a single layer in a shallow pan and toast over a moderate heat until golden. Watch them carefully. When they’re ready, set them aside. Grate the lemon zest into the goat’s curd. Place scoops of goat’s curd on each of 4 plates with some of the toasted almonds, the compote and, if you wish, a little crispbread or flatbread. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater