There is a beautiful irony attached to Scotland’s star of this World Cup emerging from a commentary box. Ally McCoist – naturally warm, naturally quick-witted – would always be a television success. So many of his colleagues in Russia, whether through launching into “we”, “our” and “us” vernacular or displaying a brand of jingoism typically reserved for royal weddings, have had Scots contemplating violence towards television sets. You’d be far more inclined to discover ill-will towards Ian Wright and Martin Keown in Edinburgh than would be the case for Gareth Southgate. McCoist caused something of a ripple on Saturday with the on-air admission that he was roaring in approval as England saw off Sweden. This triggers polarised opinions, as so vehemently stated on social media; either McCoist was somehow disloyal to a nation he represented 61 times or his backing of fellow union members was to be celebrated. “Made me want to puke,” was one especially profound Twitter response. Nicola Sturgeon’s earlier and public praise for Southgate’s men also raised eyebrows but was simple to decode; it would never be sensible for the leader of the Scottish National Party, and the country’s first minister, to appear anti-English. That political backdrop, with the independence debate a Scottish constant, is impossible to ignore as England maraud across Russia. This isn’t a new phenomenon, with Scotland’s abject showing at the 1978 World Cup widely cited as key to a failed bid for devolution the following year. Since 1998 Scotland have not featured in a major tournament. The intervening years have been interspersed with a guaranteed source of amusement as attached to watching England stumble. Scorn is bestowed on anyone who admits this element of enjoyment, just as Andy Murray after his “anyone but England” moment. In reality, and as long as kept within the confines of human decency, such rivalry actually defines and drives football. It is more intense towards bigger or more successful teams, such as England. By the same token, Celtic’s fans won’t be giddy with excitement as Steven Gerrard embarks on a European campaign with Rangers this week; nobody would or should expect anything less. The insistence that Scottish fans must support England is offensive. In the quaint words of Irvine Welsh: “This is the sort of shite talked by armchair wankers who tune into big tournaments but don’t understand footballing rivalries having never attended a game.” The writer added: “The culture is bigger than some overpaid pricks kicking a ball around on telly. Ask West Ham and Millwall fans, whose clubs are rarely in the same league.” That great barometer of the Scottish mood, the public house, supplies mixed evidence. In some, cheering for England has been commonplace. In others, replica shirts of Tunisia, Panama, Belgium, Colombia or Sweden told their own story. Middle ground supplies truth. The majority of Scots seem indifferent towards the potential of England success rather than consumed by it. For all Scotland has a significant English population and the countries have plenty in common, a football link exists only via the broadcast outlets now causing ire north of the border. England’s players are way beyond the fiscal capabilities of Scotland’s biggest clubs, just as the Scottish national team stopped being a competitive threat to the best sides in Europe many moons ago. A silver lining resonates in history. In 1967, Scotland laid claim to the title of unofficial champions of the world after a 3-2 success at Wembley. Should England take delivery of the World Cup trophy once more on Sunday, they should expect a fixture call from Glasgow.