In the course of my life, I have had intense emotional relationships with the screen versions of many actors and actresses, on both the big and small screen. My latest attachment has been to the shadow that, for the sake of convenience, I will call Daniel Day-Lewis. Is it a physical attraction? Perhaps. Let’s say he certainly corresponds to a type of man I like: lean, slightly receding hairline, a long face where the features are not annoyingly symmetrical. This is not a long-winded way of describing what excites me about this particular male body; rather, I’m being deliberately generic. The reason is, Daniel Day-Lewis interests me as much as any other lean man with a slightly receding hairline and features that are not annoyingly symmetrical. Let’s say I have no curiosity about what he is really like, and that if I happened to meet him on the street I probably wouldn’t even recognise him. I love him only in his films. I love him for the way the light on the set calculatedly strikes him, for the way he is photographed, for the power of the plot his body moves through, for the intelligence of the remarks that someone else wrote and he speaks, for the imagination with which a director has directed him, for the skill of the makeup artist, for the costumes he wears, and so on. I long ago stopped thinking of stars as human beings who truly exist. I know that at the origin of the love that films, or story factories, inspire in us there is not a physical person but a collection of specialties. When I love Daniel Day-Lewis, I love the novelists from whose books his films are adapted, the screenwriters who have composed the dialogue, and the film directors, the directors of photography, the lighting and sound technicians, the set designers, the acting coaches – in other words, all those who have helped to make his real body – with its mimetic ability, its gait, way of gesticulating, its photogenic quality – into a body particularly suited to becoming a movie or television icon. Daniel Day-Lewis (like any star, or perhaps any creative person) is, in short, not a man but a work of art. His name is a sort of title by which I refer to a valuable body of work – that is to say, the sum of all the characters he has so brilliantly portrayed, all the plots into which he has been inserted. In other words, he is a marvellous product of the imagination, a phantom moulded with words and images and technical equipment and professional skill. And he’d be that, if you think about it, even if I had the pleasure of knowing him and spending time with him. If he should suddenly be transformed into a flesh-and-blood person, poor him, poor me. Reality can’t stay inside the elegant moulds of art; it always spills over, indecorously. • Translated by Ann Goldstein