The body of a British 15-year-old who died after being struck by the propeller blades of a speedboat his father was piloting is to be flown back to the UK from Greece. Arrangements were being made three days after Toby Finnett died off the Ionian isle of Paxos in an accident that officials described as a “one in a million” outcome. “Preparations are being made to fly his body out,” the island’s mayor, Spyros Vlahopoulos, said. “An autopsy has been conducted. We are in absolute shock. It is an utter tragedy and all our thoughts are with his family.” The teenager had been on holiday with his two brothers and father, Paul, an international insurance executive based in Houston, Texas. As the family returned from a day trip out at sea on an inflatable speedboat hired by Finnett, Toby fell off the back and became ensnared in the propeller. Within seconds his father, a licensed sailor, had dived into the sea, but it was too late: the boy was pronounced dead at the Paxos health centre. “It was instant,” said Kostas Karavonioti, who heads the health centre. “There have been similar accidents involving boats before, but in 39 years I have never seen anything like this.” The Greek merchant marine ministry said the speedboat, which had a 150-horsepower outboard engine, was half a nautical mile from the port of Gaios when the tragedy occurred. Finnett, who moved to Texas with Toby’s mother, Justine Warburton, in 1994 before remarrying in the US, was initially detained on suspicion of driving negligently as police in Corfu, which has administrative oversight of Paxos, investigated the case. The 54-year-old Briton, originally from Littlehampton, West Sussex, was released after describing how his son had appeared to have lost his balance, slipping off the boat as he reduced speed in choppy seas to steer towards the islet of Mongonissi. “From what we know the boy fell off the boat as the father abruptly dropped speed,” said Sofronis Mitsialis, Paxos’ town hall registrar, who recorded the teenager’s death. Waters in the area are famously calm but on the day of the incident strong, north-westerly winds had forced the coastguards to issue a red alert banning sea travel in the straits between Paxos and Corfu. The prohibition spurred some local media to question the wisdom of hiring the craft given the weather conditions. But the island’s mayor defended the decision to hire the boat, insisting the ban did not extend to sailing around the island. “From what I know from those who rent such boats, people who hire them are informed about weather conditions, the spots they should be careful of and the boats are equipped with life jackets and what not,” he said. “Mogonissi is very protected and never exposed to winds and so the [red alert] did not apply. The accident should never have happened, it had a one-in-a-million chance of occurring,” he said. Toby’s brother, Benjamin, 17, and his 14-year-old stepbrother, Kai, paid tribute to him, describing him as “a best friend” and “the most incredible and loving character ever”.