Wearing a tight union jack leotard, Ed Balls lies on the floor of the ring at Southern Legacy Wrestling in Munford, Alabama. Playing the foreigner (in other words, the bad guy), he has just been counted out, defeated by the all-American hero Johnny Slaughter. The crowd of a couple of hundred – just about every one a Trump supporter – is baying, booing and shouting: “U‑S‑A! U‑S‑A!” Oh, Ed, what happened? That’s one helluva fall you’ve taken: from shadow chancellor, via gameshows, Gangnam and baking, to this: crashing to the floor in a community centre in Nowheresville. Yvette Cooper isn’t impressed by the direction her husband’s career is going, and particularly what it involves him wearing. “There’s something about the flag bit that just accentuates your belly,” she says from home on FaceTime. “Remember how we talked about, you know, lines you might cross? I think you’ve crossed one.” To be fair, the wrestling isn’t a new career in itself. More of a detour on a bigger journey. Ed is travelling through Trump heartland, meeting the president’s supporters, finding out how he won them over, walking in their shoes. Also walking in the shoes of Louis Theroux a little? Yes, but more political than psychological. And no one could accuse him of not being game. If, on a turkey shoot with a bunch of army vets, he had donned a feathered outfit and played the turkey, I wouldn’t have been surprised. At the Rednecks With Paychecks festival in Saint Jo, Texas, where confederate flags flutter from supersize pickup trucks, Ed meets – and helps out – a surprising Trumpster. Marta, whom the festival organiser Derrick describes as a slave-driver (unfortunate, given those flags), runs the Mexican food stall. She came here illegally 20 years ago, aged 17, by swimming across a river. Now she is not only a Trump supporter, she is fully behind the wall. “I’m sorry, I’m in, you’re out,” is Marta’s message to her compatriots south of the border. In Atlanta, he goes on a raid – sorry, a targeted enforcement action – with Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE). They pick up an illegal immigrant from Afghanistan who has been in the US for 23 years and has a couple of kids there, aged 13 and 10. Now, he is being sent back to a country where he knows no one. But, hey, he was dealing crystal meth; an “illegal” doing illegal things. Out, out, out, on the first plane to Kabul. “It’s wonderful,” says the enforcement officer, about being able to play a part in the process, although she does feel sorry for the kids. The interesting thing about this is that Balls isn’t simply saying: “Look at these crazy redneck idiots. How the hell did it come to this?” He is not starting from the assumption that they are wrong. He is taking the time to hang out with them, to listen and get inside their world, to see things through their eyes in order to understand how it came to this. Hey, if “crooked Hillary” had been able to adopt even a little of the same empathy, it might never have come to this. There are moments of poignancy – for example, Marta’s story (even if it is bizarre that she supports the wall that would have made her current life impossible). And John, a military veteran who struggled with the return to civilian life. The pain of transition, a loss of purpose: these are things Ed knows a little bit about. Has John tried Gangnam Style, I wonder? It may help. Ed wants to know, and tries to understand, why all these people think Trump has restored pride in the military and in the immigration agencies (well, that one’s not so hard). And mostly he wants to understand just how a billionaire New York businessman won the votes and hearts of all these working-class people in the deep south. It all (sort of) comes together and makes (some kind of) sense at Southern Legacy Wrestling. Because here you have the good guys (U‑S‑A! U‑S‑A!) against the bad guys (Ed Balls, from somewhere else. Boo!). And it doesn’t matter if that’s oversimplification; fabrication, in fact. The entire scenario is an act. It’s also a microcosm of the Trump worldview. And look at the crowd. It’s exactly what they want. It’s not just Ed in the ring now – we all are. And that is scary … more so even than his outfit.