On and on, the Labour antisemitism saga goes. At least Brexit continues to provide distractions. The latest twist in the tale occurred last week, when Labour’s NEC adopted a new code of conduct that intended to define antisemitism for the purposes of disciplinary cases brought before the national constitutional committee. While the code is intended to help make the disciplinary process more efficient and transparent, it has itself been met with outrage and calls for its abandonment by Jewish communal organisations, and from the Jewish Labour Movement. Keir Starmer has also come out against it. Conversely, Palestinian activists and Jewish Voice for Labour have welcomed the new code as a step forward. The reasons for both the rejection and the acceptance is that the code does not fully adopt the International Holocaust Remembrance Alliance (IHRA) definition of antisemitism, which is the one preferred by most UK Jewish communal bodies, by many other Jewish communities across the world, by the UK and other governments and by multiple public bodies. In refusing to adopt what is seen to be the Jewish community’s understanding of antisemitism, the Labour party is accused of going against the “MacPherson principles”, which maintain that minority communities get to define racism for themselves. Conversely, many pro-Palestinian activists see the IHRA as proscribing legitimate criticism of Israel and Zionism. Yet Labour’s general secretary Jennie Formby argued in the Jewish News that the new code does indeed “include” the IHRA definition and, in addition, “supplements this with additional examples and guidance”, some of them from the IHRA. It’s certainly true that significant sections of the code are drawn from the IHRA. It’s also true that the new code does attempt to give more detailed clarity on some issues. But the differences, while they might seem minor to those without a strong investment in this issue, are still significant. These differences concern the thorny question of where the line should be drawn between criticism of Israel and antisemitism. One seemingly innocuous sentence explains: “In general terms, the expression of even contentious views in this area will not be treated as antisemitism unless accompanied by specific antisemitic content (such as the use of antisemitic tropes) or by other evidence of antisemitic intent.” The reason why this is so contentious is twofold: First, it appears to imply that arguments against Israel and Zionism could not be antisemitic unless they are framed in particular forms of language. In theory, a call for all Jews to be expelled from a future Palestine would not fall foul of the definition if couched in calm, considered language. Second, bringing “intent” into judgments of antisemitism appears to go against standard anti-racist practice of judging people by what they say and do rather than what they think. Another bone of contention is the exclusion or amendment of some of the examples of antisemitism given in the IHRA definition. One in particular is conspicuously absent: “Denying the Jewish people their right to self-determination, eg, by claiming that the existence of a state of Israel is a racist endeavour.” Instead, the Labour code states, amongst other things that: “The party is clear that the Jewish people have the same right to self-determination as any other people. To deny that right is to treat the Jewish people unequally and is therefore a form of antisemitism. That does not, of course, preclude considered debate and discourse about the nature or content of the right of peoples to self-determination.” One area of consensus between the new code’s supporters and detractors is that its meaning can be clearly interpreted and applied. But there is ambiguity here too. The Labour code could be applied in a way that greatly restricted criticism of Jewish self-determination, so that it could only occur in highly abstract ways. Similarly, the IHRA code could be interpreted in a way that enabled criticism of Jewish self-determination if conducted in a similar fashion. What the controversy around the new code reminds us is that codes, laws and regulations can only work if there is trust in the process and the people behind it. There is now so little trust across the majority of the Jewish community in the Labour party that there is absolutely no faith in its ability to apply the code in a way that will not absolve whole swathes of the party from antisemitism. Clearly the Labour party is trying to reconcile the demands of the mainstream Jewish community and those on the left who feel that accusations of antisemitism repress legitimate criticism of Israel and Zionism. But that reconciliation is impossible under current conditions. Maybe in the future there might be a figure of sufficient stature who is trusted by all, who could apply either the IHRA or the new code in a way that everyone sees as fair. But there is no such figure at the moment and so what may or may not have been a genuine attempt to deal with Labour’s antisemitism issue has only compounded the problem. • Keith Kahn-Harris is a writer and sociologist