The sun shone and shone over County Cork last week, just as it did over most of Britain. When we came last year, to the same place in the same week, the steep banks of the lanes grew thick with wild roses, fuchsia and foxgloves; now the vegetation looked limper and dustier, the roses drier, the foxgloves solitary and stooped. But a poorer foreground view had its compensation in the background, where the lack of drizzle, cloud and mist revealed a rolling landscape of hills and woods that was unexpectedly Tuscan in its clarity. By four in the afternoon, the airless main streets of the small towns felt like ovens. On the coast east of Skibbereen we found a delightful cove, of the sort that in my experience rarely exists outside children’s fiction: perfect in its firm sand, its protective reefs of smooth black rock, and its warren of caves that ran back into the cliffs, invaded every day by the tide, and entirely free of plastic flotsam. The sea was calm and clear, and changed its shade of blue according to the depth and composition of the seabed. Moreover, it wasn’t chill. In 60-odd years swimming off the British coastline, I’ve rarely known water as welcoming or as hard to leave: even after 40 minutes, it seemed a shame to get out. Newspaper reports said the prolonged heatwave had raised sea temperatures in other places to over 20C, which sounded impossibly warm, almost like a heated swimming pool. In that temperature, there would surely be no dallying in the shallows, no theatrical shivering when the water reached crotch level, no complaining that the cold was unbearable, no need to stand there uncertainly while your companion, already swimming briskly, urged you to “get in and get it over with”. Instead immersion would be a swift, Mediterranean experience – a run or brisk walk into the sea and then a splash as you struck out for the diving platform. Temperatures in the Firth of Forth never made getting into the water so easy. To be consistently tempting, the estuary needed exceptional conditions – and the summer of 1955 provided them. The sun shone for weeks, and day after day my friends and I made the 10-minute walk to the beach – not a Blue Flag candidate, if Blue Flags had existed then, because a pipe ran right down the middle of it that carried sewage to the sea from the army barracks to the rear. Looking back, it seems odd that people made no fuss about this, or about another more torrential outlet not far upstream, where the sewage turned the sea pink with its infusions of potassium permanganate. But it was a beach, all the same, with a sandbank that appeared at low tide and a hut at the far end that opened on especially busy days to sell crisps and lemonade; and by the second week, I had taught myself to swim. All kinds of things happened in 1955: Anthony Eden won the general election; Princess Margaret announced that she didn’t intend to marry RAF Group Captain Peter Townsend; Ruth Ellis became the last woman to be hanged in the UK. I remember none of them. For me, it was the year I was turned brown by the sun. A family snapshot, one of our first in colour, shows me in swimming trunks, staring across a shiny flat sea towards a visiting American battleship, the USS Wisconsin, which lay anchored in the firth. My back is unselfconsciously brown – there had been no lying on towels and striving for this effect – which tells a story of capering about on the beach with no recourse to the plastic macs and sweaters that in most years the visitor to the Scottish seaside was wise to bring. (As the actor and comedian Stanley Baxter remembers, returned Glaswegian holidaymakers when questioned about the weather might reply stoically, “Well, it never kept us in.”) The strong sunlight gave everything a memorable clarity, just as it did in Ireland last week, so that certain scenes of no particular emotional importance remain fixed, when in other years they would have faded: the sight of a spoil tip near an old mine or ironworks – abandoned even in 1955 – that revealed an interior of bright red cinders where a jagged crack had split its grassy surface. It makes no sense to remember it, and yet there it is through the window of the Glasgow bus, under a bright blue sky. Unclothed adults at the seaside were then hardly visible, other than in newspaper pictures of crowded beaches at sophisticated resorts such as Ayr or Blackpool. When my grandfathers came to the beach, they retained their flat caps and waistcoats. My mother never owned a swimsuit. My father had trunks – as a boy he’d liked to swim – but I only once saw him wear them. None of this was very exceptional. I can’t think of any adult in our street who went to the beach and did much more than roll up a trouser leg. Nobody could have complained, as the aesthete James Lees-Milne did in his diary in July 1976: “Heatwave continuing. Whole country parched, and trees dying. Found E naked but for a pair of long blue shorts, with white skin, smarmed hair (for he had just had a bath), flabby muscles, pendulous breasts, looking like Picasso aged 90. How can aesthetic persons bear to be seen in this condition at 74 even by their intimates?” The great summers of my lifetime have been 1955, 1976 and now this one. With each, a little more innocence has been shed as well as clothes. Prolonged sunshine now seems ominous – a portent as well as a pleasure. Ireland, for instance, has a rural economy that largely depends on grass, and in a drought grass fails to thrive. That has huge consequences for every cattle farmer, but posterity may see it as no more than a little local difficulty, one of the negligible effects of a global temperature change that melts glaciers and ice caps. Carpe diem, then, in a cove near Skibbereen. • Ian Jack is a Guardian columnist