“Unless you can say in one media-friendly soundbite exactly what it is that you’re talking about and exactly what it is that you stand for, people lose interest.” Encapsulating Alfie Brown’s style is a challenge, given the comedian’s qualms about such descriptions. But this is appropriate: an advocate of “uncomfortable thought”, Brown constantly challenges both his audience and himself. He hunts for laughs in areas less ambitious comics might consider too complex. In Lunatic, his show this year, Brown – son of Dead Ringers veteran Jan Ravens – explores subjects including identity politics, moral certainty and mob mentality. The “cradle” for the show, he explains, is an incident in which he watched somebody die at a bus stop. For him and the people around him, there was a conflict about what they should do and what they should appear to be doing. This notion of performative goodness – the danger that people care more about being seen to do good than actually doing good – is a thread that runs though the show. Brown is similarly fascinated by groupthink, which he feels dominates much of contemporary politics. He perceives this to be inextricable from the notion of performative identity: “In fearing the lack of an individual identity that you as a person possess in and of yourself, you outsource your personality to other groups.” There are countless fringe shows this year that will make you laugh; Brown’s intellectual curiosity promises to make you do a great deal of thinking as well. Typical line: “Adele and Isis flourish under the same conditions.”Favourite Edinburgh moment: “In 2012, when I did a show called Soul for Sale, I remember feeling such relief and elation that I didn’t feel like I was on an absolute hiding to nothing.”Comedy inspirations: “My favourites as a boy were Dylan Moran, George Carlin and Victoria Wood.”Moment you realised you wanted to do comedy? “I remember going to see a comedy gig in Soho when I was 17 years old. I was quite worried about what I was going to do with the rest of my life. I remember seeing these guys, who were ostensibly low-level professional, and I thought: ‘Well, I’m at least that good.’”Festival recommendations: “Jessie Cave, performing Sunrise. She’s a true artist. And Jimmy McGhie is one of the finest, purest standups that there is.” RJ Lunatic runs 2-12 August and 14-26 August, 9.30pm at Monkey Barrel Comedy Club (Monkey Barrel 2) The subject of consent has been impossible to ignore since October 2017, when details of Harvey Weinstein’s alleged sexual abuse came to light. “I think it is often avoided because it is a touchy and confusing area,” says last year’s Edinburgh best comedy newcomer award winner, Natalie Palamides, who tackles the subject head-on in her show Nate. She workshops ideas on stage, using “devised theatre” methods she first explored at university. Devised theatre doesn’t have much time for scripts, so Palamides edits live, in front of an audience, and is still experimenting in Los Angeles with new endings for the show – in which she plays a male alter ego. As a method, this may sound terrifying but there is something liberating about its flexibility. “If you feel that it’s not working while you’re on stage,” she says, “you have the opportunity to try and save it.” One element of the show might grab the headlines in Edinburgh. Speaking to her director Dr Brown (Philip Burgers, a trained clown with a fervent following), Palamides said that she wanted the show to feature a rape. “I’m scared to,” she said to him, “but I think it’s important to see it.” Dr Brown understands what Palamides does and, she explains, always encourages her to push herself. This instance was no different: you have to try it, he told her. There is no way of telling how an audience will react until you perform. Some people describe that part of the show as “chilling”, she says, but she is getting positive feedback. Ultimately, her goal is not to impose hard-and-fast conclusions on the audience. We all feel confused, messy and awkward about this, is her message. And that’s all right. Typical line: “There’s an old bit I used to do where I’m a worm and I get somebody to give me water but it’s not enough so I end up dying anyway.”If you weren’t a performer? “Maybe I would have a hot-dog shop. That’s something I always say: ‘Once I’m comfortable with my comedy career and I don’t have to hustle all the time, I’ll open up a hot‑dog shop.’”Moment you realised you wanted to do comedy? “When I was a kid, my aunt asked me what I wanted to do when I grew up and I told her I wanted to be a comedian. And she said: ‘Don’t you want to do something that helps people?’ And I said: ‘Laughing helps people.’ I remember feeling a little insulted.”Edinburgh recommendations: “Andrea Spisto; Dan Lees and Neil Frost’s duo, the Establishment.” RJ Natalie Palamides: Nate runs 1-12 and 14-26 August, 6pm at Pleasance Courtyard (Beside) Kiri Pritchard-McLean definitely doesn’t shy away from difficult subjects. Her fringe debut in 2016, Hysterical Woman, tackled sexism in comedy. Last year’s follow-up, Appropriate Adult, chronicled her volunteer work with vulnerable children. The 31-year-old’s latest show is called Victim, Complex (“See what I’ve done with that comma?”) and covers love, lies, heartbreak and mental health. “This is definitely my most personal one yet,” she says. “It rakes over my private life and behaviour in such brutal detail, I probably come off quite badly. I look back at the defining relationships of my life so far and realise I treated people pretty badly.” Victim, Complex also explores how, in her own words, she’s “quietly been going mad for a few years”. “My mental health had always been on a fairly even keel,” she explains. “And then in my 30s, oh boy, did it hit me. I suddenly experienced all sorts of terrifying problems with my brain. I felt detached, like watching myself on a TV screen. I had debilitating anxiety. I didn’t trust my own mind, didn’t have coping mechanisms, didn’t even know what panic attacks were. It felt like someone squeezing my chest and I thought I was going to die.” She pauses. “All this sounds hilarious, doesn’t it? A real laugh riot. There’s definitely 40 minutes of funny in this, Kiri.” Even for this searingly honest standup, such soul baring doesn’t come easy. “I’m a tough little Welsh farmer’s daughter who grew up with two brothers and never cried. As a young woman doing comedy clubs full of drunk people, you’ve got to be pretty bulletproof too. So I’m not very emotionally literate and find this hard. Revealing my vulnerabilities on stage – where I pride myself on being strong, empowered and in control – is scary. But I’ve always felt you can have difficult conversations far more efficiently in comedy than anywhere else.” Not forgetting the jokes, of course. “The challenge is to make it funny,” she agrees. “To make serious points but bring everyone out of that with a laugh. I find that really edifying. That’s why standup, despite what the Arts Council says, is an art. It’s not just pissing about making knob gags. Even though, sure, that’s about 30% of the show.” Her trademark sparkly tops also stop things getting too dark. “Mate, not just a sparkly top this year – I’m getting a yellow jumpsuit made out of sequins. It’s even got a cape. I’ll be like a comedy Elvis. Or a sweaty drag queen.” Typical line: “People always ask how I managed to buy a house aged 25. I tell them I did it the old-fashioned way: worked hard, saved up all my free time and invested it into one elderly relative.”Ideal audience member: “Me. Educated feminists with quirky hair and great earrings. Plus someone who doesn’t listen to actual women, like Jordan Peterson.”Comedic influences: “I grew up watching Billy Connolly, who’s just an astounding raconteur, and was obsessed with The League of Gentlemen.”Best Edinburgh moment: “Two of The League of Gentlemen came to my show, which was one of the best but most nerve-racking nights of my life. Luckily they liked it.”Top tip for festival-goers: “Tanjore curry house on Clerk Street. Tedious twat alert: I’m a vegan now, and it does great vegan and gluten-free food.” MH Victim, Complex runs 1-27 August, 8pm at Pleasance Courtyard Emma Sidi Faces of GraceSidi dares the audience to take their eyes off her, and is the kind of ‘character’ comic with the audacity to perform routines in another language. Luke McQueen MonsterA standup with a bravery bordering on suicidal, McQueen is a thrill to watch, taking risks that invite comparisons to Sacha Baron Cohen. Sheeps Live and Loud Selfie Sex Harry PotterA sketch group with strange on-stage chemistry, left-field writing and material that is very distinct from their peers. Tom Skelton Blind Eye SpyThe partially sighted Skelton, a deliciously talented comic and improviser, presents a comedy thriller in which he is plays a blind spy in Berlin. Andy Storey AwkwardA relaxed northern comic often compared to Alan Bennett, Storey performs his acclaimed debut show. RJ