David Ospina Failed to stop Kane’s penalty in normal time and saved only one, from Henderson, in shootout. 6 Santiago Arias A solid performance but was not able to influence the game. Booked for a challenge on Kane. 6 Yerry Mina A towering presence in the heart of Colombia’s defence and scored his third goal of the tournament. 8 Davinson Sánchez An assured display from the defender and did well to block when Lingard broke clear in second half. 6 Johan Mojica The left-back was pinned back by Trippier’s runs and failed to support Lerma going forward. 6 Wilmar Barrios His distribution was poor and he headbutted Henderson in the chest, but got away with yellow. 5 Carlos Sánchez Shielded the defence well in his holding midfield role but lost his head and gave away the penalty. 5 Jefferson Lerma Struggled to get into the game on the left of midfield and was replaced after 61 minutes. 6 Juan Cuadrado Had to do a lot more defending than he had anticipated but scored in the shootout. 6 Juan Quintero Did not manage to make up for Rodríguez’s absence and miscued his best chance. Substituted. 6 Radamel Falcao Isolated up front against England’s back three. Booked for dissent but scored his penalty. 6 Subs Carlos Bacca (for Lerma 62) 7, Mateus Uribe (for C Sánchez 79) 6, Luis Muriel (for Quintero 88) 6, Cristian Zapata (for Arias 116) 6. Jordan Pickford The hero of the day and produced the save of the tournament from Uribe’s long-range shot. 9 Kyle Walker Nearly gave Colombia an equaliser after giving the ball away but Cuadrado missed with his shot. 6 John Stones The City defender looked assured when England were in the lead but a bit more stretched after that. 6 Harry Maguire A reassuring presence in defence and carried the ball out nicely. Seemed to lose Mina for equaliser. 8 Kieran Trippier Did not create as much as in previous games. Could he have stopped Mina’s header on the line? 6 Jordan Henderson A calming presence in the centre of midfield. Booked for clashing with Mina. Missed his penalty. 7 Ashley Young A solid performance by the wing-back. Looked lively going forward and defended well. Replaced. 6 Jesse Lingard Covered a lot of ground, always wanting the ball, but never had any clear goalscoring opportunities. 6 Dele Alli Looked half a yard off the pace and nothing quite came off for him on the night. Replaced by Dier. 5 Raheem Sterling Started brightly, making all the right runs, but faded as the game wore on. Came off for Vardy. 6 Harry Kane Worked hard. Converted England’s penalty in normal time and another one in the shootout. 7 Subs Eric Dier (for Alli 81) 6, Jamie Vardy (for Sterling 88) 7, Danny Rose (for Young 102) 6, Marcus Rashford (for Trippier 113) 6.