Given how lovely and warm the weather is now, spending time in your own house or garden naked would be a good way to discover how nice naturism is. If you’re sunbathing, or walking around, with no clothes on in a public place, providing your intention is you are just being a human being, and not doing it to offend people or be provocative, or causing harassment, alarm or distress, then it should be perfectly legal. Naturists are sensitive to sensitivities and probably won’t be walking around the supermarket, but the law doesn’t say you can’t. The recent police advice about warning your neighbours if you’re going to sunbathe naked in your garden is fine if it’s general advice, but it’s not in any sense a legal requirement. If you’re thinking about getting into naturism, the best thing is to find a club in your area – next week is our big summer event, Nude Fest. We understand what it is like for newcomers, but our advice always is just strip off. People have said they can be nervous and it can be uncomfortable for 10 minutes and then they think: “No one’s looking at me, and this feels rather nice.” In those environments, the person who still has their clothes or swimsuit on is the one that stands out. At events or clubs, everybody after five minutes completely forgets they’ve got no clothes on, because you just feel so free, so liberated. All beaches are technically naturist beaches, but naturists tend to go to specific places where they know they will find others and which are hassle-free. You could go to your local park, naked, and it would be legal but the trouble is, culturally you would probably attract attention. As for being outdoors naked, you just need to use common sense – nobody should be out in the sun for too long, whether they are displaying all their bits or not. The difference between what you might wear on a beach and what I might not wear is actually minimal. Just because you are a naturist doesn’t mean you are obliged to sit out in bright hot sunshine all day long. Sit in the shade. If you wouldn’t do it on a clothed beach, you wouldn’t do it on a nude beach, so you don’t sit too close to somebody, and you don’t stare at them. Taking a random photograph of the beach would be acceptable; but if you were too close to people and they felt as if you were taking pictures of them, then that wouldn’t be right. Your awareness of other people around you is probably heightened, because it’s a more unusual situation. We’ve got to get away from this assumption that nudity means something bad. All naturist people will say it’s the most wonderful, life-affirming, relaxing thing. Andrew Welch is a spokesman for British Naturism