A British teenager has become the third tourist within a year to die at the Eden Roc apartment complex in Magaluf, after a fall at the resort. Thomas Channon, 18, from Rhoose near Barry in Wales, fell 21 metres (70ft) at the party resort. Channon was visiting the Spanish island to celebrate the end of his A-levels. His body was found around 10.30am on Thursday in a communal garden area next to the block. Spanish police said Channon fell from a balcony but reports say friends claimed he fell from a walkway after stumbling over a wall. The teenager had no documents and is said to have been staying at the nearby Universal Hotel Florida. Spanish police believe he wandered into the complex at around 4am local time after losing his friends. Its understood that his father, business consultant John, 67, and midwife mum Ceri, 49, have flown to Mallorca. The Foreign Office said in a statement: “We are assisting the family of a British man who has died in Mallorca, and are in contact with the Spanish authorities.” The incident follows the death of Tom Hughes, 20, from Wrexham, who fell about 20 metres from the apartment block. Hughes was staying at a nearby hotel and investigators say he may have mistaken Eden Roc for his own accommodation. An inquest into his death has been opened. In April, Natalie Cormack, a bar worker from Scotland, fell from the Eden Roc apartment block after losing her keys and trying to edge along an overhang to get into her apartment. She fell to her death from the seventh floor. The Foreign Office has previously urged holidaymakers to not take risks on hotel balconies abroad. “Look out for friends and family and avoid doing anything that might cost a life,” it said. Tributes to Channon were posted on the Facebook page of Mostyn high school in Cardiff, where the 18-year-old is believed to have attended. One person wrote: “[Sic] With a heavy heart I am posting this ...Thomas Channon (from St Cuthberts then Mostyn) is the young lad who fell from a walkway in Mallorca. My prayers and love goes to him and his family and friends.”A stream of comments follow beneath, with one person writing: “Heart breaking news, sending my deepest condolences to the family.” In a separate Facebook post, a friend of Tom Hughes from Wrexham said: “Can’t believe what I’m hearing again just a month ago we lost one of our best friends Tom to exactly the same thing... Thoughts are with this young boys’ family and still with Tom’s RIP.”