Sir Bradley Wiggins has condemned the parliamentary report into the Team Sky Jiffy bag affair and the team’s use of the corticosteroid triamcinolone as “fabricated” and based on “unsubstantiated evidence The 2012 Tour de France winner, interviewed on ITV4, also stated that further facts have come to light which he would hope might be made public in the future. The saga began in autumn 2016 when hackers calling themselves Fancy Bears released documents showing Wiggins had been given permission to use the banned corticosteroid for medical reasons with the appropriate certificates, or TUEs, before his biggest races in 2011, 2012 and 2013, including the 2012 Tour. This was followed by a 14-month UK Anti-Doping Agency investigation into a package delivered to Team Sky at the Critérium du Dauphiné in 2011 – a race Wiggins won – which had been alleged to have contained the same drug. Ukad were forced to close the case earlier this year without reaching a conclusion because of missing medical records. The inquiry into Doping in Sport by parliament’s Culture, Media and Sport Committee ran in parallel with the Ukad inquiry, and the report was published in March. It included the claim that Team Sky had abused the anti-doping system to allow Wiggins – and possibly other riders – to use triamcinolone to prepare for the Tour de France. The report concluded Team Sky had “crossed an ethical line”. Team Sky strongly refuted both claims while Wiggins said at the time: “I strongly refute the claim that any drug was used without medical need.” Speaking to ITV4, Wiggins claimed the DCMS committee had not attempted to speak to him in person and added: “The report was fabricated stuff and it seems that they used parliamentary privilege to get it through legally. “If I’d murdered someone and was on trial, all that unsubstantiated evidence couldn’t be used – it would be lack of evidence, thrown out. But you use parliamentary privilege and you can produce a report, try and ruin someone and there you go.” The committee’s chair, Damian Collins, told the Observer it had followed up a suggestion from Wiggins’s then agent about meeting the committee but it had “never heard back.” Collins added that the material he supplied had been published on the committee website. Responding to Wiggins’s claim about the report, Collins added: “We received evidence from people who did not wish to be named, it was made clear where we relied on anonymous sources, and we trusted them as being credible. People can read the report and come to their own conclusions.” Wiggins also hinted strongly he believed there might be more information to emerge. “There are things that have come to light with this whole thing that we’ve found out since that are quite scary actually and it’s very sinister. We’re still not at the bottom of it, we’re finding new stuff out daily to do with the package that never was and all this stuff and it’s quite frightening actually. “We’re still working on it, still trying to piece it all together. Not a legal team, just other people coming to us now and saying: ‘You know this has happened, don’t you?’ We can debate TUEs and that’s one thing, but where it went after that with everything else – there is a film to be made there. I’d love it to all come out. Once it’s all stacked up and pieced together it’s quite shocking.” Wiggins was also asked to look back to his dispute at the 2012 Tour with Chris Froome, who is in contention to win this year’s race and who caused controversy by appearing to attack Wiggins, his team leader, in the Alps. Wiggins made it clear he has reflected on the episode since his initial, angry reaction. “I don’t think Chris was trying to attack me to drop me and win the Tour in 2012,” he said. “He was thinking he needed to secure his second place and he wasn’t as confident in his time-trialling as he is now. There is so much stress and pressure in this race that you’re on edge. I didn’t realise some of that until after.”