Roseanne Barr made another apology last night, something that has become something of a full-time job for her since she tweeted that former Obama adviser Valerie Jarrett was equal to the “Muslim Brotherhood and Planet of the Apes”. Often swinging between repentant and infuriated, she’s has made a number of excuses, apologies and denials about the incident. Here’s a timeline of them so far: On 30 May, a day after ABC had cancelled the show, Barr claimed that she had taken the drug Ambien before she sent the tweets. “It was 2 in the morning and I was ambien tweeting – it was memorial day too – i went 2 far & do not want it defended – it was egregious Indefensible. I made a mistake I wish I hadn’t but ... don’t defend it please.” The makers of Ambien, Sanofi, responded by tweeting: “Racism is not a known side effect of any Sanofi medication.” Barr appeared on the podcast of rabbi and longtime friend Shmuley Boteach. In the episode, she talked at length about her Jewish faith and her family and promised she wouldn’t make excuses for what she said. “I don’t want to run off and blather on with excuses,” she said. “But I apologize to anyone who thought, or felt offended and who thought that I meant something that I, in fact, did not mean.” Later, when questioned about racism, she broke down in tears, telling the rabbi: “I never would have wittingly called any black person, [said that] they are a monkey. I just wouldn’t do that. I didn’t do that. And people think that I did that and it just kills me. I didn’t do that. And if they do think that, I’m just so sorry that I was so unclear and stupid. I’m very sorry.” On 19 July, Barr posted two video on her YouTube channel. In one, she speaks calmly to camera, and says she was “speaking without the filter of the biased media” – explaining that she thought Valerie Jarrett was white and said the only reason she was fired was because she voted for Donald Trump which is “that is not allowed in Hollywood”. In the other, she is asked questions by an off-camera interviewer and is seen screaming: “I thought the bitch was white.” Decade-old tweets from Guardians of Galaxy director James Gunn resurfaced last week that included jokes about rape and the Holocaust. Many actors and members of the film industry came to Gunn’s defence, and said he shouldn’t have lost his job for tweets posted so long ago. Barr was horrified by what see saw as hypocrisy and, on 24 July, tweeted: “I’m disgusted to read all of the support for James Gunn’s pedophile jokes – as the same people supported blacklisting me for a joke they didn’t even understand.” On 27 July, Barr gave her first sit-down TV interview since the incident on Sean Hannity’s Fox News show. Hannity, who regularly speaks with Donald Trump and is by far the news host most loyal to the president, repeatedly urged Barr to apologise on air. Eventually she said that she wanted to tell Barrett “I’m sorry that you feel harm and hurt” and that she wishes she “worded” her tweet better.