In the 22 years since the original Mission: Impossible, Tom Cruise’s Ethan Hunt remains the same, moral compass and handsome, suspiciously unlined face very much intact. Hunt’s slick stunts created a new template for the spy thriller’s action man hero, but what sets him apart from his grittier contemporaries is his American altruism. Bond is misanthropic, Bourne solipsistic, John Wick (though a vigilante hitman, not a hero) spurred by revenge. Hunt, on the other hand, is defined by his “pathetic morality”, a weakness parlayed in this sixth instalment into something worth celebrating. This time, three silvery orbs of plutonium have fallen into the hands of the Apostles, an anarchist group planning to use them to blow up the Vatican, Jerusalem and Mecca. Willing to trade the explosives for Solomon Lane (Sean Harris), whom Hunt captured in Rogue Nation, Hunt’s hands are tied. He is aided by trusty accomplices Luther (Ving Rhames) and Benji (Simon Pegg, on goofy, enjoyable form), and, to his annoyance, CIA errand boy Agent Walker (Henry Cavill). CIA chief Erica Sloan (Angela Bassett) describes him as a “hammer” to Hunt’s “scalpel”, though an attractively carved block of wood would be more precise. More dynamic is coquettish criminal broker White Widow (The Crown’s Vanessa Kirby, who speaks with a fabulous, velvety purr). Cleanly choreographed set pieces see the 56-year-old Cruise bungee-jumping into the eye of a lightning storm, swishing through a Parisian club, swinging through the bowels of London’s Tate Modern and rasping lines such as: “We’ll burn that bridge when we get to it” with a straight face. The charismatic Cruise commands motorcycles, helicopters, ropes and rubber masks, as well as the fluttering hearts of two women from his past (Michelle Monaghan’s Julia and Rebecca Ferguson’s former MI6 agent Ilsa Faust). Genre convention means it’s a foregone conclusion that this mission is not, in fact, “impossible”, but director Christopher McQuarrie cleverly controls the ticking clock quality that makes these films so much fun.