Donald Trump has named Brett Kavanaugh for the supreme court vacancy left by the retirement of the “swing vote” Anthony Kennedy. With landmark rulings such as Roe v Wade – enshrining a woman’s right to abortion – potentially at stake, a fierce political battle will get under way over the nominee’s confirmation by the Senate. Republicans hold a slender 51-49 majority and, with Senator John McCain absent as he fights brain cancer, it is in effect 50-49. Every vote counts. Progressive activists are hoping to pressure two Republicans seen as pro-choice to put principle before party and block Trump’s nominee. Conservatives, meanwhile, will be pushing hard at three Democrats in “red states” who face daunting re-election contests in November’s midterms. These are the five senators who could influence the direction of the supreme court for decades. Age: 65 State: Maine Party: Republican Planned Parenthood scorecard for support for women’s health: 70% Ranked the most bipartisan member of the US Senate by the Lugar Center and Georgetown University, Collins is one of only a handful of pro-choice Republicans still in Congress. She led the successful effort to repeal the “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” law that banned gay and lesbian Americans from openly serving in the military. Collins voted for last year’s tax reform on condition that Republicans leaders pass other legislation that would reduce its impact on healthcare programmes; many observers now believe she was duped. Interviewed on CNN’s State of the Union last Sunday, Collins said: “I would not support a nominee who demonstrated hostility to Roe v Wade, because that would mean to me that their judicial philosophy did not include a respect for established decisions, established law.” But she did vote to approve Donald Trump’s first supreme court nominee, the conservative Neil Gorsuch, whom many believe would overturn Roe v Wade Recent tweet: “Great bumping into @BillieJeanKing – she broke ground and blazed the trail for so many women!” Age: 62 State: Indiana Party: Democrat Planned Parenthood scorecard for support for women’s health: 67% Branded “Sleepin’ Joe” by Trump, Donnelly, whose legislative efforts have included improving military mental health and combating the opioid abuse epidemic, is vulnerable in November’s midterm elections. He represents Vice-President Mike Pence’s home state, which voted for Trump by 19 percentage points in the 2016 election, and faces a re-election battle in November against Mike Braun, a businessman and state legislator who has cast himself as a Trump-style insurgent. Frank Luntz, a Republican pollster, predicts that Indiana looks to be “ground zero” for the fight over the supreme court. “It’s a socially conservative state that does vote for moderate Democrats,” he told the Washington Post. Donnelly was one of just three Democrats to vote for a 20-week abortion ban in January and he voted for Trump’s first supreme court nominee, Neil Gorsuch. After a meeting at the White House, the senator said: “When the president presents the Senate with his choice for the supreme court, I will thoroughly review the record and qualifications of that nominee.” Recent tweet: “The Supreme Court #Janus ruling is a setback for working men and women. The labor movement and labor unions have given voice to fair wages, safe working conditions, and collective bargaining. I will never stop advocating for Hoosier workers and working families in our state. -Joe” Age: 62 State: North Dakota Party: Democrat Planned Parenthood scorecard for support for women’s health: 100% The first female senator elected from North Dakota, who has worked on behalf on farmers and sits on the Indian affairs committee, will face liberal activist pressure to oppose Trump’s nominee. She faces a re-election contest in November in a state that Trump won by nearly 36 percentage points in the 2016 presidential election. Heitkamp voted for Trump’s first supreme court nominee, Neil Gorsuch, and met Trump at the White House to discuss the new vacancy. She said afterwards: “I told the president that he has a chance to unite the country by nominating a true non-ideological jurist who could gain strong support from senators on both sides of the aisle, rather than create more divisions.” Recent tweet: “The US is the only industrialized country in the world w/ rising maternal mortality rates, which grew by 26% from 2000-2014. Read more in @ProPublica abt my bipartisan bill w/ Republican @SenCapito to strengthen resources to address this growing crisis.” Age: 70 State: West Virginia Party: Democrat Planned Parenthood scorecard for support for women’s health: 57% Few senators have to perform as many political contortions as Manchin, who nevertheless still gets a tongue lashing from Trump. The president beat Hillary Clinton by 42 percentage points in West Virginia in 2016, his biggest margin anywhere, and last year Governor Jim Justice defected from the Democrats to the Republicans. So Manchin has been running a TV commercial touting his vote to fund the president’s wall on the Mexican border, and has hinted that he could support Trump in 2020. Manchin voted for Trump’s first nominee, Gorsuch, and was among senators who met the president to discuss the next. “I’m pro-life but I know how that divides our country immediately and divides everyone, they’re split right down the middle on that,” Manchin told a West Virginia radio station. Recent tweet: “We must secure our border and make sure that dangerous criminals cannot enter this country and that people coming into our country are doing so legally.” Age: 61 State: Alaska Party: Republican Planned Parenthood scorecard for support for women’s health: 58% The first Alaskan-born senator has focused on issues such as energy, healthcare, education, military and veterans’ affairs and infrastructure development. She recently joined Democratic senator Kamala Harris of California to introduce legislation aimed at curbing sexual harassment in the workplace. Murkowski, who won re-election through a write-in campaign in 2010 after losing the Republican primary, is not up for re-election in 2018. When, with Collins, she voted against a procedural motion to begin debating the repeal of Obamacare in July last year, Trump tweeted: “Senator @lisamurkowski of the Great State of Alaska really let the Republicans, and our country, down yesterday. Too bad!” She has called the future of Roe v Wade a “significant factor”, in the confirmation of a new supreme court justice but not the only one. “I don’t think it should be the only factor for anybody,” she told the Washington Post. “It’s not as if those are the only matters that come before the supreme court.” Recent tweet: “I am so glad to see the ruling to reunite all children that have been separated from their parents within 30 days. Great news.”