Born in London, Tinie Tempah, 29, released his debut album Disc-Overy in 2010. It went to number one and he won two Mobo awards. His latest album is Youth. This summer, he returns to Ibiza with a weekly residency at Ushuaïa until 19 September. What is your greatest fear? Not being able to fulfil my full potential. What is your earliest memory?In primary school, in year four, I did a wrestling move on some other kid in the playground, on the concrete. I don’t think his parents were too pleased and I got in a bit of trouble. I had been watching wrestling on TV. That’s what happens when you are young – you do what you see. Which living person do you most admire, and why?My mum – she genuinely wants the best for everyone. If the whole world had that mindset, civilisation would be a way different place. What is the trait you most deplore in others?Rudeness and dishonesty. What is the trait you most deplore in yourself?My lateness. What is your most treasured possession?My most prized possessions are things that I create. I cherish my songs over any car. What do you most dislike about your appearance?I don’t dislike anything – it looks perfect to me. And I think that’s what everyone should think about themselves. Who would play you in the film of your life?That person isn’t even born yet, but I reckon they are going to be the greatest actor ever. What is your most unappealing habit?Unappealing to whom? Perhaps my forensic meticulousness but, as I am a boss and employer, this is a good habit. What is your favourite smell?My mum’s food: jollof rice with plantain and sea bream. What is the worst thing anyone’s said to you?So many horrible things, like people saying I should just die. I’ve heard it all, mate. What is top of your bucket list?If I was lucky enough to afford the luxury, I’d hire a plane, get loads of mates and travel to every country in Africa. What is your guiltiest pleasure?This is my safe answer: Haribos. Who would you invite to your dream dinner party? Oprah and Beyoncé and Jay Z. What is the worst job you’ve done? Telesales. What has been your biggest disappointment? England not winning the World Cup in my lifetime. How do you relax? By getting as far away from work as possible. What has been your closest brush with the law? A police escort on the way to a gig. What keeps you awake at night? Fomo. What is the most important lesson life has taught you? It’s nice to be important, but it’s more important to be nice. Tell us a jokeWe don’t get a breakdown on what all of our tax money is spent on, and we have to pay to park outside our homes. Tell us a secretReal friends and good memories with the people you love are worth far more than wealth or fame.