The World Anti-Doping Agency’s head of science has sought to play down fears that Chris Froome’s salbutamol case may raise questions about other tests dependent upon threshold levels of banned substances. Dr Oliver Rabin said that he was not concerned about further fallout from the verdict, in which Froome was cleared of any potential wrongdoing after showing a high level of salbutamol in an anti-doping test at last year’s Tour of Spain. Wada had been “well aware of salbutamol’s variability”, Dr Rabin said. “That is why an adverse finding only opens the door to further study – it’s not an automatic sanction.” Dr Rabin was keen to underline that the Froome case was specific but not unique. “In this case, we had several specific elements,” he said. “First, there was a very significant increase in dosage in the preceding days [Froome increased his normal low dosage to a higher but still legal number of puffs because of worsening symptoms]. Second, he was being treated for an infection. And then there was the physiological impact of the event and other factors, such as dietary supplements and so on. “Given all of this we decided an excretion study was impossible and the finding was not inconsistent with therapeutic dosages. It’s not a unique case but because it was Froome, a sporting celebrity, and it was put in the limelight, it appears to be unique. For now, we have no reason to question the rules. We can see no reason that previous cases have not been handled fairly.” News of the Froome verdict was coolly received in the French media, with both L’Équipe and Le Monde – which revealed the story with the Guardian in December – unwilling to let the four-times Tour winner completely off the hook. With full details of the decision yet to be released, L’Équipe’s verdict was that, “for the moment, the explanations that have been provided do not allow all doubt to be removed”. Le Monde, for its part, speculated that Wada might have feared a costly legal battle against Team Sky and Froome. As expected, Froome was named on Tuesday in Team Sky’s eight-man lineup for the Tour, with the big surprise the selection of the young Colombian climber Egan Bernal alongside old hands Luke Rowe and Geraint Thomas. Speaking to the Times, the four-times Tour winner refused to be drawn into a war of words with the five-times winner Bernard Hinault, who had called for the peloton to strike if Froome were allowed to start the race without the case being resolved. “I can’t say anything bad about Bernard,” said the Team Sky leader. “He’s one of the great champions. I imagine with age sometimes your wires get a little bit crossed, but if I see him I’ll very happily explain it all in a bit more detail.”