Why are we so weird about food in this country? Is it our rotten old class system, our regional divides, our faddishness, our slavish devotion to whatever someone on the box tells us to do? Barely a day passes without another reminder that we have an unsettled relationship with our stomachs, a queasy preoccupation with whether what we have for our dinner (or tea or supper) reveals all too much about ourselves. I blame surveys. And initiatives and votes and top-10 lists. They give us too much food for thought. Take the polling company YouGov’s revelation of the “traditional British foods” even now teetering on the brink of extinction, just a few gummy old pensioners slurping down their liquidised suet-and-tripe concoctions before a billion millennials storm the care home, fuelled for the battle ahead by quinoa soufflés. According to YouGov, which selected 24 foods that “tend to be associated with olden days”, and asked people when they last ate them and, if they never had, whether they’d give them a whirl. The results were pretty predictable: tripe topped the poll, with a whopping 69% vowing never to let it pass their lips, with giblets and eel also in the top three. Shall we state the obvious? When was the last time you were offered a plate of tripe when you grabbed a bite in a local hostelry? Have you, within living memory, removed the giblets from your Sunday chicken and magicked them into a delicious gravy? Are your summers spent stalking the Fens, a copy of Waterland in hand, on the lookout for the majestic eel? The point being: while the poll might correctly discern which foodstuffs are rapidly going out of business, they’re less successful at exploring the reason. Those respondents who quailed at the thought of scarfing down tripe were probably doing so from a point of almost total unfamiliarity – and, let’s face it, the description isn’t going to win hearts and minds (“it’s stomach lining… yes, cows, and sheep. No, it’s delicious”). But the tripe is a distraction. It’s not delicious; it’s pretty bland. As are, incidentally, testicles, which I sampled in an ocakbasi of late. Not remotely repulsive, simply unremarkable, particularly compared with the juicy lamb chop next to them. People ate tripe, as they ate many things on this list, because they were the unfancied byproducts of the slaughterhouse, the add-ons of the abattoir. They were cheap, and eating them kept you alive and relatively well nourished. Further down the list, though, are several items to make the mouth water: kidneys, sardines, rabbit, bubble and squeak. Despite the fact that they are also pretty cheap, they have a certain cachet: you might expect to find them in chafing dishes were you to spend a weekend somewhere posh, such as Chequers. A devilled kidney would not look out of place on the menu of a fancy London restaurant in the school of St John, Fergus Henderson’s exquisite “nose to tail eating” establishment in Smithfield market. But what happens in the elitist eateries and around the kitchen tables of the metropolis is not representative of the country’s tastes at large. Look at all the trouble the actor Eddie Marsan got into recently when he said he preferred dinner parties to pubs. What a traitor! shrieked the twitterati, for all the world as if Marsan was touring the fish and chip shops and kebab houses of his native East End and emptying platters of shaved truffles and porcini mushrooms into the deep fat fryers. Food remains hopelessly confusing. Black pudding, which appears in ninth place on the list, and which a third of those surveyed had never eaten, is both a staple of greasy spoon set breakfasts and of high-end menus, where it might appear with bit of octopus or a scallop. But it also carries with it a whiff of something taboo – it’s made of blood – and an unmistakably strong taste, as do many of the foods featured. Tongue, cockles, nettles, oxtail: all foods we are apparently in the midst of rejecting, and all of them strongly flavoured. What do we veer towards instead? Burgers, pizzas, chicken in a million forms, damped-down versions of the cuisines that have arrived with waves of immigration. As for clean eating: leaving aside its quackery, it is a triumph of the tasteless, in which homeopathic doses of anything with a bit of kick – kimchi, kombucha, kefir et al – is prescribed as a remedy, more than as something you might want to savour. But here’s the thing that the oldsters and those raised by them (ie my generation) came to understand through what appeared on our dinner plates. It wasn’t always supposed to be that nice. Every evening was not a celebration of Jamie or Nigella; family meals were not curated events. If your mum found something you particularly liked, she might try to sling it at you occasionally to keep the peace; otherwise, you generally got what was quickish, cheapish and readily available in the shoppish. That meant funny old cuts of meat (lots of necks, I recall), enough offal to give us gout forever, an array of root vegetables that we never referred to as seasonal because what else would they be, and some arctic roll to take the taste away. And mince. Endless mince. Mince for dinner, followed by after-dinner mince. Naturally, in middle age, I long for mince, for shepherd’s pie, and meatloaf and even the terrible mince-inside-a-weeping-marrow (how has marrow escaped this survey?). But I must admit that the semolina, tapioca and turnip that also grace this list are welcome to slip off into oblivion. • Alex Clark is a regular Observer contributor