There is nothing so innately human and primal as blackening a bumper pack of sausages while under the influence of lighter-fluid fumes, cheap beer and sunstroke. Barbecue season is upon us, but these al fresco adventures can play havoc with our digestive systems the morning after. So, how can you have a healthier barbecue that doesn’t leave you feeling bloated and sore the next morning? The temptation is to load it up with sausages, burgers, chicken wings and lamb chops and to shove a lonely pepper on as an afterthought. If we were to put as much thought into the variety of vegetables we serve up as to the meat, our gut microbiota – the good and bad bacteria, funguses and parasites that live in our gut – would be a lot more balanced and varied, too, and that has been linked to better gut health. If you have the same three fruit and veg every day, you will decrease the range of your microbiota, so take advantage of the opportunity to get creative with vegetable skewers. Dietitian Megan Rossi says: “If you want to increase gut microbe diversity, you should try and have 30 different plant-based foods a week.” Kirsten Jackson, a dietitian and the founder of The Food Treatment Clinic, explains that exercise and relaxation has been shown to improve digestive health and that poor gut microbiota is linked to poor mental health and stress. “Doing a daily walk of 30 minutes can help to reduce those stress levels and to improve your microbiota,” she says. Just make sure you think of it as walking to improve your digestive health, rather than walking to work up an appetite ... Beware of falling into the trap of having nothing for breakfast to save yourself for a big barbecue at lunch, warns Jackson – it may sound like you are being virtuous, but your microbiota will not thank you for it: “By lunch you’ll be really hungry, so you’ll eat more than you would do if you’d eaten breakfast – and that is more likely to have a bigger impact on your gut,” Jackson says. If you have IBS, you may be particularly sensitive to food that are high in Fodmaps – fermentable carbohydrates that get broken down by your microbiota. In some people, that process creates a lot of gas, meaning the next day can feel very uncomfortable, to say the least. Burger buns made from wheat are high on that list – and it is easy to eat two or three over the course of an afternoon of barbecuing. That, says Jackson, “can have quite a dramatic effect”.