Labor has emerged victorious in critical byelection contests in Tasmania and Queensland in a significant fillip for the federal leader, Bill Shorten, boosting its primary vote in Longman and harvesting the lion’s share of preferences in Braddon. After gruelling three-month campaigns triggered by the last vestige of federal parliament’s dual-citizenship crisis, Labor held crucial terrain in two key marginal seats and is set to return two MPs to Canberra in the west coast contests – a clean sweep, shoring up its foundations for the next federal election. The Centre Alliance MP Rebekha Sharkie also held out a challenge from the Liberal party’s star recruit, Georgina Downer, whose father, former foreign affairs minister Alexander Downer, held the South Australian electorate from 1984 to 2008. Sharkie – a popular and hardworking minor party representative – declared her emphatic victory in the seat of Mayo was attributable to “people power”. The Turnbull government had been hopeful of triggering an upset in either Longman or Braddon in the super Saturday contests. No Australian government has picked up a seat from an opposition at a byelection for close to a century. The average two-party-preferred swing against an incumbent government at a byelection is between 4% and 5%. The contest in Braddon was complicated by a strong showing for the high profile local independent Craig Garland, who picked up more than 10% of the vote. The One Nation vote also held up in Longman despite various campaign controversies, with the Queensland electorate centred in Pauline Hanson’s heartland. The Liberal party performed better in Braddon than in Longman, where the LNP suffered a negative swing of 10%, and recorded a primary vote in the mid-20s. While government strategists declared on Saturday night it was the two-party preferred vote that mattered in Australian elections, the LNP’s weak primary vote in Queensland was ominous for the Coalition, given the state always plays a major role in determining the outcome of federal elections because of the large number of marginal seats. Labor ran a substantial ground campaign in Longman, focusing on public services and the government’s support for a company tax cut as a road test for messaging for the federal election, which could be this year or next. Labor also invested in a substantial television and radio advertising blitz in the final week of the campaign, which the LNP lacked the financial resources to match. The weak result in Longman puts neighbouring seats in doubt, including the marginal seat held by one of the Turnbull government’s most influential conservative kingmakers and future leadership aspirant, Peter Dutton – which is an uncomfortable development for Malcolm Turnbull. Ahead of the contests on Saturday night, much of the focus had been on Shorten. Prominent frontbencher Anthony Albanese was clearly positioning as an alternative in the event the byelection contests went south. But Labor holding its position, particularly in the crucial electoral battleground of Queensland, will neutralise some of the internal concerns about whether the party’s election strategy is hitting the right note. Labor’s solid result comes despite all the national opinion polls suggesting the major party contest has been tightening over the first six months of this year. It also makes it much more likely that the federal election will be held in 2019, not in the second half of this year. A jubilant Labor leader told supporters in Queensland on Saturday night the result of the byelection contests around the country was “another signpost to the destination that matters for Australians – a Labor government after the next general election”. Shorten acknowledged it had been a tough campaign, and he said Labor had emerged in “pretty good shape”. He said critics of the ALP often underestimated the party as a fighting force. “When our opponents write us down and write the vision for Australia small, you can always count upon the rank and file of the labour movement, trade unionists and ALP members. “You can count on them to put their shoulder to the wheel.” Shorten said the test of a political movement was not when times were benign but when conditions were more testing. “When you’ve got a hard fight ahead of you … you get up and dust yourself off, and you go hard.” The Labor leader said the opposition would not redouble policy efforts between now and the next election. “We will continue the work of putting together a policy agenda for the next national Labor government – a program which will win the confidence and the support of working class and middle-class Australians. “We say this to all Australians, it is about your family, it is about your health. It’s about the ability of getting good, affordable childcare, about the ability to go to well-funded schools, about the ability to get an apprenticeship or go to university. “It’s about ensuring that as you grow older, you can be sure you have decent aged care, it’s about making sure that it is your Medicare card, not your credit card that determines health for you.” Saturday night’s result means all the parliamentarians felled by the dual citizenship fiasco who sought to return to parliament have held their seats.