A major incident has been declared in Wiltshire after it was suspected two people might have been exposed to an unknown substance in Amesbury. The man and woman, both in their 40s, were in a critical condition at Salisbury district hospital, Wiltshire police said. A number of scenes in the Amesbury and Salisbury area were cordoned off as a precaution, although the force said it was not yet clear if they were the victims of a crime. One of the sites cordoned off and guarded by three officers was the town’s baptist church, a modern red brick building, a few minutes’ drive away from the address where the man and woman were found. Public Health England (PHE) advised that it did not believe there to be a “significant health risk” to the wider public, although its advice was being continually assessed. The incident comes after the former Russian spy Sergei Skripal and his daughter, Yulia, were left poisoned by a suspected military nerve agent in Salisbury, around eight miles from Amesbury, in March. Police said the man and woman were found unconscious at an address in Muggleton Road on Saturday evening and it was initially believed that they had taken illegal drugs, however further tests were being carried out. The address is thought to be on a new housing development on the southern edge of the town, which lies close to Stonehenge. Muggleton Road is a brand new Bovis Homes development. A police officer was posted outside one of the homes on Wednesday morning though no cordon was in place. A police statement said: “Wiltshire police and partners have this evening declared a major incident after it is suspected that two people might have been exposed to an unknown substance in Amesbury. “Emergency services were called to an address in Muggleton Road, Amesbury on Saturday evening [30 June] after a man and woman, both in their 40s, were found unconscious in a property. “They are both currently receiving treatment for suspected exposure to an unknown substance at Salisbury district hospital. They are both in a critical condition. “It was initially believed that the two patients fell ill after using possibly heroin or crack cocaine from a contaminated batch of drugs. “However, further testing is now ongoing to establish the substance which led to these patients becoming ill and we are keeping an open mind as to the circumstances surrounding this incident.” Amesbury incident - police cordon at the baptist church. pic.twitter.com/JRzIBH2Lu2 A number of scenes believed to be areas they frequented before they fell ill were cordoned off overnight. There was no cordon at the ambulance station at Amesbury. Meanwhile, there was an increased police presence in and around Amesbury and Salisbury. Salisbury district hospital was “open as usual” and officials advised people to attend routine appointments unless contacted to do otherwise. A PHE spokesman said: “The current advice from PHE England, based upon the number of casualties affected, is that it is not believed that there is a significant health risk to the wider public. This will be continually assessed as further information becomes known.” Skripal, 67, and his daughter, 33, were left in a critical condition after they were found slumped on a bench in Salisbury city centre on 4 March. They spent weeks in Salisbury district hospital where they were saved by treatment for suspected exposure to the Russian-created nerve agent novichok. The British government has accused Russia of being behind the attack. Sergei Skripal settled in the UK after a spy swap. The Press Association contributed to this report