Naidoc is in my blood. It holds such special significance to me as it continues the vision of many of our old people including my late grandfather, pastor Sir Doug Nicholls and his uncle William Cooper. Naidoc week unifies our people, acknowledges our history and celebrates our survival. As long as I can remember, it has been a big part of our identity and our history. In Melbourne, Naidoc has also been an opportunity to drive change and at times it has been used as a platform to speak out against the callous and discriminatory treatment of our people. This year, under the theme Because of Her, We Can, Naidoc week acknowledges the valuable contribution Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women have made to our families, communities, and nation. As pillars of our society, these women play significant roles at the community, local, state, national and international level. As leaders, politicians, activists and social change advocates, our women fought and continue to fight, for justice, equal rights, our rights to country, access to education, employment and to maintain and celebrate our culture, language, music and art. They are our mothers, our elders, our grandmothers, our aunties, our sisters and our daughters. For at least 65,000 years and over 3,000 generations, Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander women have carried the dreaming stories, songlines, languages and knowledge that have kept our culture and identity strong. Our women were there at first contact and have stood firm – from the early days of the Aboriginal resistance. They went through a torrid cultural transition being subjected to the social, cultural, linguistic, and environmental destruction of our peoples. They stood beside our men at the Torres Strait pearler’s strike, the Cummeragunja walk-off, the Pilbara pastoral workers strike, the freedom rides, the Wave Hill walk-off and in the frontline of the Aboriginal tent embassy. They marched with our men in Sydney on 26 January 1938 at what would be Australia’s first civil rights protest – the day of mourning – a protest, a movement that would ultimately become our national Naidoc week. They were pioneering women like Barangaroo, Truganini, Gladys Elphick, Fanny Cochrane-Smith, Evelyn Scott, Pearl Gibbs, Margaret Tucker, Oodgeroo Noonuccal, Celuia Mapo Salee, Thancoupie, Justine Saunders, Lady Gladys Nicholls,Flo Kennedy, Essie Coffey, Isabel Coe, Emily Kame Kngwarreye, Hyllus Maris, Edna Brown, Geraldine Briggs, Eleanor Harding, Naomi Myers, Faith Bandler, Mum Shirl, Ellie Gaffney and Gladys Tybingoompa. Women who stood tall and strong and raised their voices for truth and justice. We must never forget the sacrifice of our elders, the daring leaders who laid the foundation. Our people who came before us and who helped to make us who we are today. Their very blood running through our veins. Today, they are trailblazers like Joyce Clague, Yalmay Yunupingu, Evonne Goolagong Cawley, Nova Peris, Lidia Thorpe, Cynthia Lui, Elizabeth Morgan, Barbara Shaw, Rose Richards, Vonda Malone, Margaret Valadian, Lowitja O’Donoghue, June Oscar, Pat O’Shane, Pat Anderson, Jill Milroy, Banduk Marika, Linda Burney and Rosalie Kunoth-Monks – to name but a few. They have marched, protested, fundraised, lobbied and spoken at demonstrations and national gatherings calling for national reform and justice. They often did so while caring for our families, maintaining our homes and breaking down cultural and institutionalised barriers and gender stereotypes. Our women did so because they demanded a better life, greater opportunities and – in many cases equal rights – for our children, our families and our people. There are of course many others across Australia. There are women that you heard stories about, you were told about, or you read about. And their names should not be forgotten. There are many more that we don’t yet know about, strong black women that are making an outstanding commitment to our community and families right now. Their families and communities know who they are. They are fighting for our rights, looking after their grandchildren, advocating for our people, managing our local organisation, coaching our sports teams, nursing our elders, caring for our children. They are all remarkable women. Their achievements, their voice, their unwavering passion give us strength and have empowered past generations and paved the way for generations to come. • Guardian Australia is proud to partner with IndigenousX to showcase the diversity of Indigenous peoples and opinions from around the country. • Comments on this article have been pre-moderated to ensure the discussion is on the topics that have been written about in the article.