Jordan Spieth was making a decent fist of getting his hands on the Claret Jug again less than a week after handing it back when he reached three-under after 11 holes, though he then dropped four shots in the final four to head for the clubhouse at one over and in philosophical mood. Justin Rose, one of the American’s playing partners, finished with the same opening score but with a sense of relief after what had become a difficult day in mid-round. Both players remain firmly in contention here but they will need to progress in their second rounds. It was the finishing stretch which won the Open for Spieth at Birkdale last year, picking up five shots in the last five holes, so perhaps his equanimity was understandable at Carnoustie. His problems on Thursday started with double at the 15th which led to a bogey at the par-three 16th and the tee-shot into Barry Burn at the 18th just added to the drama. “I think I’m certainly in a recoverable situation,” he said. “Yeah, it felt like a missed opportunity. I felt like I was really going well. I imagine this is as easy as the course could play so I don’t see the winning score being any better than it was in 2007 [seven-under] with tomorrow’s forecasted tough conditions and Sunday’s forecasted heavy winds. “I got some good breaks early. I was three-under and kind of felt like I had stolen a couple there. So I just have to play better golf. It’s that simple. You can’t rely on some of the breaks I got early in the round today.” The pair set out with Kiradech Aphibarnrat in benign conditions and Spieth completed the front nine in two-under which included a decent scramble at the 580-yard 6th, where he found the second of the four bunkers from the tee, pitched out in front and finally holed a 15-footer for the ultimate in sandy pars. “Other than that, it was very stress-free,” Spieth said. “I was putting the ball where I needed to, having maybe no more than four feet for par on every hole. It was just a clean round of golf.” Rose’s serene start, four pars and a birdie, was shattered at the 6th by the rattle of a press photographer’s shutter from the gallery behind the green and he sent a short putt past the hole to miss out on a second successive birdie which would have brought him level with Spieth at two-under. “Camera,” he yelled as he tapped in for par when he was entitled to have expected better. After pushing his drive to the right rough from the adjacent 7th tee he and his caddie remonstrated with the bank of snappers once again, their response being “he’s gone”. So had the unsettled Rose and a glower at the crowd behind him in the light rough after hitting short to the green and a tossed putter to his caddie after missing a 10-footer to save par spoke volumes. Stability of sorts was restored at the 8th after he hit his tee shot through the back and did well to save par with a huge lag putt, but a disastrous double-bogey seven at the other par-five, Spectacles, left him chasing his tail, though he was reflective after holing out at the last and picking up only his second shot of the round. “It’s one less birdie I have to make by Sunday,” he said. “Especially on a hole like 18 which you can as easy bogey as you can birdie. If I came off at three over that would be a tough start but one over, you can build on.” Aphibarnrat, on the other hand, holed his third from the 17th fairway with a one-bounce pitch from distance to get a round which had begun with a birdie and featured only eight pars back into some semblance of shape at three-over and give the genial Thai a chance of finally making the cut after four blowouts at the Open.