We seem rather short of the older generation.” The remark was made by the chair of a meeting I attended last month of an old people’s network, organised by the county council adult care department, where I was indeed the only representative of the older generation. The other 30 or so people were from agencies and charities engaged with the crumbly generation. The atmosphere was pungent with well-meaningness. The format was presentations followed by questions, culminating in around the table reports, by which time there was a certain restlessness, which put silent pressure on the final few to be brief. There is clearly an art in seat selection on such occasions if you want a decent hearing. The main item was “social prescription”. It takes its format from medical prescription, where you go to the doctor, explain your symptoms and leave with a piece of paper containing the name of a drug. Its “social” sibling would go through the same process, with care as well as health agencies, the piece of paper prescribes an activity, facility, or support group. In theory, an exciting idea but one which, as a potential client, living and working among existing clients, I felt obliged to challenge. “So, how does my carer or GP know about the options available to a lonely old bugger (LOB) like me?”, I asked. From then on, LOBs became the lingua franca of the meeting, their referral the primary issue. The “prescription” problem is not that there is any deficit in care. In fact, support for older people has become an industry – Men’s Sheds, Alzheimer cafes, chairobics, geri-diets etc. As statutory bodies shrink, their care functions go out to contract, to be competed for by faith groups, social enterprises and charities. A successful bid has to reduce local authority spending, so these organisations bid low. But then they need top-up funding, for which they have to demonstrate provision – and for which they need to hang on to their clients. Therefore they don’t inform them of other options. Locally, for example, there’s a church-initiated scheme which offers a monthly lunch; in the same town a secular provision offers daily lunches with activities. Common sense would argue that the clients who attend the monthly lunch would be obvious customers for weekday lunches, but the monthly lunch project does not share that information with their clients because they fear loss of numbers leading to loss of funding. The ghost in the elderly care machine is competition. It is an industry made up of myriad tribes, each “provider” more concerned with protecting its fiefdom through promotional lobbying than servicing its clients with co-ordinated provision. As a consequence, the already overstretched “prescribers” – doctors, carers, support workers – are overwhelmed with a tsunami of glossy flyers. This is information overload and it generates confusion not understanding. The result is that we are denied access to a choice of facilities, which critically make a real difference to our wellbeing – and reduce our burden on the NHS. So it needs to be addressed. A few days later our crumbly coterie came up with a simple menu, an A4 sheet listing every activity and provision for older people in the town by day, time and place. This will be available in hard copy to and from all referral bodies and at the click of a mouse on the council website, updated on a weekly basis to add one-off events. The result – LOBs like me will be prescribed the “right medicine”. It’s a simple solution and the chair’s comment gives the clue. Always consult the client. • Stewart Dakers is a 79-year-old voluntary community worker