Anthony Martial is heading for a stand-off with Manchester United as the striker is determined to leave the club and José Mourinho is minded not to sell the Frenchman. Martial believes his career has stalled at United and the 22-year-old’s contract expires next summer. But United are expected to trigger a clause that allows for his terms to be extended for a year and so tie Martial down until summer 2020. By doing so, the club could fetch a far higher fee for the player. Mourinho has stated that Martial will be in his starting lineup for United’s first game of the new campaign, the visit of Leicester to Old Trafford on 10 August because the manager’s preferred centre-forwards, Romelu Lukaku and Marcus Rashford, will not be match-fit after having an extended holiday following the World Cup. Were they available, Martial would almost certainly not be chosen to be the No 9 , and Alexis Sánchez might still be selected ahead of him. Jesse Lingard is also on a post-Russia 2018 break and is another player higher in the pecking order than Martial. The England forward’s absence clears the way for Martial to start. Despite the uncertainty over his future, Ander Herrera believes Martial can still re-establish himself for United. “He’s very talented,” the Spanish midfielder said. “He can be one of the best players in the world and I think he is very focused this season to smash it. When you have players like Anthony, like Rashford, Jesse, Juan [Mata], Alexis, those kind of players that can change the game.” Herrera believes Martial is one of a strong group of forward options for the manager. “If one of them cannot play, we have three or four more so we have lots of options,” he said. “I think we shouldn’t think that any other club in the Premier League has better players because at least we have as good as the opponents. “Now it’s all about work, confidence, about keep playing like he did today. I am confident with them because they are all amazing players and Anthony looks very sharp.” Martial was bought by Louis van Gaal for £36m in summer of 2015, a world record fee for a teenager that rises to £58m with add-ons. Despite United struggling under the Dutchman the following season – his side finished fifth — Martial was a standout performer scoring a memorable goal against Liverpool on his debut after coming on as a 65th-minute substitute in the 3-1 win at Old Trafford. He ended that first season with 17 goals, including the 90th-minute winner against Everton in the FA Cup semi-final as United went on to win the trophy for the first time since 2004, Martial playing all of the Wembley final. The Dutchman, though, was sacked, for failing to claim a Champions League place and under Mourinho Martial has lost his way. He is no longer a first choice, and scored only eight goals in 2016-17 and 11 last season. Martial lost the No 9 jersey when Zlatan Ibrahimovic was signed by Mourinho in 2016, with Lukaku then taking it 12 months ago. Martial’s patchy form has caused Mourinho continuing frustration. As none of Lingard, Mata or Rashford have established themselves asan automatic choice for Mourinho’s starting XI, the Frenchman can still win him over. Martial is set to start Sunday’s friendly against San Jose Earthquakes at Santa Clara’s Levi’s Stadium, United’s second tour game. Sánchez will also play, Mourinho has said.