The Church of England will create more than 100 new churches to “revive the Christian faith in coastal areas, market towns and outer urban housing estates” in the face of a record low number of people identifying as Anglicans. The £27m plan is part of an ongoing drive to refocus the church on evangelism amid a dramatic decline in the numbers of people regularly attending services and to reform some of its archaic rules. Despite forecasts that church attendances will continue to fall for years to come, Justin Welby, the archbishop of Canterbury, insisted churches across the country were “bursting with life”. The new churches would be in “the places of greatest need in our society”, he added. “These projects are wonderful examples of how churches are seeking to be faithful to God – and faithful to their communities in love and mission. Through their innovation, they signal a growing determination in the church to share the good news of Jesus Christ in ways that make sense for those in our most deprived communities.” Among the recipients of grants will be nine new churches modelled on Ignite, a café-style church in Margate, Kent. It was founded 10 years ago to work with marginalised and deprived communities. Three of the new churches will be in coastal towns: St Peter Port, Guernsey; Herne Bay, Kent; and Sheerness on the Isle of Sheppey. Another three churches will be created on housing estates on the edge of Plymouth, and a further nine in market towns in eastern England. In Swindon, a former railway works building will be converted into a church aimed primarily at people aged under 40. Up to 50 new churches will be established in the diocese of Leicester and 16 in the diocese of Manchester. The C of E’s “renewal and reform” programme, aimed at modernisation and growth, includes diverting funds away from struggling rural parishes to new evangelical churches in towns and cities. The programme has been championed by the archbishops of Canterbury and York and senior church officials. But some critics say the new priorities risk alienating the C of E’s traditional backbone. Two years ago, John Spence, the C of E’s finance chief, said the decline in church attendances was expected to continue for another three decades, with the number of people regularly attending church falling to just 1% of the population. Last year, the British Social Attitudes survey found that only 3% of adults under 24 and only 5% of 25-34 year-olds described themselves as Anglican. The new places of worship will add to more than 16,000 C of E churches across the country, most of them in rural areas. On Tuesday, the C of E’s general synod, meeting in York, approved measures aimed at strengthening the governance of England’s 42 cathedrals following a crisis at Peterborough cathedral that resulted in the acrimonious departure of the dean and several redundancies. The synod backed a proposal to establish senior executive teams to oversee the day-to-day operations of cathedrals and to ensure a majority of non-executive members on their governing bodies, known as chapters. A report from the C of E’s cathedrals task force said “a large number of cathedrals [were] under significant financial pressure”. It added: “Whenever cathedrals get into debt and serious financial difficulty, this presents a reputational risk for the entire church, especially where a cathedral is unable to pay its creditors in full … The insolvency of a cathedral would be exceptionally difficult to manage.” Cathedrals attract about 11 million visitors each year, but running costs and maintenance bills are enormous. Only nine charge an entrance fee, with the remaining 33 relying on donations, legacies and grants and, increasingly, income from commercial activities.