The Red Bull team principal, Christian Horner, has described Mercedes’s decision to have their chief strategist, James Vowles, publicly apologise for a strategy error at the Austrian Grand Prix as Vowles throwing himself under the bus to motivate Lewis Hamilton. Speaking before this weekend’s British Grand Prix, Horner was also optimistic Silverstone would remain on the F1 calendar but hopeful that London might still become a venue. Red Bull’s Max Verstappen won in Austria, which Horner believed proved they were still outsiders with a shot at a title, but it was Hamilton’s team that attracted scrutiny. Mercedes opted not to pit the British driver under the virtual safety car, costing him the lead and leaving him angry and frustrated. They took the unusual step of having Vowles admit it was his fault over the radio, saying that he had “thrown away the win”. Mercedes said it had been an attempt to refocus Hamilton on the task at hand. Hamilton has four world championships and is in his 12th season in F1 and Horner could not understand Mercedes’s strategy. “It seems a fairly bizarre thing to need to do,” he said. “For somebody to throw themselves under the bus to motivate a driver to go from fourth back into the lead.” Horner, who has won four drivers’ and constructors’ championships with Red Bull since he became principal in 2005, insisted his team was run differently. “One thing you have to do is win as a team and lose as a team,” he said. “That’s why we hardly talk about individuals. Because that puts an unfair amount of scrutiny and pressure on that individual. Our philosophy is that as a team, it is collective responsibility.” Mercedes have been largely dominant for four years. However, they now face a tight fight with Ferrari and Red Bull. Indeed the latter are increasingly competitive and have three wins this season, equalling both their rivals. The competition was proving tricky for Mercedes, believed Horner. “Obviously Mercedes have got so used to being at the front it becomes easy to become complacent,” he said. “And there is an adjustment when that isn’t happening and you are having to fight and having to scrap. “The management of the team have never been in a position where they have had to go head to head for an entire season and the closer you get to the end of the year the more the pressure builds, so it is a new experience for them.” Silverstone is currently contracted to host two more grands prix and is in negotiations with Liberty Media about a new contract, having activated he break clause on their previous deal, unable to meet rising costs. Horner was optimistic that an agreement would be reached, however he also believed Liberty maintained a realistic ambition for London to be a venue. “From a personal point of view Silverstone is the natural home of the British GP,” he said. “But it would be great to complement it with another race even if it was not a permanent fixture, a one-off race in London would be phenomenal. Why not have a race in London one year and one in Paris one year? “Like a European Grand Prix that toured different venues, if the economics worked for Liberty it would be fantastic.”