The Colombia striker Radamel Falcao says referee Mark Geiger favoured England during the teams’ World Cup last-16 tie on Tuesday, while Argentina’s former striker Diego Maradona called the result a “monumental robbery”. England won after a penalty shootout and Falcao says decisions went against his team throughout the match. “The referee disturbed us a lot, in the 50-50 plays, he always made the calls in favour of England,” Falcao said. “This situation was undermining us. He didn’t act with the same criteria for both teams. When in doubt, he always went to the England side. It’s shameful that this happens in the round of 16 of a World Cup.” Six of the eight players booked during an ill-tempered game were Colombian, and Geiger also awarded England a penalty after Harry Kane was wrestled to the ground at a corner. Falcao believes Geiger’s nationality affected his decisions. “I found it peculiar that they put an American referee in this instance,” he said. “To tell you the truth, the process leaves a lot of doubts. He only spoke English, some bias was certain.” Maradona said England perpetrated a “monumental robbery” and said the American official should have penalised Kane rather than award a penalty. “Today I saw a monumental robbery on the pitch … a fatal mistake for a whole country,” he said of the incident that put England 1-0 ahead in the second half. “Here’s a gentleman who decides, a referee who, if you Google him, shouldn’t be given a match of this magnitude ... Geiger, an American, what a coincidence,” Maradona added on his nightly World Cup show for Venezuela-based Telesur broadcaster. Colombia players showed their displeasure with Geiger throughout the match, and they argued with the referee for several minutes after England were awarded their penalty in the second half. One player who did not seem as hostile to Geiger was Wilmar Barrios. The midfielder lifted his head into Jordan Henderson’s jaw during the first half but escaped with a booking rather than a red card. Barrios shook hands with the officials as he walked off at half-time. Of the 36 fouls called in the game, 23 went against Colombia. Their coach, Jose Pekerman, believes England were just as guilty as Colombia. “We shouldn’t only look at Colombian players, people should look at England players,” he said. “I wish I was wrong, but I think from the next match England will be much more careful. Today we were on the receiving end of this but I hope it won’t happen again. It’s been absolutely obvious, too obvious.” Geiger had already endured criticism from another team at this World Cup. Morocco’s Nordin Amrabat alleged that Geiger had asked Portugal’s Pepe for a shirt during a group-stage match. “I don’t know what [Geiger] is used to, but he was very impressed by Cristiano [Ronaldo],” Amrabat said. “I’ve been just told by Pepe that ... he asked if he could have his shirt. Come on, man. What are we talking about? We are at the World Cup, not a circus here.” Fifa later dismissed Amrabat’s allegations. “Fifa referees are under clear instructions with regard to their behaviour and relationship with the teams at the 2018 Fifa World Cup Russia and it can be confirmed that Mr Geiger has acted in an exemplary and professional manner as an appointed match official,” it said in a statement. Geiger also refereed Colombia’s 3-0 victory over Greece at the 2014 World Cup.