As the Tour de France headed across the Massif Central towards the final showdown in the Pyrenees, with the Welshman Geraint Thomas in charge, a French saying came to mind: plus ça change, plus c’est la même chose. As in every year since 2012, the overall outcome looked set, with the usual provisos about good fortune and acts of God. The situation is unusual: an established champion, Chris Froome, with a – faint – question mark over his strength, trailing behind a teammate, Thomas, who pledged to show loyalty, but is in the form of his life and clearly contemplating a career-defining victory. Plus, the intimidating strength Team Sky showed through the Alps threatened to shut down the race. The terrain on Sunday is propitious for surprise attacks of the kind once produced by Alberto Contador – or Froome in this year’s Giro d’Italia – but such moves are not in the repertoire of Tom Dumoulin or Primoz Roglic, the only riders within three minutes of Thomas, other than Froome. With only Dumoulin remaining to threaten the British team’s hegemony – barring an unlikely move from Romain Bardet, Mikel Landa or Steven Kruijswijk – the next question is obvious: Thomas or Froome to win? Therein lies perhaps the only remaining intrigue in the Tour, a little world where, as the Observer’s Geoffrey Nicholson wrote more than 40 years ago, the favourite pastime is speculation. Thomas has ridden like a team leader since the final 10km of stage one into Fontenay-le-Comte, when Froome was forced off the road as the race split apart. At every available opening since that initial gain of 51sec, the Welshman added a few seconds: five at Mûr-de-Bretagne, 20 on the second Alpine stage to La Rosière, five at l’Alpe d’Huez. With time bonuses for winning those two Alpine stages – his two successive Alpine victories are a feat rarely seen in the Tour – that took his advantage over his nominal leader to 1min 39sec. The Welshman has not once looked like a team worker, never playing the role that he had spent years performing for Froome. At times, he could claim to have followed wheels when the race split, but those two Alpine victories were little masterpieces that could only have been created by a man with his mind on winning overall as well as on each given day. At La Rosière, a No 2 would have deferred to Froome rather than soaring upwards and leaving him to the mercy of others; at l’Alpe d’Huez, a wingman would have helped his leader out for the bonus seconds available for the stage win. To muddy the waters further, Froome has not – yet – ridden like a man destined to win the Tour, looking panicked when left without teammates on stage one, and producing ineffectual attacks in the Alps rather than his usual searing accelerations. However, recent history has shown he was perfectly capable of biding his time early in a three-week Tour before making his move in the final days. The situation resembles the one he had faced in the Giro d’Italia: a younger (British) rider making the pace, but one yet to prove he could last a full three weeks of racing. But the difference is that at the Giro, Froome was always in a position to attack Simon Yates for the simple reason he was in a different team. Thomas’s greatest achievement has been in gaining time, incrementally, without ever making it look too blatantly like he was trying to oust the man he insisted was his leader. His repeated assertions that Froome remained Sky’s man for the overall win are respectful to the point of parody, but he keeps making an important point: with six Grand Tour wins under his belt, Froome’s record matters, massively. Cycling history, from Jacques Anquetil through Eddy Merckx to Bernard Hinault and Lance Armstrong, shows the same truth: the more Grand Tours a rider wins, the better he becomes at finding ways of winning them. There are similar stories when teams have been forced to choose between two strong contenders in Tour’s past, of course, but none that resemble this one, as Team Sky seem – for the moment – light years away from descending to the internecine strife and distrust that made life hell at La Vie Claire as Hinault and Greg LeMond disputed the race lead in 1986. In 1985, LeMond was the challenger, Hinault the incumbent, but the American never wore yellow. A better parallel perhaps, is the 1976 Giro d’Italia, where the former team worker Johan De Muynck looked set for victory having unexpectedly discovered his true potential before being brutally put in his place by the leader of his Brooklyn team, Roger De Vlaeminck. With one summit finish remaining, the unknown ascent to the Col de Portet on Wednesday, two other mountain stages and the time trial, the Tour is beginning to look like Thomas’s to lose rather than Froome’s to win. Which leads to the million-dollar question: assuming Thomas does not crack – a major issue for a rider unproven in the final week of the Tour – how will Froome react when or if he feels he could win? Will he sit back and let his teammate claim victory, or will he attack him, risking team unity? Having courted controversy alongside Bradley Wiggins in 2012, Froome knows full well how public opinion would greet any hint of a knife in Thomas’s back. Which takes us back to De Muynck: in an interview last year, he said he had not spoken to De Vlaeminck since his “treachery” in 1976. The wounds opened when a team leader clashes with an ambitious teammate can run deep indeed.