Orange Is the New Black (Netflix) was one of the earliest original dramas on the streaming service and in many ways, it was ahead of its time, pushing for a diversity of representation before that became such a rallying cry. But success brought problems of stamina, too, and in an attempt to get past the repetition issues that a prison drama with a seemingly unlimited lifespan might face – a contained environment, a relatively fixed set of problems to deal with, even if by a broad group of people – last year’s fifth season took a bold step. Instead of the usual, extended season-long timeline, they started a prison riot, homing in on just a few days of drama, as inmates suddenly found they could run the ship from within. Then it all fell apart, and they burned the ship down. The choice was courageous, but the execution was not quite up to it; ironically, it felt like more of a slog than the old familiar routine. One major benefit of closing down Litchfield’s minimum security wing, though, was the injection of energy that the previous season was striving to achieve. This time around, everyone has been carted off to the much-feared Max (that’s maximum security), and it’s the reinvention that was needed. Early episodes hint at a new vigour, and the opening scenes, which see an unmedicated Suzanne “Crazy Eyes” Warren (Uzo Aduba) hallucinating the other inmates as stage performers, could be seen as a promise that the ambitions of the previous season have not gone away. The Max reboot means that even diehard loyalties have been upended and replaced with new clans and friendship groups. The series has lost some of the jarring tonal clashes that have dogged it in the past, with the bleak humour no longer always feeling like an uneasy interruption to the unfolding horrors. The guards in Max have a kind of fantasy football league for inmate behaviour and the scene explaining the points system is dryly funny: “Scissoring has been bumped to 11 points, because it’s not a thing.” It restores the sense of discovery that season one held, back when Piper learned the ways of prison life – only this time, it places almost all of the cast favourites in a newborn state. The focus on previously underused characters such as Frieda (Dale Soules) and Ruiz (Jessica Pimentel) is welcome; there’s only so much moping Piper can do. The wing-based rivalry is enjoyable, too, like the Crystal Maze, but with shanks and rats. But it isn’t quite back to its best. There is still a sense that, despite everything, OITNB is stuck in a handful of grooves that it just can’t seem to skip. Some of the more cartoonish inmate villains are as irritating as the theme tune. Every time a sadistic prison guard is defeated, another grows, hydra-like, in his place. It’s hard to root for the overthrow of the new baddies when you know that more will simply appear. This sense of despair becomes somewhat suffocating; the show has a frustrating tendency to convey the idea that the penal system is broken by inflicting torture on the few characters who are beloved by fans. This time it’s Taystee’s (Danielle Brooks) turn, and while of course there is a point to make about the contrast between her experience as a black inmate and Piper’s “white privilege bullshit”, it can be hard having to watch her endure yet more suffering. OITNB rarely makes a statement with subtlety. At times that leads to a funny, sneaky, outrageous show that deserves its reputation as a TV pioneer. But sometimes, still, it’s all a bit too much.