“A Spanish artist doesn’t get this big,” says Alba Farelo, better known as Bad Gyal. “And a Catalan artist – never.” It’s true: what started as a hastily recorded cover of Rihanna’s Work has spiralled into a highly unusual success story for the 21-year-old from Vilassar de Mar, a seaside town near Barcelona. Since Bad Gyal’s inception in 2016, Farelo’s stew of reggaeton, dancehall and melancholic electronics – sung in a mixture of Catalan, Spanish and English – has carried her around the globe, garnered feverish critical acclaim – Fact magazine named the seductively glum Jacaranda the best song of 2017 – and racked up tens of millions of YouTube hits. While Farelo tends to cut an outrageous figure on stage – at last year’s Sonar festival she sported assless chaps and a thong – today, she is a world away from her outre persona, in a baggy white sweatshirt and jeans. Recounting her career’s inauspicious start with a mixture of insouciance and steely braggadocio, she recalls how just over two years ago some friends with a microphone encouraged her to have a go at singing. Farelo liked what she heard. “I tried and I was like: ‘Man I’m good!’” she laughs. Not long after, Farelo – a longtime dancehall fan – heard Rihanna’s Work and sensed a phenomenon in the making. “The kind of music I’d been listening to for years, it was getting really big – and Rihanna’s from Barbados, why she didn’t do that before? So I was like: ‘This means something, let’s do a remix for this song.’” She opted to do a cover in Catalan, and the resulting track – titled Pai – caused enough of a stir that Farelo was able to put out her own original mixtape, Slow Wine, nine months later. In February, she released her second. Worldwide Angel features production work from Popcaan collaborator Dubbel Dutch and Jam City (Kelela, Troye Sivan) and is packed with tracks that match sultry beats with the kind of heavily-autotuned desolation that characterises the trendiest rap. It’s an interesting moment for Catalan-language pop to go global. While Farelo says her multilingual music is less a reflection of any political beliefs and more a representation of her natural speech patterns – she tends to freestyle lyrics and melodies over producer-provided beats – she still has strong feelings on the region’s clamorous calls for independence. Viewing her Spanish and Catalan identities as tightly entwined (“No one can say I’m just Catalan or I’m just Spanish, we are mixed”), she sees the movement as a misdirection of efforts at a time of economic crisis for Spain. “I think it’s a little bit selfish,” she says. “I understand we have problems with our identity and our language and people are angry, but my mentality is that all the country is in a really bad situation. No one deserves that.” She says Catalans often want to secede “because we are moving more money”, but she doesn’t have time for this argument: “I don’t think it’s fair.” On the upside, there has never been a better time to be a reggaeton star. The genre – a Puerto Rican derivation of dancehall that incorporates hip-hop and Latin American sounds – has soundtracked Spanish adolescence for the past decade, and last year went properly global thanks to colossal hits such as Luis Fonsi and Daddy Yankee’s Despacito (which tied with Mariah Carey’s One Sweet Day as the longest running US No 1) and J Balvin’s Mi Gente, the popularity of which was bolstered by a Beyoncé remix. According to Farelo, the genre “is the culture” in her homeland, and as such is responsible for significant social changes there. “Young people feel really represented by reggaeton, and that’s what made our generation be less caring about dancing or women expressing themselves with the body,” she says. And while their elders have tended to look down on it, they are being gradually won over, too. “When I was a kid and I was listening to reggaeton, my father [Eduard Farelo, an actor and voiceover artist who has dubbed the likes of Michael Sheen and Colin Firth] used to get really angry, because I was talking about drugs and sex and I wasn’t realising what I was saying because I was nine years old,” she explains. “Now, he can recognise really good reggaeton songs. He put his pride aside and he’s like: ‘OK, this is good music.’” The following evening, Farelo takes to the stage in a sweaty Brighton club, flanked by two gravity-defying dancers. The Bad Gyal live show often feels less like a gig and more like a particularly demanding HIIT class, with Farelo repeatedly relinquishing vocal duties in order to glug iced water. Not that it dampens the raucous reception. If anything, the crowd are too busy dancing along to notice. It’s a testament to the charms of Farelo’s bristling and thoroughly modern contribution to the reggaeton revolution. Her dad won’t be the last unlikely convert.