I love tonnato so much that I could eat it for breakfast. It evokes sunshine for me – summery holidays where all cares in the world are fixed by peaches, white wine, anchovies, quiches and creme brulee (though not necessarily in that order). I fell for tonnato on one particular Italian holiday, when we ate it with veal. It was so mouthwatering that I was smitten. Here is a version loaded with vegetables, for the summer. To make a meal of this dish, serve it (and the excess it makes) alongside a roast chicken. A soft poached egg is an excellent addition to this salad, too. Prep 15 minCook 30-35 minServes 4 500g new potatoes2 tbsp olive or rapeseed oilSalt and black pepper300g string beans2 baby gem lettuces½ small red onion, very finely sliced For the tonnato4 anchovy fillets2 garlic cloves2 egg yolks120g sustainably caught skipjack tuna, drained2 heaped tsp dijon mustard2 tbsp lemon juice2 tsp white-wine vinegar150ml extra-virgin olive oil3 tbsp capers Heat the oven to 220C/425F/gas 7. Cut the potatoes into bite-size pieces (some will be small anyway, but cut any that aren’t into halves or thirds), put them in a roasting tray and toss in the oil and plenty of salt and pepper. Put in the oven and roast for 30-35 minutes, until golden and wrinkled. Next make the dressing. Put all the tonnato ingredients except for the olive oil and two tablespoons of the capers into the bowl of a food processor and blitz to a smooth paste. Once thoroughly mixed, slowly start pouring in the olive oil, with the machine running, in a thin, slow stream at first. Once half has been incorporated, go a little quicker. Once fully incorporated, add two tablespoons of cold water to loosen the dressing. Taste and adjust the seasoning with salt and perhaps a splash of vinegar, if needed. Bring a large pan of salted water to a boil and blanch the beans for three minutes, then drain and plunge into iced water. Once cool, drain and pat dry with a tea towel. Break open the lettuce, wash and dry. Spoon a pool of the dressing on to a large serving plate and arrange the leaves, beans, onion, potatoes and remaining capers on top. Serve any extra dressing on the side. If you don’t add the water to this dressing, it is delightfully thick and creamy. Serve it with crudités such as the roast potatoes above, hard-boiled eggs, strips of red pepper, sweet fennel, radish and so forth. Or eat with veal or pork, as is customary, either in chop form or with thin slivers of loin.