Donald Trump indicated on Monday that he accepted Vladimir Putin’s denial of meddling in the 2016 US presidential election over the findings of his own intelligence agencies, during an extraordinary press conference with the Russian leader in Helsinki. At a joint appearance following their summit in the Finnish capital, the US president said: “President Putin was extremely strong and powerful in his denial today.” Trump acknowledged that Dan Coats, the director of national intelligence, had told him that Russia was behind the cyber-attack on American democracy but that Putin insisted it was not. “I don’t see any reason why it would be,” he said. He then veered off into a rambling discussion of the Democratic National Committee’s server and Hillary Clinton’s missing emails – a move a seen by critics as a crude attempt to deflect and distract. “Where is the server? I want to know. Where is the server and what is the server saying?” For his part, Putin, addressing reporters at the Finnish presidential palace, reiterated his denial of election meddling. He said: “We should be guided by facts. Can you name a single fact that would definitively prove collusion? This is nonsense.” In the wake of last week’s indictment of 12 Russian military officers, Putin offered to allow the special counsel Robert Mueller’s team to visit Russia and witness the accused being questioned – but only if the US made a reciprocal offer concerning individuals charged with crimes on Russian territory. The Russian leader was also asked about claims that he holds compromising material on Trump; there have long been rumours of a video tape in which Trump was caught in a Russian hotel with sex workers. He quipped: “I was an intelligence officer and I know how dossiers are made up.” Putin added: “I did hear these rumours. When President Trump visited Moscow back then, I didn’t even know he was in Moscow ... Nobody informed me that he was in Moscow ... Please disregard these issues.” During the press conference Putin presented Trump with a football, with the US president saying he would give to his son, Barron, as he passed it to the first lady, Melania Trump, on the front row. This is a breaking news story. More details to follow …