At 16, Mark Warren says he struggled to spell “architecture”, let alone think he might enter the profession one day. Now aged 30, he’s an architect at a leading London practice. His passion was inspired by a teacher, Neil Pinder, who taught him design and technology at Graveney school, south-west London. Had it not been for Pinder, Warren is sure he would not be designing buildings for a living. Nearly 94% of British architects are white, despite 14% of the UK population being of a black and minority ethnic background. Warren’s mother, originally from the Philippines, worked “day and night in a range of menial jobs” to make ends meet, so joining a profession such as architecture was not on Warren’s radar. “No one in my family had been to university and, at the time, the thought of seven years’ studying without earning a penny was terrifying,” he says. Warren is featured, alongside some of Pinder’s other former students, in a new film due to premiere at the Royal College of Art (RCA) this month. Celebrating Architecture, which aims to encourage diversity in the profession, will be accompanied by architecture workshops for around 80 pupils from communities under-represented in the profession. Funded by the Greater London authority and the Architecture Foundation, which organises architectural exhibitions, competitions and debates, Pinder made the film with Venetia Wolfenden of the education and architecture consultancy Urban Learners. “The industry is beginning to recognise the need for diversity in the built environment and hopefully this film will bring the message to a wider audience ,” Wolfenden says. Helen Taiwo, a Liverpool University architecture student whose Nigerian mother works on a checkout till and Ghanaian father is an airport cleaner, is giving the film her backing. She says: “There are more than 100 students on my course, and only three of us are black. Initially, it was a shock to feel so under-represented. I grew up in London, where three in 10 people aren’t white.” And it is not just Taiwo’s ethnicity that is under-represented in architecture. Although half of architecture students are female, women make up only 26% of the profession. While Taiwo doesn’t believe her ethnicity or socioeconomic background directly hindered her career choice, she does think the black African community could be better informed about the profession. “People rate it highly but don’t know much about the course of study or career field. It could be why architecture is a less popular career aspiration in my community than medicine and law.” Lack of awareness about the profession is not the only problem. “Nepotism rules in architecture,” says Pinder. “I’ve got really strong industry contacts I’ve built up over the years, and which have helped many of my students. But my pupils from privileged backgrounds never tap me for them. Their parents already have those links.” Unconscious bias may also play a part. Pinder volunteers for Open House London, an annual event that gives the public access to architecturally important, and normally private, buildings for free, and has been “mistaken for the security guy”. These kind of experiences are not uncommon, he says, and can discourage students from ethnic minorities from pursuing professions such as architecture. The advent of the Ebacc and progress 8, which measures schools according to their pupils’ performance in academically focused GCSEs, means that getting intoa career such as architecture is likely to get more complicated. “Not enough emphasis is put on creative subjects in the new structure,” says Pinder, who notes that the number of pupils who sat GCSE exams in design and technology fell by 10% last year. He is concerned that this will fall further, and black and minority ethnic students could be hit hardest – something discussed at length in his film. Warren agrees: “I hope the film shows pupils like my younger self that they can have an architectural stake in their city. I want the London of tomorrow to be built by people who have lived in its social housing, who understand what makes it tick.” The Royal Institute of British Architects agrees the profession needs to change. Lucy Carmichael, RIBA director of practice says: “Architecture should be a rewarding career for talented people regardless of any aspect of their identity, but we have some way to go before the UK architecture profession, or construction industry, properly reflects the diversity of society at large.” She says the organisation is “supporting women’s progression in architecture through nationwide mentoring resources and have initiatives in place to reduce the gender pay gap”. She adds that the RIBA is backing the development of a new apprenticeship standard to provide a route to qualification for students from lower socio-economic and BAME backgrounds.