Glitter is usually sidelined as a festival look, or an accessory you dab on to make an office Christmas party more jazzy. But at Anna Sui they tried something new. Models’ eyes were left bare save for the most delicate stripe of shimmering silver down the middle of the lids. It was subtle enough that, if they didn’t blink, you’d miss it. Anna Sui said it represented “optimism”. Surely we could all benefit from trying that at home. 1. Butter London Glazen Eye Gloss in Mermaid £15, feelunique.com 2. Lime Crime Diamond Dew £18, selfridges.com 3. MUA Prism Eyegloss Kit £5, muastore.co.uk 4. Eyeshadow Trio £20, smashbox.co.uk 5. Kitten Palette £20, winkylux.com 6. Fenty Eye Shimmer £22, harveynichols.com 7. Rimmel Wonder’swipe Liner in Crave Me £6.99, superdrug.com 8. Autograph Liquid Shimmer £23, marksandspencer.com Who said suncare needed to be boring? Protect your skin with Unicorn Snot. Not only does it have an SPF of 30, but it sparkles, too. £10, shop.nationaltheatre.org.uk. Diptyque is known for its scented candles, but its skincare is just as delicious. Its new face mask is infused with wild pansies. And when you apply the invigorating Body Balm, with its melting texture of dry oil, it releases the smell of clementines. Summer nights, in a tub. £50, diptyqueparis.co.uk. Cult Korean acne stickers, Mighty Patch, have arrived in the UK. They’re ‘natural, cruelty-free, vegan-friendly’ circular gel stickers which use a fluid-absorbing agent called hydrocolloid to dry up spots overnight. Could they be the answer to your skincare problems? Let’s see. £12.99, amazon.co.uk. Email Eva at e.wiseman@observer.co.ukor follow her on Twitter@EvaWiseman This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.