Could not really have been expected to do anything about either goal and got a vital hand to the ball to thwart Sterling when one on one. 6 In for the suspended Mikael Lustig but struggled to fill those boots.. Lost possession in dangerous positions. Found his feet later on with a couple of important interceptions. 6 The Manchester United defender made a couple of important interceptions but was overwhelmed by the dominance of England. 5 The captain made a vital tackle to stop Sterling in the box when the forward looked likely to score but was unremarkable otherwise. 6 Left‑back failed to pick up Maguire for the goal and skied his free‑kick high above the bar in the closing minutes of the quarter-final. 4 Plays for Krasnodar in Russia and the gulf in class showed. He deserves credit for battling defensive work and troubling Pickford with a fizzing shot. 5 The Hull City midfielder returned after missing the Switzerland game but failed to make much difference and was largely anonymous. 5 Could not assert himself, despite an enviable work rate and was punished accordingly by England’s rampaging forwards. 4 Scored the decisive goal against Switzerland but could not perform heroics in Samara and no match for Maguire’s head in the penalty area. 4 Unlucky to be flagged offside when he got behind Maguire and produced two decent efforts which required Pickford’s intervention. Sweden’s biggest attacking threat. 6 The 32-year-old striker was out of his depth, although he played a good through pass for Claesson to create arguably Sweden’s best chance. 5 Substitutes John Guidetti The forward came on for Toivonen in the 65th minute. Booked. Martin Olsson The Swansea defender replaced Forsberg in the 65th minute. Pontus Jansson Leeds defender replaced Krafth in the 85th minute. The little guy who always goes with the wrong hand produced outstanding saves to continue a barnstorming World Cup tournament. 9 A couple of brilliant defensive headers to halt dangerous Sweden counterattacks and generally looked at home on the big stage. 7 Another assured display, his composure notable as he played the ball out from the back despite being under pressure. 7 One of England’s top performers of the tournament rose high above the Sweden defence to break the stalemate with a booming header. 8 Reinforced his claim to be the best right‑back at this World Cup with a masterly reading of the game and several perfect passes. 8 Another masterclass in midfield. A defensive brick wall and set the tempo, not to mention a great ball over the top to put Sterling free. 8 Lost possession a couple of times early on but delivered a pinpoint corner for the opener. No reason why he should be replaced by Danny Rose. 7 Perfectly weighted ball to Alli for the second goal and he grew into the game, contributing with energy as England’s tired bodies showed. 6 Looked nervous, possibly struggling for fitness, but in an assured second‑half performance his header doubled England’s lead. 7 A rare game off the scoresheet for the leading Golden Boot candidate but still played an essential role in bullying the Sweden defence. 7 Will be rightly criticised for a lack of composure in the box but his pace, movement and quick feet unsettled a few yellow shirts. 8 Substitutes Fabian Delph Replaced Alli in the 77th minute. Eric Dier Replaced Henderson in the 85th minute. Marcus Rashford Manchester United forward came on for Sterling in added time.