In the era of the rouleur-grimpeur – think Geraint Thomas, Tom Dumoulin and Primož Roglič – only a super-climber, so slight and so quick that he can escape the high-tempo climbing speeds of well-drilled teams, might be able to win the Tour de France. With Froome now 33 and Thomas set to win his first Tour at 32, the restless Dave Brailsford is already seeking a new leader at Team Sky. As the post-Froome era looms he believes that in Egan Bernal, the Colombian climber making his debut in this Tour, he has a rider so gifted he is capable of becoming just that. “My responsibility as team manager is to look two or three seasons ahead,” Brailsford said when asked about Bernal, before adding: “I’ve already got the team I want in three seasons’ time. “I’ve searched and searched for the rider that might be the next Chris Froome, who would be our next big leader for Grand Tours. My choice was Bernal, whom we absolutely had to have in the team. He’s our future.” In the Tour’s final mountain stage Brailsford’s decision to blood the 21-year-old in this year’s race was vindicated. After his sterling work on the Col du Portet on Wednesday, a stage in which his seventh-placed finish went almost unnoticed, Bernal was again called into action on the Col du Soulor, the “false” summit leading to the final mountain pass, the Col d’Aubisque. As Froome again slipped backwards, just as he had on the Portet, Thomas suddenly found himself isolated, fighting to keep pace with his biggest rivals, Dumoulin and Roglič. Behind the race leader, Bernal rescued the faltering defending champion Froome, towed him back to the lead group once more to assist Thomas and then moved to the front of the group, to resume pace-setting duties. He could not do enough to save Froome’s top-three position but, without Bernal’s presence, Thomas’s Tour might easily have slipped through his fingers. Bernal follows in a long line of Colombians who have come to the Tour, illuminated the mountain stages but flattered to deceive, the most recent example being Nairo Quintana, who despite great expectations has never genuinely looked likely to win the yellow jersey. Bernal came to prominence in mountain biking but was quickly snapped up by the talent factory that is the lowly Androni-Giocattoli team in Italy. As a teenager he took fourth place in the Tour de l’Avenir, a proving ground for young professionals, but then went on to win that race last year. Since joining Sky last winter he has come on in leaps and bounds. In fact Brailsford wanted him so much he bought out his contract with the Italian team and is understood to have paid them a compensatory “development fee” of around €350,000. Bernal has had a flying start with Sky. He beat Quintana and Rigoberto Uran – second in last year’s Tour – to win the biggest stage race in South America, the Colombia Oro y Paz, before then running Roglič close in the Tour of Romandie and winning the Tour of California later in the spring. Then came the Tour itself. Bernal speaks good English and, standing in the shade of his team bus one morning during the first week of this year’s race, he dismissed the suggestion that he was Team Sky’s secret weapon if Froome and Thomas failed to deliver. “No, I’m in a good position,” Bernal said. “I’m not riding for the GC, so it’s less stress. For Nairo,” he said of Quintana, “it’s heavy. If he loses time, it’s hard.” When the peloton reached Alpe d’Huez, a stage that this year was marked by near-hysteria at times, Bernal revealed an old head on young shoulders and, unfazed by the frenzy around the riders, paced his teammates through the crowds for the best part of eight kilometres. “We’ve never doubted that he was capable of great things,” Sky’s sports director, Nicolas Portal, said, “but even then he’s impressed us. Of the young riders his age he’s the best.” Where will Bernal be in 12 months’ time? Still under contract with Team Sky but perhaps assuming greater prominence, particularly if Froome is slipping towards decline. “I was a bit anxious about bringing him to the Tour,” Brailsford said. “For a young South American rider, without much experience of Europe, it was a risk but now I’m happy that I made the right decision.” Before the Tour began Bernal said: “I just want to be a good professional. And if that means I’m the guy who fetches the water bottles, then that will be fine with me.” After the way he has handled himself, during this often fractious race, he is unlikely to be carrying bottles for his team for that much longer.