More than 500 climbers are thought to be trapped on Mount Rinjani on the island of Lombok, a day after a 6.4-magnitude earthquake killed 16 people on the Indonesian island. Rescuers set off on Monday morning to help the climbers who are stranded at two points on the mountain, Indonesia’s disaster agency said, after landslides caused by the powerful earthquake blocked some trails off the mountain. Sudiyono the head of Mount Rinjani national park, said: “There are still 560 people trapped. Five hundred are in Segara Anakan area, and 60 are in Batu Ceper.” Sudiyono said the figure included Indonesian and foreign trekkers, including nationals from the US and Thailand. At 3,726 metres high, Mount Rinjani is the second-largest volcano in Indonesia and a popular destination for adventurous climbers. The strenuous trek to the summit takes at least two days and one night on the mountain. Asdiyanto, an official at North Lombok Disaster Mitigation Agency, said: “The latest information from the team in the field is that today all the families stuck on Mount Rinjani will be evacuated via the Sembalun trail. Korban meninggal dunia warga negara Malaysia (a.n. Siti Nur Ismawida, 30 tahun) akibat gempabumi di Lombok Timur disebabkan tertimpa dinding rumah yang roboh. Korban bersama 17 warga Malaysia akan mendaki Gunung Rinjani. Jadi korban meninggal bukan saat mendaki. pic.twitter.com/e14qRv9r1m “This is being handled by the management team from Mount Rinjani national park,” said Asdiyanto who, like many Indonesians, uses one name. The evacuation team, which set out at 7am, comprised 184 people, including military, police and medical personnel, volunteers and park staff. One of three key routes – the Senaru trekking route – leading to the summit has been cleared, park staff said. It remains unclear exactly how many climbers are stranded on Mount Rinjani. Local authorities put the figure at more than 400, but park staff put the figure at 560. Park officials closed the climbing route on Sunday morning and the stranded trekkers have been advised to stay in a safe place until the rescue team arrives. “Officers on the mountain are still guarding the climbers who cannot go down,” Sudiyono told Kompas on Monday morning, “All have been directed to stay calm and stay in a safe place from the landslide until help arrives.” According to local reports an Indonesian climber from Makassar was killed by falling rocks during the landslide. Other climbers are believed to be in good health. The death toll from the Sunday quake has risen to 16, including a Malaysian tourist who was found dead after the walls of the house where she as staying caved in on her. More than 67 people were seriously injured and more than 1,000 homes were damaged in the quake, which was followed by hundreds of smaller aftershocks that rattled people in the popular holiday destination. Indonesian president Joko Widodo arrived in Lombok on Monday morning to visit the victims and oversee the provision of aid, including cash to help residents rebuild their homes.