Siobhan McSweeney was born in County Cork, Ireland, and studied at the Royal Central School of Speech and Drama in London, where she currently lives. Her career began on the stage – she has appeared in five National Theatre productions and most recently performed a monologue by Maxine Peake, inspired by the 100th anniversary of women’s suffrage, at London’s Old Vic. Her role as the caustic nun Sister Michael was a standout in Derry Girls, Channel 4’s comedy about teenage girls set during the Troubles. Ahead of shooting season two, McSweeney returns to the stage in Rory Mullarkey’s surreal comedy Pity, which is at the Royal Court, London from Thursday. What drew you to the role of Sister Michael in Derry Girls?I’d already worked with the writer, Lisa McGee, on a previous show of hers in 2013 called London Irish. That script was the funniest thing I’d ever read so I’d do anything with Lisa. A lot of scripts pretend to be funny or are made funny by good actors or the laughter track, but she’s the real deal. Growing up, had you always wanted to be an actor?I always wanted to but it wasn’t something I thought I could do. When I was smaller I was sent to drama classes and there the idea of standing up in front of people and shouting at them started to take shape. I’m a weird anomaly in my family; they all thought I’d settle down and become a teacher or something but so far I seem to be getting away with it. Was Derry Girls’ success a surprise?It was, not because I didn’t think it would be a success but because there’s no meritocracy in this industry. There’s so many reasons why Derry Girls is a success, though, and one of them is because it filled a vacuum – the lack of realistic women on TV. We’re not seeing women being heroes in their own lives or being protagonists enough. Also the north of Ireland isn’t represented enough, and the girls themselves are brilliant. What appeals to you about comedy?There’s a common misconception that comedy is trivial but when you’re laughing in a group, you feel a sense of commonality and humanity, you feel alive. Who are your tips for comics to watch?I’ve just been tipped off about the US comedian Nore Davis who’s amazing. I recently went to a recording of the Guilty Feminist podcast which is hosted by Deborah Frances-White. Listening to it, I’ve been introduced to so many new female voices. In terms of theatre, there’s the company All In, which is run by Steve Sobal and Amalia Vitale; I met Steve while studying clowning and they do very funny and heartbreaking physical work. Tell us about Pity...It’s bonkers! What drew me to it initially was Rory Mullarkey’s writing and its innate theatricality. The type of plays I like are ones that need to be done in a theatrical space, rather than [those that feel like] a cheaper version of a film. The play is vast in its ambition. It’s a study on pity, which we define as closer to our current conception of empathy. There’s nine of us in the cast and we play an anarchic troupe that presents various situations to the audience in surreal circumstances over the course of a day. We test the idea of pity and isolate its components, like identifications with a person that might make you pity them – we then stretch that to its extreme to question how pity is packaged. It’s very funny, and humour is a wonderful prism to see complex issues through. Will the passing of the abortion referendum in the Republic now put a spotlight on Northern Ireland?There’s a lot to shift in the north because it’s been neglected for a long time. There’s not only the issue of abortion but also marriage equality and the outrage at May’s pairing up with the DUP. It makes me really angry because this is part of the UK – you wanted it, you got it – so people should know what’s going on there and at the moment there’s no government. Your average person in the north just wants to carry on with their lives, like in Derry Girls. It’s not everybody crying out of windows, it’s people trying to get their kids to school, get food on the table and have a laugh, and they have been truly neglected.