How do you solve a problem like Kuldeep Yadav? It is a question that could well be vexing English batsmen for the remainder of the summer after his six-wicket sorcery set up a thumping win for India in the opening one-day international at Trent Bridge. Certainly Eoin Morgan was hoping answers will come soon after this one‑sided affair. The left-arm wrist‑spinner’s six for 25 had rolled his troops for 268 in 49.5 overs, before a sparkling 137 not out from Rohit Sharma, and Virat Kohli’s cool 75, knocked off the target with 59 balls remaining and eight wickets to spare. “When he does bowl well, he’s very good. There’s no getting around that. He exposes an area of our game we need to improve on but that is a healthy thing,” said Morgan, who was hoping for less turn from the pitch come the penultimate ODI at Lord’s on Saturday. Kuldeep, fresh from the best figures by a spinner against England and having added to his five in the Twenty20 at Old Trafford last week, said: “I am enjoying English conditions, they are perfect for any spinner who turns it. I didn’t try anything new.” With Sharma following up his T20 series-sealing century in Bristol on Sunday with a 114-ball masterclass of 15 fours and five sixes, this was all a shock to the Trent Bridge regulars. In recent times they have seen England chew up visiting attacks, including the world record 481 for six put on a hapless Australia four weeks ago. But in this era where many fret about the plight of bowlers with the white Kookaburra in hand, Kuldeep proved the best can still prosper and now the question for India is whether to transfer his potent array of leg‑breaks, googlies and sliders to the Test series that follows this three-match encounter; removing four mainstays here – Joe Root, Jonny Bairstow, Jos Buttler and Ben Stokes – helps his case. Certainly at present the hosts appear no nearer to cracking his code, with Kuldeep’s introduction in the 11th over wiping out the top three in no time after Roy and Bairstow had responded to Kohli’s win at the toss with 71 runs in the initial power play. Roy was first to go for 38, clothing Kuldeep’s second ball to cover via the reverse sweep when a sighter might have been advisable, before Root and Bairstow completely failed to pick his variations in the follow-up over. The out-of-sorts Root missed a ball turning into him by six inches to be trapped in front playing back, while Bairstow, on 38, misread the one that went the other way to also fall lbw as Kohli successfully reviewed a delivery shown to have just pitched on leg stump. When Morgan chipped leg-spinner Yuzvendra Chahal to short mid-wicket in the 20th over, England were 105 for four and needed a significant rebuild. It came via contrasting half-centuries from Buttler and Stokes in a stand of 94 that looked to have compiled something resembling a launch pad for late hitting. Buttler was fluent, exuding his recent form with rapier-like drives and hustled running; Stokes, in for the dropped Alex Hales – who is now out of the series with a side strain – was laboured, compiling the third slowest half-century by an England batsman in ODIs from 102 balls. Though the pair negotiated Kuldeep’s second spell in their 19.4 overs together at the crease, it was his third and fourth that snuffed out any hope of a competitive total, with Buttler the first of three more to succumb when tickling a ball turning into him to the grateful MS Dhoni behind the stumps. Stokes held on, briefly, awaiting the charge but in the left-armer’s final over could not resist as a reverse sweep was acrobatically taken by Siddarth Kaul at backward point. The final ball of Kuldeep’s allocation – probably his worst – was a long hop struck by David Willey to the man at deep midwicket. Umesh Yadav may have snuffed out some late defiance with the wickets of Moeen Ali (24) and Adil Rashid (22) but it was clear where England’s problems lay, with the spinners – including some darts from Suresh Raina – picking up seven for 84 from their 23 overs. Morgen’s men huddled up on the outfield before the restart but what followed was a worryingly impotent response, as Sharma and Kohli reacted to the loss of Shikhar Dhawan through an imperious stand of 167 that had the blue-shirted members of the sell-out crowd in clover. Sharma was brutal, save for one half‑chance dropped by Roy at diving backward point on 92, and duly brought up his 18th one-day hundred off just 82 balls with a huge straight six off Rashid. England’s leg-spinner had some joy, picking up Kohli stumped before the end when he appeared totally at ease, but without the runs on the board, thanks to the sinister spin of Kuldeep earlier, Rashid and co were largely powerless to prevent the inevitable.