Route 66 may have long been decommissioned – officially ceasing to exist in 1985 – but thanks to its enduring legacy in pop culture and the imagination of travellers the world over, this historic route from Chicago to Santa Monica remains high on the list of must-do road trips. It might be synonymous with the motor vehicle, but now, if you want to get your kicks on Route 66, you can do so by bike. Last month, the first section of United States Bicycle Route 66, running from St Louis, Missouri, to the bottom of Kansas was opened as part of an ambitious set of plans by the Adventure Cycling Association to develop a country-wide network of trails called the United States Bicycle Route System (USBRS). Once complete, USBR66 will follow much of the original highway’s 2,448-mile trajectory, offering ample opportunity to lap up classic Americana in the towns along the way. “Riding this route really gives a glimpse into the soul of the American heartland,” said Brent Hugh, the executive director of the Missouri Bicycle and Pedestrian Federation. But it is not the only magnificent road trip route that can be enjoyed by pedal power – here are some adventurous suggestions for those whose other car is a bike. One of Canada’s best road trips, the 298km Cabot Trail runs around Cape Breton Island in Nova Scotia, offering stunning views of the coast to one side and the Highlands to the other. Though challenging, it also offers an incredible opportunity for cyclists, taking riders up into the forests before hurtling down towards the ocean where you can cool off with a dip at one of the many beaches. Featuring the eye-boggling Storseisundet Bridge, a twisting stretch described as “the road to nowhere”, the Atlantic Road is an 8.3km route that crosses a series of islets as it travels from Averøy to the mainland. As well as being heralded as one of the world’s most scenic drives, in 2010 it was voted the most beautiful bike ride in Norway. Designed as “the ultimate road trip” across north Scotland – and conceived as Scotland’s answer to Route 66 – this 516-mile scenic route, launched in 2015, also comes with an itinerary for those that wish to have an adventure by bike. The route can be completed in eight days, riding for about 65 miles on each. Highlights include sandy beaches, castles, lochs and mountains; the route starts and ends at Inverness Castle.