When Manuel Pellegrini was asked about the “West Ham way” last week, his answer was straightforward: “I always like to play offensive.” The sense remains, however, that in making Felipe Anderson his marquee signing in a busy transfer window the new Hammers manager knew he was signing a crowd pleaser. The winger arrives in east London after five years in Rome with Lazio. During that time he has had ups and downs, hot streaks and periods outside the team. But Anderson’s stats have remained consistently impressive. With real pace on the right-hand side and the technical level you would expect from a Brazilian international, he is now backing himself to deliver again in the Premier League. “People say I have the capability to be a protagonist in whichever team I play for and I believe that,” says Anderson, speaking through an interpreter. “My game is dribbling but I also want to concentrate on the team aspects of the game, whether that be marking or regaining possession. I want to do whatever is necessary for the team but then also to stand out in my own right.” Listen to him talk and it is clear Anderson has been paying attention since his arrival in England. He has absorbed the message, articulated also by Pellegrini, that no individual is bigger than the team. He also made sure to reference Bobby Moore when he first signed. He is confident in his ability but also in his opinions and, despite the language barrier, makes eye contact as he speaks. This is a player who has done his growing up. Anderson arrived at Lazio from Brazil in 2013 as the raw prospect, the kid Neymar – his teammate at Santos – described as “my little brother”. The hype was big, and two years later it got bigger. A series of eye-catching performances in the 2014-15 season – including a run of five goals and five assists in as many games over Christmas – drew the attention of every big club in Europe. A move never came to pass, however, and last year Anderson made only nine league starts as Lazio missed out on the Champions League spots on goal difference. Yet still, in just over 1,000 Serie A minutes he contributed seven assists and four goals. “I was out injured and the team did well without me”, he says, matter-of-factly, of his final year in Rome. “When I came back to fitness and then found my form the manager chose to stick with those who he had trusted in my absence and I understood that. But when I had the chance to come here I was really happy for the opportunity.” West Ham had the field to themselves for Anderson, something that would not have been the case two years ago, and although the fee of £36m is a club record, it is significantly smaller than the €50m Manchester United were reported to be willing to pay in 2016. On the one hand it’s a big investment, on the other the signing of Anderson could prove to be a bargain for West Ham. On the subject of pressure, Anderson is characteristically relaxed. “Obviously it’s a big responsibility and the club have put a lot of faith in me, but that’s part of the game,” he says. “I was at Santos with a number of big players and played in big matches as a young player. That experience means I can leave the pressure behind. All I have to concentrate on is working hard every day to help the team so that we gain victories and win friends.” Already a friend is Willian and Anderson consulted the Chelsea player about English football before making his move. He was told the game was fast – he knew that already – but that it would suit him. Anderson says he has no qualms about taking on a new division and, in particular, coming up against a more physical type of opponent than he may have been used to. “I understand that this league is a lot different to Italy, people use a lot of strength here, a lot of force,” he says. “But I’ve been watching that. The way I’m going to approach it is to work hard and play above it. I’m fast and I’m going to use my intelligence. I’m also going to listen to what my manager says.” West Ham have got themselves a Brazilian with pace and flair. But if they have one who’s willing to graft for the team as well, that status as a crowd favourite may be Anderson’s for the taking.