Whatever the names of the spin bowlers announced by Ed Smith they were less likely to cause Virat Kohli and his fellow batsmen sleepless nights than the heatwave. The selectors opted for Moeen Ali and, more surprisingly, Adil Rashid, which betrayed their short-term expediency. They would surely not have taken this course if the first Test was at Headingley, such is the anger in Yorkshire about Rashid’s recall.Yorkshire are now denied their little leg-spinner for their T20 campaign. It would surprise me if Rashid plays another game for the county whatever the format. Rashid will attract bile from Sheffield to Scarborough. In reality he should not be castigated. Imagine his position when asked whether he would be available to play Test cricket against India. Rashid is not the sort to engage in a philosophical debate about how his selection affects the value and purpose of Championship cricket, which he has rejected. That is more Smith’s territory, manna from heaven for leader writers. Instead Rashid’s response is similar to the rest of us. “Of course, I would like to play.” Any blame should be attached to the selectors, not Rashid. The Indian team will take a more sanguine view of this turn of events. In their last Test against England in Chennai in December 2016 India’s batsmen were confronted by Rashid and Moeen, who were augmented by Liam Dawson on his debut, and they seemed to cope reasonably well. India declared on 759 for seven in their solitary innings. Rashid took one for 153 from 29.4 overs, Moeen one for 190 from 41 overs and India won by an innings and 75 runs. Admittedly this was the end of the tour and England’s two frontline spinners were by then punch-drunk but these are haunting numbers. Rashid’s selection, on the heels of Jos Buttler’s more widely applauded recall in May, adds spice to an already appetising series. The debate over whether Rashid’s selection is unprincipled will rumble on especially in the north but there is also a case for arguing that it is far from expedient. Rashid will not enjoy being in the centre of a controversy about his selection and it could easily unnerve him. Moreover bowling wrist-spin in Test cricket is a far cry from the white‑ball game, where there is the insurance of four boundary fielders and the compulsion for batsmen to attack before they are ready to do so. It is true that Rashid can propel the odd unplayable delivery and the leg-break he bowled to Kohli at Headingley was a beauty – with major consequences. The expedient view might have been to retain Rashid as a white-ball bowler with his confidence sky-high until after the World Cup next year and then to entice him back to the red-ball game. There is the danger that amid all the hullaballoo Rashid will suffer and his confidence, which has often been a fragile commodity, will dip, whatever the colour of the ball. In part the selectors have been driven towards Rashid via a combination of bad luck and bad planning. Somerset’s Jack Leach made an impressive Test debut in Christchurch this spring after which he has been waylaid by a broken thumb and concussion. He has bowled 37 overs this summer and it is nearly August. Not that this state of affairs can be remedied. There is no Championship cricket until 19 August, which is also a major hindrance for Dom Bess, as well as any batsman eager to promote his Test claims. Bess played two Tests against Pakistan earlier in the summer and impressed by his sparkiness. The preference for Moeen in this Test squad is not so disturbing and nowhere near as daft as Somerset’s decision to omit Bess from their recent match at Worcester. Somerset can demonstrate they won that game but how they can justify playing Peter Trego, albeit the most endearing of cricketers, ahead of Bess is hard to fathom. They probably will not do that again. Bess was none too pleased by that selection and he was sent off to play in the second team. He promptly hit 185 out of 324 for nine in a second XI match against Middlesex – increasingly that is where our Test players have to prepare, which was an impressive response to being omitted. Bess may not be England’s best off-spinner but he is now good enough to play in any county team – especially during a drought. The other notable selection is Jamie Porter of Essex, who was contemplating the virtues of giving up cricket and becoming an estate agent about four years ago. Smith was keen to stress his achievements in county cricket over the past two years. It is unlikely that Porter will make the final XI at Edgbaston and the sceptical view is that his selection is a sop towards the Championship – “Don’t worry. Of course we value what happens in county cricket.” Try telling that to a Yorkshireman today and they will not believe you.