It took Russell Norman a glass or two of wine to ask what the locals were drinking. This was Venice in the mid-00s and, in the city’s back-street bars such as Caffe Rosso and All’Arco, Norman kept noticing big drinks glowing orange or red. These were Aperol or Campari spritzes, he was told, an assemblage of those tangy apéritifs, local white wine and “seltz” (soda water to us in the UK), garnished with lemon and an olive. Though he didn’t know it then, Norman was researching what would become his first restaurant, Polpo – now a small chain of Venetian-inspired eateries – and when it came to opening in 2009, he needed a signature drink. “We were a regional restaurant, and the spritz seemed an important hallmark of what we were trying to do.” Unsure whether punters would take to them – “Aperol was a complete unknown, Campari was a bit naff” – Polpo gave away spritzes when people walked in. They went down a storm. Ironically, the spritz’s roots lie in hiding certain flavours rather than celebrating them Fast-forward to today and spritzes have moved from obscurity to ubiquity in the UK. Sainsbury’s reports Aperol sales are up 38% year-on-year and Campari 16%, while Norman says that, between its six sites, Polpo has been shifting between 1,500 and 2,000 spritzes a week during the heatwave, “and one-third of those from our smallest restaurant, a 40-seater on Chelsea’s Duke of York Square: we’re seeing a direct correlation between sitting outside and drinking spritz”. Why the surge in popularity? Partly, it is marketing. Grupo Campari, which owns Campari and Aperol, has funnelled giant budgets into the latter especially, which included a sponsorship deal with Manchester United in 2014; promotional accessories (RIP my Aperol sunglasses, lost at Notting Hill carnival in 2012); and a roster of events including the Aperol Spritz Social in east London in June – not just two spritzes and a few bites for a tenner but also an Aperol-hued canal with rowing boats and a carousel of lurid orange Vespas. Low-key, then. In the mainstream, spritz drinkers fall into two camps: the orange and the red. More successful is Aperol, the Serena Williams to Campari’s Venus, although the Williams analogy ends there because Campari is significantly stronger (25% to Aperol’s 11%). Aperol’s modest ABV may well be key to its popularity, tapping into a trend toward lower-alcohol drinks, particularly among young people. Alcohol consumption is dropping across the board, with 45% of 25- to 34-year-olds saying they drink more no- or low-alcohol drinks than a few years ago, while low-alcohol wine now occupies 3% of the market. Served over ice in a large glass and topped up generously with soda, the spritz’s appeal to that growing breed of moderate millennials is easy to understand. It is, as chef and Campari devotee Jeremy Lee puts it, “a thirst quencher with a gentle canter attached”. There is no doubting that the Aperol spritz is Instagram gold. Search the #spritz hashtag and your screen will be awash with lurid orange drinks alongside similarly orange millennials, spritz tattoos and spritz merch. Ex-Made In Chelsea star Millie Mackintosh and Benedict Cumberbatch are both fans of the drink, while it’s arguable that Donald Trump even shares genetic material with it. The definition of a spritz varies depending on where you are. In essence, says Kay Plunkett-Hogge, the author of Aperitivo: Drinks and Snacks for the Dolce Vita, it’s a drink of white wine, soda and Italian bitter liqueur over ice – “I favour one part of each” – and can be traced back to the mid-19th century, when Venice (or Lombardy-Venetia) was part of the Austrian empire. “The story goes that Austrian soldiers didn’t much like the local wines, so they took to adding soda water to punch up their acidity. So ‘spritz’ derives from the German spritzer, ‘to spray’.” In other wealthy north Italian cities such as Milan and Turin, where pre-dinner aperitivo culture is deeply embedded, prosecco and an orange slice replace the white wine and olive of Venice. This is the style favoured on British soil and, personally, I’ve always thought Campari or Aperol to be a handy weapon for masking cheap sparkling wine. Ironically, then, for something so adored for its taste today, the spritz’s roots lie in hiding certain flavours rather than celebrating them. A combination of spritz fever and the steady march of lower-alcohol drinks has prompted large wine producers to launch their own ready-mixed versions. Gallo Vineyards Spritz (pineapple and passionfruit with a pinot grigio base, or raspberry and lime with a grenache rosé base) is 5.5% ABV – which the Grocer reports to have been developed for 22- to 30-year-old female drinkers – while, at 8.5% and flavoured with blood oranges, Jacob’s Creek Aperitivo Spritz is perhaps an iota more sophisticated. Nonetheless, both, not to mention the Barefoot, Blossom Hill and Echo Falls equivalents, all seem to miss the point, excluding the bitter component, which is surely the very essence of a spritz. More interesting – or maybe just better marketed – is Ramona, a spritz developed by New York City-based sommelier Jordan Salcito. Now the director of special projects at David Chang’s Momofuku group, Salcito says her go-to aperitif was always a spritz (“delicious, easily drinkable and low alcohol”), and Ramona was born from her thirst for a portable one in a can. Grapefruit-infused, 7% ABV and with a base of organic Sicilian rosé, it taps into last year’s rosé resurgence, as well as trends for low-alcohol drinks, natural wines and flavoured sparkling waters. Rumour even has it that, having asked for the coolest drink the bar had, Kanye West was seen drinking Ramona at the MTV Video Music awards after-party – and P Diddy and Alicia Keys followed suit. In the UK, not least with these sizzling temperatures, the rise of the spritz continues unabated. Some bars serve Aperol Spritz on tap, others have whole spritz-dedicated menus, serving up ever more creative spins on that original formula of aperitif-plus-wine-plus-soda: St-Germain elderflower liqueur with rose, maybe; or the Dandelyan bar in London’s Pantone spritz of “Plymouth gin, black rice, Cocchi Rosa, corn syrup and bubbles”; or, indeed, the alternative spritzes now popular in Venice. Norman says there is a movement of young Venetian restaurateurs and bar owners “who have seen their city and culture appropriated by the rest of the world, and are trying to claw it back”. Aperol and Campari are sidelined in favour of the more herbal and vegetable bitters enjoyed by their grandparents – Amaro, Cynar – which, if you can overlook their muddy water complexions, hit the spot in a spritz. That’s what the locals are drinking; you heard it here first. So, unlike Norman, you won’t have to pluck up the courage to ask. All in a tumbler filled with ice ... 1 part Cynar1 part Prosecco1 part sodaA squeeze of grapefruitGarnish with another slice of grapefruit 1.5 parts Pimms2 parts Prosecco1 part sodaGarnish with celery leaves or cucumber 1 part St-Germain2 parts rose wine1 part sodaGarnish with a slice of lemon 1 part Crodino (Campari’s non-alcoholic aperitif) 1-2 parts tonicGarnish with a slice of lemon This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.