Most of Johanna Konta’s very good and marginal qualities were on show on day two at Wimbledon, as she overcame her own nerves and a rousing fightback by the 21-year-old Russian Natalia Vikhlyantseva to start her campaign on No 2 Court with a 7-5, 7-6 (7) win in just under two hours. “The first round is always tricky, both players trying to find our footing, and the wind was very tricky,” the British No 1 said courtside. “[I had] a few nerves, but I enjoyed every second of it. I didn’t do too much wrong, and she played some good points. I’m playing these championships independent of what happened last year. I’d like to think I’m a little wiser. I’m working very hard to be here for the full two weeks. I think I stayed my own best fan, feeding myself good thoughts.” The serve in tennis is like the jab in boxing: everything works off it – and, if it malfunctions, heartache beckons. That has happened too often to Konta since she slid out of the top 10 with no discernible handbrake on 15 January to No 24 arriving here. And on another perfect, sunny day she moved over the grass as if she had not a care in the world – which, for anyone who knows her, is a state she aspires to in life and in tennis. She told the Guardian magazine on Saturday her greatest achievement was: “Being happy. I think that transcends the results of my matches, the so-called successes or failures.” Yet that is the only barometer used in sport: winning or losing. There is little point to it, otherwise, but Konta feels more comfortable ignoring results and taking heart from performances. In a sport riddled with tics, Konta has her share, from the little skip back to the service line after winning a point, to that elaborate, archer-like ceremony before she serves – but they work for her, and her serve was back in working order on Tuesday. Vikhlyantseva has had an ordinary season, and arrived here with four straight losses on her CV. But big tournaments lift any player, and she looked strong in the early exchanges. There were no break points in the first quarter of an hour as both of them settled into a pleasing rhythm. Ten minutes later Konta looked a little shaken when she slipped on the baseline in the seventh game, after forcing Vikhlyantseva to save a break point, the first glimmer of a breakthrough. The pressure momentarily switched ends when Konta held to stay in the set at 4-5 – but she immediately unleashed a burst of shot-making to break and hold to love for the first set after 41 minutes. It was a momentum shift Vikhlyantseva was at first powerless to resist. She dropped serve at the start of the second set and then slipstreamed Konta all the way to the seventh game, where she had to save two break points. But a run of 11 of 16 points gave her a 5-4 lead on serve and, after 45 minutes of an enthralling set, Konta had to save twice in the 10th game to stop the Russian’s charge to parity in the match. It was very much an even contest as they went to the tie-break, where Konta was 3-3 this season, Vikhlyantseva 1-2. The Russian’s nerves were raw, still, and she struck her ninth double fault as Konta steeled herself to close it out, but Vikhlyantseva fought tenaciously to save four match points. At the fifth opportunity, Konta double-faulted for the fourth time, before edging ahead 8-7, stroking a volley to close it out. On Thursday, she plays Slovakia’s Dominika Cibulkova, the two-times quarter-finalist who was bounced from the seedings by the inclusion of Serena Williams, and on day two beat the French player, Alizé Cornet, 7-6 (3), 6-1, on Court eight.