“It’s like Mike Tyson fighting some random guy off the street,” laughs Emad Megahed, as we sit down at a chrome table in Cafe Nova, in Elephant and Castle’s famous shopping centre in south London. Megahed runs a small IT support company, the Tekk Room, in the centre and is also chair of the Elephant and Castle Traders Association. He and his fellow traders – 117 in the mall and its “moat” outside, the vast majority small, independent businesses – are gearing up, again, to fight for their livelihoods. Property developers Delancey want to transform the Elephant with a whole new “town centre”, including new facilities for the London College of Communication (LCC) and new housing and retail units. Their plans are being fiercely resisted by local traders, who are joined in opposition by Southwark Notes, Latin Elephant, 35% Campaign, Southwark Defend Council Housing, LCC student representatives and other local groups, who say it would destroy one of the most multicultural working-class communities in London. Megahed is from Egypt and opened the Tekk Room, his first business, in 2010. “I’ve made mistakes, I’ve fallen down and got back up – and I’ve learned so much. I’ve even learned Spanish.” He decided to learn the language to better serve Elephant and Castle’s large Latin American community, he says. “I made a name for myself and my business. People come to me and ask for advice on their devices, or even just for a chat. “In my life I’ve never had the chance to travel the world, but I feel like I have done by living and working here. I’ve made friends from so many different cultures, and so many different countries – that’s what this community is like. Why would you want to destroy it?” The battle between Delancey and the campaigners lined up in opposition has posed a challenge to the orthodoxies of urban regeneration in London. At 2am on 17 January, after an eight-hour meeting, Southwark Council’s planning committee voted 4-3 (with one abstention) against the developer’s plans for the area, with the objections amounting to a shorthand for regeneration as gentrification. Critics said Delancey’s vision lacked affordable retail units for the existing traders and a persuasive transition plan during construction; and was woefully short on affordable housing, in an area with a chronic demand for it. Only 33 of Delancey’s new homes were to be at social rent – just 3% of a total of almost 1,000. It’s really important to recognise that we are investing in Elephant and Castle for the long term Delancey have since increased that number to 116 – although in the process the number of homes available at the next tier of affordability, “London living rent” (for households with incomes of up to £60,000), has been slashed from 138 to 54. On Tuesday night, the council planning committee will meet for the crunch vote on Delancey’s updated proposal, and the future of Elephant and Castle. Stafford Lancaster, a director at Delancey, told Southwark News that it was possible that it might be able to provide more lower-cost housing once the new town centre became more established: “It’s really important to recognise that we are investing in Elephant and Castle for the long term.” But Jack Buck, the Southwark Labour councillor, urged his colleagues on the planning committee to reject the new plan on the basis it still fell short of the council’s own affordable housing policy, requiring 17.5% social rented housing, or 170 homes. “Delancey has done little to nothing to improve the scheme and ... it has still failed to reach even the minimum expectations of the local authority and the local community,” he wrote on Thursday. “This is nothing short of disgraceful.” Last Thursday, a demonstration against Delancey’s plans brought the roundabout’s rush hour traffic to a standstill, with speeches in Spanish as well as English amid a flurry of homemade banners. “This is a pattern we’re seeing across London: universities partnering with big ... property developers,” said Sahaya James, campaigns officer for the LLC student union ArtsSU. The LCC’s support of the plan offers the council “a kind of loophole” to get around its lack of compliance with their own social housing requirements, she said. “Here’s this not-for-profit organisation, an arts university, which styles itself as progressive – so maybe the council can overlook [it]. “LCC have a lot of leverage, they’re enabling it. It’s effectively artwashing to facilitate the social cleansing of the area.” A spokesman for LLC said in an open letter that it believes Delancey’s updated proposal would “offer many educational, cultural and economic opportunities for local communities” while also allowing the university to remain in the area as a key employer. It’s a celebration of what is best about London​ – a meeting place of cultures As the protest circled the shopping centre, it paused for more speeches on the site where the Heygate estate’s 1,200 mostly council flats once stood. Activists chalked “We are the Elephant” on the paving stones beneath the first of the luxury towers built to replace the Heygate. Portchester House contains 373 new homes – with not a single affordable unit – and 272 student rooms, starting at rents of £279 per week, rising to a staggering £435 per week. This and other harbingers of change now ring the shopping centre like Roman legions around Asterix’s village, with many more still under construction. The shopping centre has more than just commercial value to the community, said many campaigners: it is a meeting place. Jerry Flynn of the 35% Campaign highlighted the importance of the bingo hall as a social hub for older locals, along with many of the cafes. “These might seem like small things to Delancey, but they’re big things to us, people who’ve lived here for decades,” he said. “You’ve got the government talking about how isolation is an epidemic, especially among older people, with no other family, network, or meeting place,” said Natalia Perez from the campaign group Latin Elephant. “If you go to the shopping centre at any time of day, you’ll find lots of older people of all ethnic backgrounds, who go there for the purpose of socialising.” Many locals cite the area’s relaxed multiculturalism as its greatest asset: many of the businesses are south or central American, but also Caribbean, south Asian, west and north African. There is even a “Thai and Spanish” food stall, Kubolonia, offering a “fusion of cultures”: pad thai and croquetas. Since the 1990s Elephant and Castle’s Latin community in particular has grown and thrived: it becomes a sea of yellow whenever Colombia’s football team play – as they will at the same time as the crucial planning committee meeting, against England – and on the day of the demo, many red-and-white shirts were on show, because of Peru’s game against France. “It’s a celebration of what is best about London – a meeting place of cultures, where we can celebrate our differences and discover what we have in common, too,” said Perez, adding that many of the area’s Latin residents had lived there for over 20 years. “They’re breadwinners, they have dependants, they’ve built up a thriving community – and the whole development threatens a lifelong project for many people. “The uncertainty has been bad enough – where will they relocate? How much will it cost? Will they lose their loyal customers? Will they be hidden away? There’s inter-dependency among them too – the businesses rely on each other, and all of that is under threat.” Traders complain that it has been impossible to plan for the future because of the lack of firm promises over relocation. One cafe owner was struggling over whether to buy a replacement for her ailing catering-sized fridge, knowing that, if she is evicted from the premises early in 2019 as Delancey proposes, she would be left with a white elephant of an altogether different kind. Places like Westfield are so depressing. You go there and you feel like you’re alone, even when it’s busy A spokeswoman for Delancey said in a statement that it was in both the company’s and traders’ interests to ensure that the shopping centre continued to operate effectively and if its application was granted, “this will remain the case up until closing”. But Megahed believes Delancey are trying to make the demolition of the centre a fait accompli by allowing services to falter. “The escalator was out of order for three months, the toilets were closed for almost a week – that sends a message, a signal, that the centre is on its way down. Indirectly they are affecting our trade, and our takings are down day by day.” In its statement, Delancey said it remained committed to ensuring the continued maintenance of the centre but added that it was over 50 years old, “and as is often the way with older buildings, some elements do unfortunately fail”. The delay in repairing the escalator was because it was so old, spare parts were no longer made and had to be specially manufactured, the spokeswoman said. The shopping centre has long attracted scorn and been dismissed as an eyesore – not least because of its “manky, hot-pink” exterior, as Time Out once put it – but some see that as part of its charm, with the Guardian’s property section once describing it approvingly as the “anti-Westfield”. Now its traders and patrons fear it is going to be flipped from one extreme to the other, with chain stores filling the new commercial units to match the new luxury flats. “Places like Westfield are so depressing,” sighs Megahed. “You go there and you feel like you’re alone, even when it’s busy. People don’t smile, it’s like you’re in a concrete jungle, everyone looks busy or unhappy. But this is a community of friends.” He gestures to Cafe Nova’s manager, Sharif. “I joke around with Sharif because I know him, but I guarantee you if you don’t know Sharif, if you come to Cafe Nova and order a coffee, he’s still going to crack a joke with you. “You’re not going to meet people with that stern professional face because their boss is watching them on CCTV, or a bored teenager who is going to quit tomorrow.” Drastic changes to the area have been mooted, discussed, contested and shelved for decades. The demolition of the shopping centre has been on the cards since Megahed opened Tekk Room there in 2010. Aren’t the traders prolonging their own pain by delaying an inevitability? They want a quicker solution, Megahed demurs, but not one that leaves them out in the cold, relocated a mile or more away; many fear their businesses will fold soon after eviction, before new units are even completed on the site. “They want to develop the area, sure, we know that’s going to happen – but not everybody likes big expensive brands; some people like local traders, and the personal touch, the quick service, the friendly face; picking up a cheap falafel wrap or an empanada. The cost will be handed down to the consumer. “People have to understand, redevelopment can be good, it can bring new people, fresh blood, but it also brings extra expenses, new costs as well. Regeneration can be a good thing in itself – but it shouldn’t be done at the cost of poor people.” Follow Guardian Cities on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram to join the discussion, and explore our archive here 