The director John Tiffany sits in a sunny alcove of the Palace Theatre in London. In a few hours an orderly queue will form on the street below and snake its way around all four sides of the building in preparation for another showing of Harry Potter and the Cursed Child. A significant portion of those waiting in line will be colour-coded according to their Hogwarts house. Some will be children but most will be young adults. The generation who grew up with Harry are legion and they have waited a decade to find out what happened next. Two years after the Cursed Child premiered in the West End it still regularly sells out four shows a week. In April it began showing on Broadway. Next week tickets will go on sale for the Melbourne season, which will begin preview shows in January. “I am really excited,” Tiffany says. “There are some real treats in the principal cast for Australia. It’s going to cause a whole new controversy.” The first controversy was the decision to cast the Olivier award-winning actor Noma Dumezweni, a black woman, as Hermione Granger, the character popularised on film by the white actor Emma Watson. Watson has praised Dumezweni’s performance. Tiffany didn’t set out to spark an internet-wide debate; he just wanted to cast Dumezweni. It has paid off: she earned a second Olivier award and a Tony nomination, one of four nominations and six wins the Cursed Child received at the Tony awards in June, including best play. The casting choice was also well received by a majority of Harry Potter fans, a large group of whom already read Hermione as being black. With Dumezweni and the rest of the principal West End cast on Broadway, the Welsh actor Rakie Ayola has stepped into the role. The Australian cast is yet to be announced but Tiffany says casting Hermione as a person of colour is immutable. “I never want to drop what kind of quota of diversity we have got,” he says. “I think it’s really important that we say: no, we need that number of non-white actors in this cast. But that’s not to say that I can’t do some mixing up.” The Cursed Child picks up where Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows left off, in the epilogue that takes place 19 years after the battle of Hogwarts. Albus Severus Potter, Harry’s second son, is saying goodbye to his family on platform 9¾ before boarding the Hogwarts Express for the first time. Harry, Hermione and Ron are 37 years old. Hermione is minister for magic and married to Ron; Harry is married to Ron’s sister Ginny, and head of the department of magical law enforcement. Albus Severus – named for Professor Albus Dumbledore, the twinkly-eyed headmaster who manipulated Harry into volunteering for death, and Severus Snape, the potions teacher who bullied and protected him in equal measure – is nervous that he will be sorted into Slytherin house. He meets Scorpius Malfoy, the son of Harry’s former rival, on the train, and the two become friends. Several years flick by, during which Albus is sorted into Slytherin, relentlessly bullied, and becomes increasingly angry at his father. It’s perhaps unsurprising that, given the succession of father figures who died in fairly grisly ways in the service of a war that only he could win, Harry turned out to be fairly rubbish at being a dad. It is a love story between Scorpius and Albus in lots of ways That’s the adult’s pitch. There is also time travel, dark magic, a return to the triwizard tournament of the fourth book, Harry Potter and the Goblet of Fire, and surprise cameos by characters whose appearances were met by gasps – and in one case, hissing – by the London audience. We cannot go into more detail. Despite the script, written by the playwright Jack Thorne and based on an original story by Rowling, being available to purchase since Harry’s 36th birthday on 31 July 2016, it has remained remarkably unspoiled for most audiences. A campaign encourages people to #keepthesecrets and, surprisingly, those secrets have been kept. The play is split into two parts, with a combined running time of five and a half hours. Audiences give up an entire day or two consecutive evenings to see it, a model that spawns lengthy theorising in the intermission. It was the decision to focus on Harry’s experience of trauma that won the producers Sonia Friedman and Colin Callendar the right to continue the story, which Rowling said had been put to bed for good with the publication of Deathly Hallows in 2007. At the time she had said the epilogue had been written to put a cap on Harry’s story, not to leave the door ajar for something more. “[They] said we want to explore Harry, how he deals with the fact that for 11 years he did not know anyone cared, what that kind of abuse does to you when you become a parent yourself,” Tiffany says. “She was very clear that she was done writing Harry Potter when she wrote 19 years later, but in terms of the relationship between Harry and Albus that was there … it was so clear that that was going to be the centre of what we did. It seeded that possibility.” To that they added a new story of magic, mystery and adventure, because, despite Harry’s greying temples and Ron’s depressed realisation that he now makes an “oof” sound when he stands up too quickly, it still retains the properties of a children’s story. “If we put on a kind of ‘Harry Potter as Samuel Beckett’ with these long monologues and tortured soul and whatever, that wouldn’t work,” Tiffany says. “We have got to bring darkness back. It has got to match the epic nature of the book ... it’s got to feel that exciting.” Excitement, in Harry Potter, equals magic. That is an easy proposition in both a novel and a multimillion-dollar movie franchise, where imagination and CGI trickery provide the necessary sparks. It is harder to achieve on stage but, perhaps because the creators do not have a green screen to fall back on, the magic here feels more authentic to the original novels than anything produced by Warner Bros. There are a selection of suitcases, which provide both scene setting for King’s Cross station and the seats of the Hogwarts Express. There are two staircases which form a weaponised bookshelf, the top of the Hogwarts Express, and the ever-changing staircases of Hogwarts itself. There is an air of make-believe to the magic that works better than expensive visual effects because it relies not on spectacle but on the actors themselves. “It’s the opposite of film, really,” Tiffany says. “You need to leave enough space for people’s imagination. It’s much closer to reading novels, the theatre.” He laughs when asked about budget. “This is the expensive version,” he says. “It’s much more expensive to do something simple than it is to do something overstuffed with a glitter cannon.” The sparse staging allows the focus to be on the often strained human relationships, particularly between Harry and Albus; Harry and Ginny; Harry and a Shakespearean echo of Dumbledore; and Harry and his own anguish. It is the angry Harry of the Order of the Phoenix but with a depth of guilt and hurt that make his outbursts almost painful to watch. One source of the tension between Harry and his moody teenage son is Albus’s intense friendship with the delightful Scorpius, of whom he disapproves. The friendship has sparked accusations of “queerbaiting”, a term used by fan communities to describe narrative properties that imply a same-sex relationship but do not explicitly address sexuality. LGBT fans have already said they feel let down by the franchise because of the treatment of Dumbledore, whose sexuality was revealed by Rowling in an interview seven months after the last book was published. That criticism is centred around the decision not to show Dumbledore as “explicitly gay” in the upcoming Fantastic Beasts 2 movie, where a young Dumbledore will be played by Jude Law. Tiffany, who is himself gay, said it “would not be appropriate” in the Cursed Child, which begins when Scorpius and Albus are 11 and ends when they are 15. “We don’t say how [Scorpius] is going to carry on with the rest of his life,” he says. “It is a love story between Scorpius and Albus in lots of ways,” he adds. “But that does not mean it’s sexual. I suppose the whole queerbaiting thing is just people saying ‘I want more representation’ and ‘I want explicit representation’. But also that would become the story.” • Tickets for the Melbourne season of Harry Potter and the Cursed Child will go on sale at 9am AEST on Monday 6 August • Guardian Australia attended the Cursed Child in London as a guest of Harry Potter Theatrical Productions