The head of cycling’s world governing body, David Lappartient, has issuing a stinging retort to Sir Dave Brailsford, accusing him of “pouring oil on the fire” by criticising the French public for booing Team Sky’s riders. Brailsford’s comments on Monday followed his attack on Lappartient earlier in the Tour de France when he accused him of having a “French mayor” mentality. A clearly exasperated Lappartient, who as well as being the mayor of Sarzeau in Brittany became president of the UCI last year, said that Brailsford should have tried to calm a situation which has also led to Chris Froome being cuffed by one fan and spat at by another, rather than inflame it by saying that there was something wrong with the French and French culture. “He started with the mayors, now he attacks the spectators,” said Lappartient. “I would say two things. First, there are not only French spectators, there are spectators of all nationalities at the Tour. Second, it is not very healthy for his team to nationalise the debate whereas we are calling on the public to be calm, to ensure that the riders, and especially Chris Froome are respected.” On Monday Brailsford had told reporters, “We know we’re going to get abuse and we know that not a lot is going to be done about it.” He also revealed that Team Sky’s young marketing executive, Emma Kennaugh, had also been spat at – and directly criticised France fans for their behaviour. But Lappartient insisted those remarks went too far. “Pouring oil on the fire is not very good. We must not forget that Team Sky owe their success to what has been done through the Tour de France and France,” he added. “He must be frustrated to see that there is not a love for him or his team, however, we must not attack the people of any country. We must respect all the spectators, the people who come are people who love cycling. “When you are the manager of the team, you should try not to insult those who come to see the race.” But while being fiercely critical of Brailsford, Lappartient praised the behaviour of Geraint Thomas and Froome. “Geraint Thomas and Chris Froome have, for me, the right attitude. Chris Froome says he likes France, and that he trains every day in France. He speaks our language, he also knows what the Tour de France brought him. “While the riders, like us, try to reduce the pressure, their sports director puts oil on the fire while there is no need to do it. I invite him to pay attention.” Lappartient also admitted that some TV viewers had been put off by Team Sky’s dominance of the race and their tactics. “We cannot blame the winning team and its strategy, but people want to dream. They want to see the show. And it’s a bit boring.” He added: “We look carefully at the UCI audiences and the number of spectators. It did not escape me that there were obviously fewer people in Alpe d’Huez than some years. We want there to be people on the roads of the Tour de France. We want there to be viewers for our sport. The heavy atmosphere at the beginning of the Tour played a part. It’s a reality. Right or wrong.” The UCI president also said he wouldn’t mind Team Sky finishing first and second on the podium as long as it was an exciting finish. “If we have a good fight between them and they are the two best, I have no problem with that,” he said. “What I would like is that we vibrate. We have to vibrate a little.”