I am a 68-year-old woman and separated from my husband four years ago, after being married for 42 years. We have children and grandchildren. My ex-husband was a serial adulterer but this time I was so hurt and angry I had the strength to ask him to leave. Our marriage had not always been easy and we didn’t communicate well; I had often felt lonely. There was a lot of acrimony in the divorce proceedings. I shouldered the burden of sorting things out, including selling our home. I don’t feel I was being difficult – I wasn’t looking for any more than our finances to be halved, but he thought I was being controlling. I did survive moving house, divorce, the death of my father, but at great emotional cost. I was OK for a while but then last year my ex sent me a message saying he didn’t want never to speak to me again. I wasn’t ready to be his friend. I sent him a message saying I felt unable to speak to him at the moment, but I was OK and hoped that he was, too. He said he had only contacted me because one of our children had asked him to. Since then I have been questioning decisions I made, my own self-worth and generally feeling very low about everything. I seem to be incapable of making decisions. I worry about money and feel so lost sometimes. I had started to build a new social life and make new friends but, over the last year, have been withdrawing from people and not being as open to them. I don’t feel able to speak about my feelings. When you stopped putting up with your husband’s serial infidelity, I think he mistook you being “in control” with “being controlling”. They are not the same thing. Good for you for having the strength to get out, and I’m sorry to hear about your father. Your emotional landscape has indeed been rocky these last few years and this is bound to take its toll. We can cope with things in the short-term, because dealing with what’s right in front of us (funerals, divorce lawyers, estate agents) takes up our immediate, practical attention. The emotional fallout comes afterwards, when life becomes more normal. When people get together at a very young age, they can sometimes remain stuck, emotionally, where they were when they met. In some ways, you are still the teenager you were when you met your husband. You’ve been defined by your marriage for so long that it’s going to take time to rediscover who you are outside of it. This was a marriage in which you couldn’t communicate, so very probably thinking about how you feel, and being able to act on it, is a new freedom for you, which will take time to get used to. But you’ve shown courage and impressive resilience – have a little faith in yourself. Chris Mills, a psychotherapist who works with separating couples, said that what you did was “very brave, an act of great self-determination”, but he went on to say that “the less developed areas of your self-esteem haven’t caught up with you yet. You’re suffering from a lack of confidence and some delayed shock and you may be confusing missing the habit of being in a relationship with missing this particular relationship.” This is all entirely normal. Look how far you have come. Despite your wobble, you are resolute that you don’t want to speak to your ex – that’s amazing. What makes you feel good? We all have something that makes us feel better. For me routine is key, having things to do, and getting out of the house. There’s a saying “when you feel blue, go green” – when you feel down, go out. Obviously this is not right for all situations, but I am concerned you’re shutting yourself off and starting to withdraw. When we go out and mix with others we see our place in the world, and I feel that’s terrifically important. You say you’d started to make friends, can you go out with one of them? Have a change scene, do something that makes you feel good? Plan a weekly meet up? Is there someone you can trust whom you can tell how you feel? Mills felt it would be great if you could get some counselling – despite resources often being patchy, some GPs do have counsellors attached to the surgery or there may be free/low-price therapy in your area (otherwise see links below). I think even one or two sessions could be a great start to help you rediscover who you are, and that you matter to lots of people. Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence