The former UK ambassador to the US Sir Christopher Meyer is recovering in hospital after being attacked at Victoria station in London, with two teenagers arrested on suspicion of assault. The 74-year-old former chair of the Press Complaints Commission and former director of communications for John Major was left with heavily swollen eyes, a split lip and a suspected broken nose. British Transport Police said officers were called to the station at 2.45pm on Wednesday after reports that a man in his 70s had been seriously assaulted. A 16-year-old boy from Hillingdon, west London, and a 15-year-old girl from Croydon, south London, were arrested on suspicion of assault occasioning grievous bodily harm. They have been released under investigation. “He looks terrible,” his wife, Lady Meyer, told the Times. An image showed Meyer, who is being treated in St Mary’s hospital in Paddington, covered in blood. Police said his injuries are not thought to be life-threatening. https://t.co/xhaihWxFuM Lady Meyer said: “His left eye is like a golf ball and bleeding, the nose looks like it could be broken.” She claimed her husband was attacked by a man and a woman who were later arrested. She said: “I’m absolutely shocked by the level of the brutality. They really beat him. It’s appalling – like something you would see in a war zone.” The children and families minister, Nadhim Zahawi, tweeted that the attack was “sick” and asked the London mayor, Sadiq Khan, what he planned to do. That is sick. Prayers for @SirSocks what are you doing about this @SadiqKhan Henry Newman, the director of the Open Europe thinktank, joined many in wishing Meyer a quick recovery. Gosh. How awful. Hope @SirSocks recovers quickly The attack, which happened on Wednesday afternoon, a day before Donald Trump was due visit to the UK, is not believed to have been politically motivated. Lady Meyer said: “The police told me they believe that it is more likely that they might have wanted to rob him. Nothing was taken, but the transport police intervened quickly.” In a column published by the Times on Thursday, Meyer looks ahead to Trump’s visit. He writes: “If Trump smashes as much crockery in Brussels as he did at the G7 meeting in Canada last month, when he repudiated the final communique and insulted the Canadian prime minister, it will fall to Mrs May to try to pick up the pieces: to remind Trump that Nato is as important to North American security as it is to European; to pledge to work for a fairer sharing of the costs of common defence, a long-standing and justified American complaint; and to make clear that, while she has nothing against improved US-Russian relations, domination of Europe has been a strategic Russian goal since 1945.”