Roger Federer and Serena Williams have marched through in dominant fashion but fans coming to the All England Club in the second week may need to have a flick-through their programme to get the lowdown on some unfamiliar names. Upsets have been the norm, rather than the exception, with only one of the women’s top 10 seeds still involved and four of the men’s top eight. Maybe it is the scorching weather that has caused so many surprises – the players are not used to these kind of temperatures at Wimbledon. Whatever it is, the opening week has been the scene of some rare carnage. After two rounds, only two of the women’s top eight were still in the tournament, the fewest in the Open era, and with the world No 1, Simona Halep, joining the exodus on Saturday, it is down to one. Halep’s defeat combined with the exit of Alexander Zverev, the men’s fourth seed, meant by the time play ended on Saturday, 25 of the top 32 women had departed and 22 of the seeded men. Federer believes the numbers are an anomaly. “I think sometimes it’s a coincidence that it happens,” he said. “The guys who have won in previous weeks, like in Stuttgart, in Eastbourne, in Rosmalen, they all happened to lose quite early now. “I think it just happened to be this way. That top seeds from the women’s side happened now shows that the field is quite even, maybe as well, regardless of who is 1, 2, 3, and 4. Even 10 to 20 are really close, maybe even 30 to 50 are not that far off on the day. Still, throughout the years, the best are at the top, otherwise they wouldn’t be ranked where they are now.” Williams, who was given a seeding of 25 as she returns from having her first child, has not dropped a set in her first three matches. The 36-year-old pointed to the strength in depth of the women’s Tour as a reason for the early upsets, which included the defending champion, Garbiñe Muguruza, Caroline Wozniacki, Maria Sharapova and Petra Kvitova. “I think a lot of the top players are losing but they’re losing to girls that are playing outstanding,” the seven‑times champion said. “If anything, it shows me every moment that I can’t underestimate any of these ladies. They are just going out there swinging and playing for broke.” The timing of the carnage could cause a little difficulty for Wimbledon and the three other grand slam events. Last November, under pressure from broadcasters to produce more interesting matches in the first week, they jointly announced the intention to revert back to 16 seeds, for the first time since 2001. The original decision then was taken to ward off a potential boycott from Spanish players, who were angry at not being seeded at Wimbledon, because of their lack of grass-court prowess. Since then, Wimbledon has applied a grass-court formula on the men’s side, taking into account results on grass over the previous two years, to shuffle the top 32 in the ATP rankings. The seeds for the women’s event usually match the WTA rankings, though as with Williams this year, they can bring someone from outside the top 32 if they feel it is “required to produce a balanced draw”. But with so many defeats of top‑ranked players in the opening week here, the decision to go back to 16 seeds may yet be reconsidered. Any changes need to be confirmed by the time of the Grand Slam Board’s last meeting of the year, which comes during the WTA Finals in Singapore in October. Wimbledon officials told the Observer that discussions are continuing. Kevin Anderson, the vice‑president of the ATP Tour player council, said he was in favour of keeping 32 seeds and would be looking to seek clarification from the grand slams as to their plans. “Grand slams are the ones that pushed for 32 seeds in the first place,” the South African said. “I guess they want more interesting match‑ups in the beginning [but] there are a lot of pretty interesting match‑ups already. “It will be definitely more of an open playing field, definitely interesting, some tough opening‑round matches, to say the least. Somebody in the top 10 playing someone ranked 17, 18 [in the first round], is pretty tricky.” To put this year into context, in 2000, the last year of 16 seeds, 10 men’s seeds and nine women’s seeds went out in the first three rounds at Wimbledon. In 2002, the second year of 32 seeds, 25 of the top 32 men had gone by the start of the fourth round. Nine of the top 10 women have already gone out 1 Simona Halep – third round 2 Caroline Wozniacki – second round 3 Garbine Muguruza – second round 4 Sloane Stephens – first round 5 Elina Svitolina – first round 6 Caroline Garcia – first round 8 Petra Kvitova – first round 9 Venus Williams – third round 10 Madison Keys – third round