The passage of time, 50 years of literary hoo-ha, has been both cruel and kind to the Man Booker prize, which will next month celebrate its half-century (the majority of those years as the Booker) at the Royal Festival Hall. The world’s self-styled premier English-language literary prize has marked this milestone by inviting the public to vote on a “Golden Booker” chosen from five decades of winners. If its founding bookworms ever had serious aspirations for a trophy to rival Nobel or Goncourt, those hopes have long since been dashed. Most British readers are too indifferent, or too snooty, to go along with that kind of cultural agenda. For some, at the supermarket end, fiction is what happens to ball-bearings. For others, trading up, Julian Barnes’s dismissive “posh bingo” is an apt summary of Booker’s reputation at higher altitudes. As a lottery, more than a literary laurel, Booker has come to occupy a place in the national conversation that falls somewhere between the Grand National and the Oxford and Cambridge boat race. If there’s a lit-crit analogy, it’s closer to an oriental mystery. An inscrutable puzzle that the judges must solve to the satisfaction of a demanding minority, the prize has driven some jury members to the edge of reason. In 1996, AL Kennedy, an otherwise seasoned critic, was moved to declare the prize “a pile of crooked nonsense” in which the winner was decided by “who knows who, who’s sleeping with who, who’s selling drugs to who, who’s married to who, and whose turn it is”. Beyond the bar and the bedroom, meanwhile, arts and letters are never static. The English language, which Booker champions, now enjoys such a global variety of expression that such an Anglo-centric prize must struggle to hold its place as a sub-detonation within the wider transcultural explosion. When, in 2013, Booker bowed to the inevitable, admitting American fiction into contention, there were some, notably AS Byatt, who considered it to have betrayed its fundamental mission: the promotion of British (and Commonwealth) literary excellence. Sometimes, the prize’s executives must wonder if they can ever do anything right. Sisyphean rage is perhaps intrinsic to literary promotion. From its origins in 1968 – when Harold Wilson was PM, Tom Jones’s Delilah a hit-parade single, and the top-grossing movie 2001: A Space Odyssey – Booker could never possibly have confined itself to English national themes. Even in its first decade, the 1970s, Booker’s judges on three occasions awarded the prize to novels about India (The Siege of Krishnapur; Heat and Dust; Staying On), and with some prescience chose In a Free State in 1971, rightly recognising VS Naipaul as the finest living writer of English, a crown he retains. Thereafter, having given the prize to Salman Rushdie’s Midnight’s Children, a profoundly influential decision, Booker then went on a multicultural spree through the English-speaking world (ex-America). The next two decades of Booker recognised writers from Australia (Thomas Keneally; Peter Carey); India (Arundhati Roy; Rohinton Mistry); Nigeria (Ben Okri); South Africa (JM Coetzee), and Canada (Michael Ondaatje). “The empire strikes back” became a cliche of 1980s literary comment. Now Booker was less a grave arbiter of English prose fiction than a mirror to the vagaries of contemporary taste in an age of irrational exuberance. At Booker’s glittering Guildhall dinners I remember some bizarre and strangely thrilling moments, reflecting the vitality of contemporary fiction from across the English-speaking world. There was the Maori troupe that erupted into terpsichorean frenzy to greet Keri Hulme’s win for The Bone People in 1985; James Kelman’s inspiring and impassioned celebration of “the Scots tongue” when he won in 1994 for How Late It Was, How Late. As sporting events go, Booker was holding its own, though not necessarily in the way it might have preferred. This was partly thanks to the silky manipulations of the literary press by Booker’s feline administrator, the late Martyn Goff. In the arena of book prizes, where you win some, you lose some, Booker was no exception. Having been right about the English literatures of India, Australia and the rest, the prize misjudged the other big story of these decades, the emergence of a brilliant new generation of female novelists. In hindsight, this was predictable. A book prize cooked up by middle-aged men in the smoke-filled rooms of London’s clubland was likely to have a tin ear when it came to the innovations of contemporary female writers at the cutting edge. While a feminist literary revolution led by Virago transformed the reading lives of a new generation, Booker was struggling. In 1976 it chose Iris Murdoch (The Sea, The Sea), and then Penelope Fitzgerald for Offshore in 1979. But it failed to select her masterpiece The Beginning of Spring in 1988; did not recognise the genius of Elizabeth Taylor in 1971 (Mrs Palfrey at the Claremont); passed over Beryl Bainbridge five times; missed Muriel Spark in 1981 (Loitering With Intent), and never even shortlisted Angela Carter’s Nights at the Circus. Belatedly, my fellow “Golden Booker” judge, Lemn Sissay, has made amends for these omissions by nominating Penelope Lively for her 1987 novel Moon Tiger. One of the paradoxes of the 1980s was the way in which a philistine, xenophobic and nationalist conservative government presided over a moment of extraordinary renewal. Thatcherism’s other unintended consequence was to transform prizes for books, music and art into taste-makers in a new marketplace. A series of small but significant insurrections placed the language and habits of the market at the heart of every literary transaction, a change from which Booker benefited. Its acquisition by the Man Group in 2002 marked a significant shift in its fortunes. Henceforth the Booker would have to live or die by brand promotion, just like any business. At the same time, the Booker has acquired added importance from the unexpected revival in the fortunes of hardback publishing and the boom in digital reading worldwide. From the widest perspective, its 50 years have promoted some remarkable novels. Were these sealed in concrete and prised open a hundred years hence, I believe that they would adequately represent the fiction of 1968-2018. Whether readers of the 22nd century will agree that these books are classics, only time will tell. Robert McCrum is a former literary editor of the Observer