Norma Grier always thought it was wrong for the BBC to report the existence of a police investigation into allegations of historic sexual abuse against Cliff Richard, which is why she was celebrating the singer’s landmark privacy victory outside the high court in London. “Justice and truth have prevailed,” said the retired teacher, who had travelled down from Glasgow for Wednesday’s verdict with her husband and their dog. Grier, who has seen the singer in concert more than 100 times, was one of a group of fans known as the Cliffettes who supported the singer in his privacy case against the BBC. “There’s boundaries to people’s privacy,” she said. “He just went through an awful time because the press overstepped the mark.” Luckily for the singer and his fans, Mr Justice Mann agreed. Following a month-long trial earlier this year, the judge issued a strongly worded ruling that was heavily critical of the actions of BBC reporters and executives, awarded substantial costs to the singer, and threatens to redraw British media law by making it substantially harder to report ongoing police investigations where no charges have been brought. At the heart of the case was a claim that the singer was being investigated following an allegation he sexually assaulted a child in Sheffield following a Billy Graham evangelical rally in the 1980s – and the BBC’s desire to land the scoop. Richard strongly denied the claims and the police probe never resulted in any charges, but the story was on the news around the world, aided by the BBC’s decision to fly a helicopter to film a raid on the singer’s home in a Berkshire gated community, having coordinated the coverage with South Yorkshire police. The trial, which followed years of legal disputes and a refusal by the BBC to settle on a point of principle, exposed the corporation’s sometimes contorted decision-making processes, showed the breakdown in the relationship between the the corporation and a major police force and provided sometimes excruciating details about the process of how journalism happens. The judge asked questions over the decisions of senior BBC managers who signed off the story, including the current director of news, Fran Unsworth, who was the most senior editor on duty when the story broke and signed off the decision to use the helicopter footage. But ultimately the case was about the extent to which the rights of the media to report on an ongoing police investigation outweighed invading an individual’s right to privacy. Like many pieces of journalism, the entire case began with a simple tip to a reporter who – depending on whether you believe the journalist or the police – either lucked out when police confirmed his half-formed story, or pressured the authorities into handing over information on a highly contentious secret investigation. In summer 2014, Dan Johnson, a rising BBC star working in the north of England, was told by an anonymous source that – following a run of historical sex offence cases against celebrities such as Rolf Harris and Jimmy Savile – there was “just one more major figure” under investigation, with the case being handled by South Yorkshire police. After, in Johnson’s words, he “guessed” Richard’s name based on internet rumours relating to Elm Guest House, he mentioned the story in passing to South Yorkshire police’s communications chief, Carrie Goodwin. At this point their stories diverge. In Johnson’s telling, the press officer then let out an “audible gasp followed by a short silence”, before saying he had very good sources. The press officer invited him in to meet the officers involved in the case for a briefing, who gave him the full details. According to statements from South Yorkshire police, they were operating under the impression that the BBC reporter already had the entire story and they had little choice but to attempt to buy time by bringing him in on the ongoing investigation. The judge, who occasionally seemed shocked by the processes involved in journalism, was critical of the reporter’s actions and suggested he used a “form of threat” with the police. “I do not believe that he is a fundamentally dishonest man, but he was capable of letting his enthusiasm get the better of him in pursuit of what he thought was a good story so that he could twist matters in a way that could be described as dishonest in order to pursue his story,” he said. After weeks of delays, the BBC was told that a raid on Richard’s home in Sunningdale, Berkshire, would take place on 14 August 2014. Johnson and a BBC crew were sent to camp outside the gates and the decision was taken to send up a helicopter – causing anger at ITN, who shared the cost of the aircraft but were not given the requisite warning of its use. Reporters on the ground in Berkshire encountered chaos. Furious residents swore at journalists and demanded the helicopter stop hovering overhead, with one of Richard’s neighbours apparently concerned the journalists were investigating his own, unknown misdemeanours. A TV news crew bumped into fellow local celebrity Bruce Forsyth at a nearby petrol station and attempted to get his reaction to the news. Meanwhile, a reporter from the Daily Telegraph – sent to try to interview the Great British Bake Off contestant Martha Collison, who was receiving her A-level results at the private school opposite Richard’s home – almost scooped the rest of the media by inadvertently stumbling across the police raid, only to depart unaware they had missed the story. Eventually, the decision was taken to run the story on the One O’Clock News – ultimately by Unsworth -–who told the court that she stood by the decision and was implicitly criticised along with other BBC News chiefs by Richard’s spokesperson following the court victory. “Her acts and thinking on the day, like the acts and views of others, were affected by the desire to protect the scoop, though perhaps less than others,” said the judge, who expressed surprise that the BBC did not give greater consideration to Richard’s privacy rights, speculating that the main motivation for running the story swiftly was to stop ITV claiming the scoop. The story – and the footage of police being filmed through the windows from the air searching inside Richard’s home – led the news bulletins all afternoon. BBC editors were delighted with their scoop. Johnson thanked South Yorkshire police for a “bonkers but brilliant day”. Then it all started to go wrong. Richard, who was on holiday in Portugal, had learned that his name and helicopter footage of his home were all over the news and issued a strongly worded denial through his publicist. Later than month he was voluntarily interviewed by police. In 2016, two years after the initial story, Richard was told no charges would be brought. Then – problematically for the BBC and the British media – the legal fight began. Richard decided to bring the case on the basis that he had been subject to a “very serious invasion” of his privacy and refused to give up – spending more than £3m on the legal battle. The police settled out of court but the BBC, which insisted its coverage was accurate and in good faith, felt obliged to fight the case in order to avoid redrawing what the British media can report about a criminal investigation before charges are brought. The end result was the sometimes bizarre month-long stint in a central London court, where the singer was accompanied by a revolving cast of light-entertainment celebrities including Gloria Hunniford and Paul Gambaccini, and attempted to emphasise the severity of the damage to his reputation. During breaks in hearings the singer’s fans would respectfully hover by the doors of the court, before congregating outside to grab photos of him on their smartphones at the end of each day’s hearing. Meanwhile, the court heard communication between BBC staff which might be common in newsrooms filled with black humour but are not so well-received when read out in court: the time that Johnson told his editors he was looking at “celebrity paedos”, the moment when the BBC’s north of England bureau joked with the corporation’s UK news editor that Richard would soon be singing Jailhouse Rock, and the email to Johnson quoting Richard’s song Congratulations and Jubilations. Ultimately though, what mattered was whether one man – the judge - was convinced by the legal arguments. He was. “A suspect has a reasonable expectation of privacy in relation to a police investigation,” Mann said. With that, he concluded – at least in criminal investigations yet to result in a charge – the right to privacy trumped the public interest. In doing so, he redrew the boundaries of British media law.