One of the early dates in the diary for the Football Association’s management team after their unexpectedly heartening World Cup campaign is with the parliamentary committee which has serially bashed England’s governing body over the years. The chairman, the Conservative MP Damian Collins, who led a vote of no confidence in the FA only last year – attended by just 17 MPs – has called them to account for the proposed sale of Wembley Stadium. But the mood in the room should be different this time from the habitual, ritual excoriation. The FA has been relentlessly, often justifiably, criticised for failing to govern the national game robustly and rein in the Premier League’s commercialised excesses. But the FA has a right to credit where it is due for England’s advances in Russia and the foundations, including Gareth Southgate’s own development, have been long in the planning and construction. The groundwork for the team’s assured progress to the semi-final was laid at the £105m national football centre at St George’s Park, concrete investment in English football from the billions of pounds washing through it. The shortcomings exposed by the semi-final defeat against Croatia show investment is still needed in participation and grass-roots facilities ruthlessly underfunded by Collins’s Conservative government, and for Premier League clubs to give more first-team opportunities to young English players. A senior FA executive told the Observer the World Cup experience has only reaffirmed its resolve to sell Wembley to the Fulham and Jacksonville Jaguars NFL team owner, Shahid Khan, and invest the proposed £600m proceeds in grass-roots facilities. “We desperately need to improve playing conditions nationwide,” he said. “We hope the England team’s progress, and recognition of the work which has gone into it, will give more confidence that the FA as an organisation can be trusted to handle the project properly.” The DFB’s overhaul of its structures after Germany’s failure in the 2000 European Championship – chronicled in Raphael Honigstein’s book Das Reboot – is justly lauded as an example to English football. But less well known is that the FA did undertake its own review, led by the then technical director Sir Trevor Brooking, after the 2010 World Cup. Southgate’s first role at the FA, as head of elite player development, working to foster better relations with top players and the clubs which release them, was itself a result of the review. Talking to the Guardian in 2011 the England manager explained that a longer-term plan was being developed for England squads to perform more confidently than when he was a player. “We definitely realised we were inferior,” he said of his time as an international player. “Everybody realises we can’t keep playing the way we have and producing the English style of player. We have to grow and change.” The renewed FA effort to improve English footballers dates back at least 21 years, to the former technical director Howard Wilkinson’s Charter for Quality. It called for a total, professionalised improvement to clubs’ youth development. That has happened, although clubs’ modern Elite Player Performance Plan (EPPP) academy system has been criticised for recruiting thousands of boys at seven or eight who will never be given an opportunity to play first-team football at the elite level. Wilkinson accused Premier League clubs last year of failing in their “moral duty” to give opportunities to academy graduates and called for a review. He believes overall, though, that England’s performance illustrates the deeper progress made since the years he was insisting the FA needed a national football centre like France’s home at Clairefontaine. Wilkinson always believed the FA financing Wembley’s rebuilding was an unfortunate political accident and sucked up too much time and money, leading to St George’s Park’s construction being mothballed in the 2000s. Asked last week if he agrees with the plan to sell Wembley, Wilkinson gave a one-word answer: “Absolutely.” He explains the significance of St George’s Park, now a base for England’s 28 men’s, women’s and disability teams of all age groups, their coaches and support staff, and coach development programmes: “Our aim was to make it the Oxford and Cambridge of football education. It is symbolic: you can’t have a national development programme for players and coaching and not have a home.” Brooking, Wilkinson’s successor between 2003 and 2014 when Dan Ashworth took over, was dedicated to nurturing more confidence with a football, learning from Spain and Germany. His national football strategies introduced the small-sided children’s game and coaching that encouraged passing from the goalkeeper, through defenders and “the three thirds” of the pitch, a style which Southgate’s team endeavoured to play in Russia. “We tried to introduce it at the grass roots,” Brooking says, “then St George’s Park was the base we needed, where all the national teams would come, where coaches would work together, learning, speaking around the table.” After the centre finally officially opened in 2012 under Ashworth, Southgate as the under-21s coach and other FA performance staff further developed the common philosophy, style of play and preparation, publicly launching the England DNA policy in December 2014. The clear principles Southgate was expounding in Russia to sudden, dazzled admiration from a delirious nation were in fact well established. His mantra for players not to experience past England glories as a weight but strive instead to “create their own history” is a component of the DNA ethos which has been up on the FA’s website for years. They learned from British teams’ scientific approach to Olympic success, recruiting some of the staff who had been involved in it. The sports psychologists Lane4 worked on their first pilot scheme with Mark Sampson’s strongly improving women’s team in November 2014, and the value of psychology, headed since last November by Pippa Grange, became nationally recognised during the tournament. Yet the margins between glory and ignominy in World Cup football are, of course, minute: had Colombia scored their last two penalties in the shootout England would have been out at the last 16 again, and Southgate’s talk of DNA and writing your own history could have been ridiculed as management guff. But the FA is taking heart from current success across England teams; last year the men’s U17s and U20s won their World Cups, the U19s the European championship,and the U21s and women’s senior team reached their European Championship semi-finals. Brooking agrees Premier League first teams must increase the number of English players, but also acknowledges that clubs’ major investment in the EPPP has improved academy coaching. He hopes England’s progress, and further improvements, will foster more opportunities. “It would be hugely frustrating to have the world’s best league and not be developing young English players,” Brooking said. “It has taken longer than we hoped, but this World Cup should not be a one-off.” At the national centre of politics this time, perhaps Damian Collins and his fellow MPs may even find themselves asking the FA for a little advice, about the merits of careful planning and attention to detail.