A poorly considered or mistakenly implemented railway timetable can have serious consequences, worse even than the recent sights of platforms crowded with disconsolate commuters who wait for trains that run late or never come at all, and in the meantime tell each other stories of peeved employers, missed domesticity and the infuriating cancellation of the 8.15. “Timetable chaos” is the new headline phrase, born earlier this summer, when Britain’s railways attempted to implement what turned out to be an overambitious revision of their schedules, but it describes a situation as old as the railways themselves. When trains come and go unreliably, bad things can happen. Charles Dickens was nearly a victim, on 9 June 1865, when his train came off the rails near Staplehurst in Kent, causing the deaths of 10 passengers and serious injuries to another 40. It happened at a viaduct across the river Beult, where workmen were replacing the longitudinal timber baulks on which the rails were laid. The work had gone on successfully in the intervals between trains, and the foreman, John Benge, planned to lay the last of the new baulks in the 84 minutes available between trains timed at 2.51pm and 4.15pm, the first going towards London and the second the opposite way, to the coast. Benge’s terror when an express to London steamed towards him at 3.13pm is easy to imagine; the timber baulks had been replaced, but two 6.4-metre (21ft) stretches of rail had still to be relaid. The train was travelling at 50mph; it shut off steam and braked hard, but the momentum carried the locomotive and brake van across the gap, leaving the first coach dangling by its coupling towards the river. Dickens was in that first coach – and not just Dickens. He shared a compartment with “two ladies” whose only description, in a letter he wrote soon afterwards, was “old” and “young”. The force of the crash and the carriage’s angle piled them together in a corner. He calmed the two before he climbed out of the carriage window and set about the work of helping the wounded and the dying, dispensing brandy from his flask and water that he carried from the river in his top hat. Engravings in the press showed his familiar figure calmly tending their distress, though by now he must have been as terrified as Benge – not by the accident, but at the prospect of disclosure and the ruin of his reputation as the great moral force of English life and letters. His anonymous travelling companions were in fact his mistress, the actor Nelly (Ellen) Ternan, and her actor mother. Nelly was 26 and Dickens 27 years older, and they were returning from a stay in France, where Nelly’s mother seems to have played a role that was both chaperon and accomplice. The relationship lasted throughout the last 13 years of Dickens’s life but remained unknown to the public until the 1930s, and was explored fully only when Claire Tomalin published her account of it in 1990. Nelly was injured in the crash, but somehow kept her name out of the papers. Dickens refused to attend the crash inquiry. As Tomalin writes, the subterfuge and secrecy “must have been a nightmare for all three of them”. Who or what should be blamed for this anxiety, injury and death? The question attracts more attention from railway historians than from literary historians, with answers that range from the unstoppable forces of nature to plain bad luck. In the first place: the effect of the moon on the sea. Dickens and his party crossed the Channel from Boulogne to Folkestone at a time when the tide still governed a steamer’s access to both ports. As the tides run later and later from day to day, so did the ferry and its connecting train, the Folkestone boat express, known as the Tidal, which ran to no fixed schedule and was hard to insert into a public timetable. Nevertheless, its timings did appear in what’s known as a working timetable, a private document circulated among railway employees that lists the movement of every train, freight as well as passenger, with great particularity. Benge and his leading carpenter each had a copy, but the carpenter left his on the track, where it was destroyed by the wheels of a passing train, while Benge confused the date and expected the express to arrive two hours later than it did. As printed timetables had a habit of disguising vital information as an easily overlooked footnote – “calls Bletchley 7.19am on Sundays only to set down sleeping car passengers on notice to the attendant prior to arrival at Rugby” – we must sympathise with Benge as well the people who might be considered his victims. Public timetables were then about 25 years old. The word, appropriately enough in the case of Staplehurst, was derived from the “tide tables” that had been a guide to mariners since the 16th century. In 1830 the world’s first passenger line, the Liverpool and Manchester, advertised its timings under the words Scheme of Departures, but eight years later the London & Birmingham adopted “time table” as a clearer and brisker description. A Manchester printer, George Bradshaw, had the clever idea of collating the timetables from Britain’s growing number of railway companies, and in 1841 produced the first Bradshaw’s Monthly Railway Guide, the first of its kind in the world and eventually so ubiquitous that “Bradshaw” became a synonym for timetables in parts of Europe and the British Empire as well as in Britain itself. Given this long history, and the advent of computers and digitisation, it seems yet another symptom of national decline that Britain’s railways still can’t manage to run trains to the new timetable they tried to introduce two months ago. But blame here is more difficult to attribute than at Staplehurst. The two most affected companies, Northern and Govia Thameslink Railway (GTR), had different reasons for their failure – delayed electrification in the first, driver shortage at the second – though this is a crude simplification of adverse circumstances that were sometimes outside the train operating company’s control. Part of the problem was the sheer scale of the change: 900 extra trains were to be added to the 22,000 already running (the interim timetables have managed a total of 22,500). Another part was the impossibility of Northern and GTR continuing with the old timetable while the difficulties with the new one were resolved: other companies using the same track were successfully running on new schedules, so there could be no reversion. Chris Grayling, the transport secretary, blamed Network Rail for a timetabling system that “simply cannot cope with the volume of work it has to complete” – forgetting that Network Rail has cut its staff, on government instruction, almost since the day it began, and that it sits at the end of a bureaucratic process in which the Department for Transport specifies the services it wants each train company to operate, and that each company then proposes its interpretation of these demands to Network Rail, which has to reconcile these frequently conflicting proposals as it compiles the final timetable. Just as when a novice uses a Rubik’s cube, the process needs time and iterations. The shorter the time, the greater the chance of cock-up; and here, it is generally agreed, too little time was allowed. As the great railway historian Jack Simmons cautioned his fellow scholars, timetables “are a record of intention, not performance, and they must always be treated as such”. • Ian Jack is a Guardian columnist