Even after completing the dark, treacherous journey from the depths of Tham Luang cave to safety, the rescued members of the Wild Boars football squad face additional barriers to resuming their normal lives. Before the boys can enjoy a warm embrace with their relatives, doctors must be confident they will not make anyone ill. Thongchai Lertwilairattanapong, a Thai health department official, told the news site Kom Chad Luek there would be “no hugging or touching” until blood tests proved the boys were free of infections. He named leptospirosis and meliodosis – bacterial infections that can be transmitted through soil or water – as possible risks. Hugh Montgomery, a professor of intensive care medicine at University College London, said caves presented a risk of tick-borne relapsing fever as well as histoplasmosis, a fungal lung infection commonly known as “cave disease”. The policy of separation between the boys and their loved ones marks a departure from the initial plan described to the Guardian by a member of the mental health crisis assessment and treatment team at the rescue site. The original plan was to arrange for at least one parent to accompany each boy in an ambulance on the way to Chiang Rai’s Prachanukroh hospital. Dr Andrea Danese, a child psychiatrist at King’s College London’s Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, said a parent’s presence in these first few moments of freedom would be an important first step towards a healthy reintegration. “After a long time spent underground, the boys will be tired, possibly mildly confused – almost as if they were jet-lagged – and likely quite emotional,” he said. “Bringing them together with a parent will certainly be a positive experience.” These comforts will have to be delayed, despite the fact that none of the infections mentioned by doctors is transmittable between people. At a press briefing on Monday evening, Narongsak Osatanakorn, the head of the joint command centre coordinating the operation, declined to tell reporters whether any of the boys had been reunited with their relatives. Since the first rescue operation was launched, there has been a strict policy against releasing the names of any of the boys who have come out of the cave. Instead they have each been referred to as “Wild Boar” and assigned a number. On Monday morning Osatanakorn chastised a Thai news outlet for publishing the names of the first four boys. “It is doctor-patient confidentiality, so we couldn’t name them,” he said during a press briefing. “Some of you have disclosed it. What you should realise is that it affected the parents of those who are still inside.” Banyong Suwanpong, a member of the ethics committee of the Thai Journalist Association, wrote in a Facebook post: “Using a code instead of naming them is to protect children’s rights and to avoid the ethical issues especially when the society is closely monitoring the press.” The policy is unusual for a story of global interest, especially since the names of those who were trapped are already known. However, this is common in Thailand, where media are traditionally very careful with the identities of children. In cases of crimes involving children, especially when they are the victims, names are often omitted. In the case of the Wild Boars, though, hiding identities goes beyond tradition. The boys who have exited the cave over the past two days are entering a new world where millions of people want information from them. By keeping their names secret, even temporarily, the joint command centre is giving the boys one additional layer of protection from the threat of trauma. Dr Thornnin Kongsuk, the director of Suan Prung hospital in Chiang Mai, where the boys will receive checkups in the months following their rescue from the cave, said he supported the policy. “I’m concerned that the media won’t stop interviewing them and reminding them of this event in their lives,” he told Kom Chad Luek. “If the boys and coach view being trapped in a cave as a test of their bravery or as an adventure, that will be fine. But if they [are forced to] remember it as torture, their mental health will suffer.”