In studio six, an actor has stripped to his pants and is waiting to be smeared with blood by two female dancers: one in a black leotard, the other in a white one. He is playing Mephistopheles, the women are interpreting the child-devouring Lamia of Greek myth, and I’m watching day 13 of an unlikely and wildly ambitious film shoot. We’re on a dismal industrial estate in north-west London where Faust, Goethe’s drama of damnation, sexual betrayal, witchcraft and freeform philosophic meditation, is being adapted by Philipp Humm – a man who until three years ago was CEO of Vodafone Europe. Martin Hancock, a former star of Coronation Street, is playing the title role, while the devil is being performed by Glyn Dilley, an actor so versatile that he has played both physicist Isaac Newton in a Fifa video game and Johnnie Cradock in TV comedy Fanny and Friends. Whether what I’m witnessing is an ex-telecom exec’s midlife crisis or on-trend reimagining of Goethe’s epic verse drama for the 21st century is uncertain. Just possibly, it’s both. Certainly, Humm’s adaptation tackles sexual harassment, artificial intelligence, the troubling ethical ramifications of technological innovation, the stuff of a million comment pieces. Humm’s Faust – no longer a medieval doctor-magician but an AI guru who yearns to emulate God by creating life – wears Steve Jobs’ uniform of black turtleneck with blue jeans. His devil is a suited hedge fund trader. There is even an emperor with a short attention span. Sounds familiar? Gretchen, the innocent 14-year-old destroyed by the lecherous Faust in Goethe’s play, becomes in Humm’s version a 16-year-old employee of a Silicon Valley startup called Winestone Inc when she is seduced by a sexual predator decades her senior. Winestone, eh? I say to Humm. Can’t imagine what you’re alluding to there. “Harvey Weinstein and #MeToo,” explains Humm. They’re ready to roll. A bucket is filled with blood-red liquid, Yello’s disco number Limbo is cued up to provide the soundtrack, mobiles are turned off, the devil’s in his undies and director Dominik Wieschman is about to shout action. But before he can, there is a problem. “There’s only one white leotard,” says photographer Daniele Mah. Humm, her partner, looks unperturbed. You’d imagine that the 58-year-old Belgian-German tech entrepreneur has faced bigger logistical problems: as head of T-Mobile in the US, he brokered the phone company’s $39bn sale to AT&T Inc before anti-trust regulators blocked the deal. Though he retired from full time business in 2015 to become a painter and sculptor, he still sits on boards of investment banks and ad-blocking startup, Shine Technologies. In any case, he will not allow minor wardrobe malfunctions to interfere with the tight schedule he’s set. “People said there’s no way you could shoot 37 scenes in 15 days, but here we are, us greenhorns to the film industry, and we are doing it,” he says. Humm’s shooting script schedules an average of two and a half scenes a day and, ideally, a maximum of three takes per shot. As a businessman, he was noted for his meticulous attention to spreadsheets and is clearly bringing that painstaking, can-do mindset to this multimedia production. Goethe’s drama has been played on stage over 22 hours, he says; Humm plans to reduce the action to a 90-minute film. “I insist on it being short. Nobody wants a 22-hour version.” The film is only one element. The hyperreal photographs being made during the shoot by Mah are another. After he’s finished making the film (“I plan to have it ready for distribution by November,” he says), Humm will start making paintings and sculptures of scenes from Faust for exhibition. After that, he plans to publish a book, juxtaposing the photographs with text from Martin Greenberg’s translation of Faust along with Humm’s own narrative links. It could be lucrative, I suggest. “I hope so,” he says. Certainly, Humm could do with incoming cash: he funded the first phase of the Faust project himself, but is looking for backers to help pay for distribution and further development. He won’t tell me how much he’s put into the project so far, but when I suggest he could do with the financial acumen of Mephisto who, Goethe imagines, induces an emperor to float bonds backed by as yet unmined gold from imperial mountains, he doesn’t demur. Humm has dared to go where previous adapters of Faust have feared to tread. True, Jan Švankmajer made a stop-motion animated film of both parts of Faust, and, yes, Gustav Mahler’s Symphony of a Thousand is a setting of part two’s closing section, but artists as varied as Hector Berlioz and Randy Newman are more typical in only adapting part one. “It’s easy to understand why,” says Humm. “Part one is more straightforward. Part two is where Goethe becomes...” He pauses for the right word. “Bonkers?” I suggest. “For me it’s where Goethe’s most philosophically profound.” My favourite stage direction is the one telling me Mephistopheles is troubled by the Kantian dialectic Before he became a titan of commerce, Humm studied philosophy at Saarland University in the early 1980s immersing himself in German idealism and, in particular, Heidegger’s Being and Time. In his script, lots of his philosophical concerns – what it is to be human, the dangers of technology, the perils of capitalism – are explored. “My favourite stage direction ever,” Dilley tells me between takes, “is the one telling me Mephistopheles is troubled by the Kantian dialectic.” Humm shows me his book of drawings for each of the 37 scenes that works as a storyboard for the film. There’s the time machine that whisks Mephisto and Faust from medieval Germany to ancient Greece. There’s the water tank in which the robot called Homunculus, whom Faust creates, is suspended. There’s the headstone of Marx from Highgate Cemetery superimposed on the body of an angel, symbolising for Humm how the eponymous hero during his existential journey transforms himself from technological innovator to capitalist lackey to communist. It’s quite a ride. Humm has not only updated Faust, but dared to change Goethe’s ending. In Goethe’s original, Faust says “If I ever give up longing, if I’m ever contented, let that day be my last” - and this forms the basis of the wager between God and the devil: when Faust finally admits he is content, Mephisto can claim his soul. So, when near the end Faust does admit he is content, the devil arrives to claim his prize. In Švankmajer’s Faust, when the devil arrives to claim him, Faust panic rushes into the street where he is killed by a car, a trap carries away his severed leg and when a police officer checks the car, he finds it is without a driver. After filming finishes, an actor will perform Humm’s narrative voiceover. “My hope is it will resemble Charles Gray’s in The Rocky Horror Picture Show. We have several big name actors under consideration for the role, but we can’t say yet who will do it.” Humm was inspired to make a film of Faust after seeing an exhibition of Salvador Dali’s paintings depicting scenes from Dante’s Inferno in Florence in 2015. “I thought I could do for Goethe what Dalí does for Dante.” But the impulses goes further back than that. “I was educated in Belgium so I didn’t get my German birthright – knowing Goethe’s Faust – until I was grown up.” When he studied philosophy he thought a lot about what makes humans human and what it is to be authentic, and realised that Goethe’s drama explores these issues. I was educated in Belgium so I didn’t get my German birthright – knowing Goethe’s Faust – until I was grown up As a young man who loved painting, Humm applied to Berlin’s Academy of Arts but was rejected. It was a pivotal moment: had he been accepted, he might never have become a businessman. Instead, though, painting and sculpting became a sideline. He led a double life: as a painter, he called himself Rudolf Humm in order to distinguish his artistic brand from Philipp Humm, his business persona, and has claimed some success from paintings that mixed art historical works with contemporary references. He has had solo exhibitions at the Saatchi, Riflemaker and Hix galleries in London. His painting Headless Men, depicting men in business suits at a Paris metro station with topless female mannequins in the foreground, had a price tag of £4,000. One critic has called his work “pop expressionism”. In Humm’s version of Manet’s Olympia, the eponymous nude woman is attended by a factotum with David Beckham’s body and Samuel Beckett’s head. In another, Claudia Schiffer, Kate Moss, Madonna and Naomi Campbell eat al fresco. In another, Andy Warhol and Damien Hirst tackle Botticelli’s Venus in a life drawing class. Four years ago, Humm quit full-time business to devote himself to art, studying at London’s Fine Arts Studio and the Fine Art Academy in Florence. Like Faust, he’s incessantly creative and ambitious; like Mephistopheles, he has in a sardonic eye for human vanity and striving. Who are you more like? “Neither. I’m trying to be creative as an artist. And, incidentally, I was like that in business too. There’s not such a division between the two worlds in that sense.” He shows me out of the studio block. The leotard problem has been resolved and Humm is giggling. “Fun fact,” he says to me as we shake hands. “One day, my film of Faust will be dubbed from English into German. I’ll be exporting Goethe to Germany!”