Lawson Craddock’s fist pump as he crossed the line in Saturday’s time trial spoke volumes. The American had completed a three-week battle to finish the Tour de France with a broken shoulder blade, a challenge that had seemed improbable after he fell on the opening day. He had been a daily sight at the back of the peloton, on occasion fighting to maintain contact from relatively early on. That he had raised more than $100,000 for the hurricane-damaged Houston velodrome along the way merely added to the romance. Craddock was far from alone in his suffering. There had been a touch of pathos in the Pyrenees as riders who had faded in the Alps – notably Mikel Landa, Adam Yates, Romain Bardet and Ilnur Zakarin – attempted in vain to save what they could from the wreckage. The final mountain passes were also particularly tough for Peter Sagan and Nairo Quintana, crash victims fighting for survival, beset by a Tour that seemed particularly cruel to its stars this year. One by one, most of Chris Froome’s potential challengers had dropped by the wayside. The stage across the cobbles of northern France had been dreaded, rightly so, but Richie Porte’s Tour ended with a broken collarbone before he even got to the first of the pavé. That stage ended Rigoberto Urán’s race because of injuries to his left arm and leg, while a heavy crash compromised Landa’s challenge, knocking the central prong out of Movistar’s trident of the Spaniard, Quintana and Alejandro Valverde. That cobbled stage passed in a mesmerising few hours, an intense afternoon that seemed set to fast forward; in the three-week picture, the pavé carried greater weight than was reflected in the time gaps on the day, which – among the overall contenders at least – were relatively small. The riders who were tipped as most likely to struggle on the day did get through – with the obvious exception of Porte – but there was a toll in racing at such intensity. Take Daniel Martin, who lost no time but was already dealing with the consequences of a heavy crash and intense chase from the day before, and Bardet, who spent the best part of two and a half hours chasing, puncturing, chasing and puncturing again. Going so deep in those kind of desperate efforts have consequences in a race as long as the Tour. In the Alps, the principal casualties were Yates and Vincenzo Nibali; the young Briton will return to the Tour as a challenger but it is an open question whether the Italian will be seen at his best again in the race he won in 2014. With broken vertebrae following a crash caused by a fan at L’Alpe d’Huez, his was the bitterest of exits. As for the sprinters, their mass exodus was prompted by the brevity of the principal Alpine stages, leaving them no margin for survival. What of the climbers Yates and Quintana? The most obvious answer is to look at the riders who ended up at the top of the standings approaching Paris: Geraint Thomas, Froome, Tom Dumoulin, Primoz Roglic and Steven Kruijswijk. There are no diminutive climbers among that quintet, that is not a coincidence, and it could probably be traced back to that intense opening week, which might have looked boring at times, but was far more turbulent than usual, something that has long-term effects on the mountain men. In the end, the principal opposition to Team Sky came from the Netherlands, in team terms at least. Dumoulin was always tipped as a favourite for this Tour and he lived up to that. The Butterfly of Maastricht floated and stung in equal measure, as he had done in the Giro d’Italia and on any course before 2013. In the days when the time triallists were given ample space to work with he would probably have beaten Thomas. Compared to Thomas and Froome, Dumoulin is still relatively new to the game as it is less than three years since he came within an ace of winning the Tour of Spain and two since he first made an impact on the Tour, winning a mountain and time trial stage in 2016. As his Sunweb team grows around talents such as Søren Kragh Andersen, it can only be a matter of time until he gives the Netherlands a third Tour winner to follow Jan Janssen in 1968 and Joop Zoetemelk in 1980. However, Roglic is the true newcomer, in his third year racing at World Tour level for the Netherlands’ oldest team (LottoNL-Jumbo has its roots in the Kwantum squad, founded in 1984). Unlike his teammate Kruijswijk, he is a prolific winner, with 16 victories to his name in two and a half seasons. A proficient time triallist, he resembles greats such as Greg LeMond in that he is not content to lean solely on that discipline. His brute strength and dynamism – not to mention his nerveless descending – suggest an intriguing future.