Ryanair’s first-quarter profits have fallen by a fifth owing to rising fuel prices, lower fares and staff pay rises, as it warned of further disruption to passengers over the summer. The no-frills airline continued to grow rapidly, reporting a 7% increase in passenger numbers to 37.6 million that pushed revenue up 9% to nearly €2.1bn (£1.86bn). But soaring costs during the three-month period meant that after-tax profit slumped by 20% to €319m, sending its shares down as much as 5% in early trading. The Dublin-based carrier blamed falling profits on a variety of factors including labour disputes it said were expected to continue. It pointed to a 4% fall in average fares due to overcapacity in the European flight market, as well as the early timing of Easter, adding that it had been unable to fully mitigate the impact of rising fuel prices. It said fuel was up from $50 a barrel last year to $80, an increase that was likely to cost the company €430m over the course of the year. Ryanair has also been wrestling with unrest among its pilots and cabin crew, triggering strikes in several of its most important European markets, including Ireland, Spain, Portugal and Italy. Some 600 flights have already been cancelled this summer because of industrial action and Ryanair said the ongoing tussle with unions was likely to force further disruption. “We have minimised the impact of these strikes on customers by cancelling a small proportion of our flight schedule, well in advance of the day of travel, to allow our customers to switch flights or apply for full refunds. “While we continue to actively engage with pilot and cabin crew unions across Europe, we expect further strikes over the peak summer period as we are not prepared to concede to unreasonable demands that will compromise either our low fares or our highly efficient model.” The airline also said it considered a “no-deal” Brexit, in which the UK leaves the European Union without agreement on matters such as trade, increasingly likely. “We remain concerned by the danger of a hard (“no-deal”) Brexit in March 2019,” it said. “While there is a view that a 21-month transition agreement from March 2019 to December 2020 will be implemented (and extended), recent events in the UK political sphere have added to this uncertainty, and we believe that the risk of a hard Brexit is being underestimated.”