The quarter-finals kick off in Nizhny Novgorod with what should be an intriguing tactical battle between two sides with very different styles. Uruguay are clearly the more settled and organised outfit. While both coaches can call upon world class talent, Óscar Tabárez has a team that equals the sum of its parts. That has not always been the case for France under Didier Deschamps. Finding the personnel and system that bring the best out of his star names has been a problem for Deschamps, who tends to revert to the tried and tested when the going gets tough. Antoine Griezmann has underwhelmed so far at the World Cup, with his two goals coming from the penalty spot. France’s only fluent attacking display came in the last round against Argentina, when they hit La Albiceleste on the counter. That tactic is unlikely to be as successful against Uruguay. Breaking down a defence controlled by José Giménez and Diego Godín will be easier said than done, as their clubmate Griezmann is all too aware. “Uruguay will be like Atlético,” said Griezmann this week. “They will take their time, fall, go to the referee. We will have to get used to that because the match will be boring and they will want to bring us into that.” Prediction: Uruguay 1-1 France (Uruguay to win AET). Friday night’s match in Volgograd is shaping up to be the most entertaining of the quarter-finals. It’s the favourites against the leading scorers. Belgium have scored at least three goals in the three matches Roberto Martínez picked his first XI; their second string were also victorious against England but just not so prolific. It will be intriguing to see what line-up Martínez selects against Brazil. Both Marouane Fellaini and Nacer Chadli will hope to have earned a start after they turned the game against Japan on its head. There was no such drama in the for Brazil, who beat Mexico relatively comfortably and were the only side to win their last-16 match by more than one goal. That said, Tite’s side have not been prolific in Russia. Despite having the most shots (77) and the most shots on target (31), they have scored just seven goals and never more than two in a game. In comparison, Belgium have scored 12 times. This game could be a slow burner. Belgium have only scored in the first half in one of their four matches and Brazil have scored five of their seven goals after the interval. It should catch fire in the second half, though. Belgium will look to exploit Casemiro’s absence through suspension. Fernandinho is an extremely capable replacement but Martínez would be wise to push Kevin De Bruyne further forward to occupy his Manchester City teammate. Both teams have plenty of firepower but Brazil have been more reliable at the back. Tite’s men have conceded just one goal at this World Cup – from a corner in their first game against Switzerland – and their opponents have been restricted to just five shots on target across four matches. Brazil’s dependable defence should see them through. Prediction: Brazil 2-1 Belgium. It’s time we gave Sweden the respect they deserve, not only for defying the odds at the World Cup but for doing so consistently over the last 18 months or so. Since crashing out of Euro 2016 and losing their best ever player in Zlatan Ibrahimovic, Janne Andersson has turned this squad into an incredibly functional team who are very difficult to beat. They have beaten Portugal, France and Italy since Euro 2016 and they topped a group where Germany were the clear favourites. They relish their underdog status and will not fear England. They boasting an impressive international record against England, with just one defeat in their last eight competitive encounters. They do have any star name but their record of five clean sheets in their last six matches shows they can rely on their defensive organisation. England have reasons to be concerned. They have struggled to create a great deal from open play since their scintillating start against Tunisia, particularly against the two stronger sides they have faced. Sweden have created seven more chances from open play than England but they do not have anyone as deadly as Harry Kane, who has scored six goals from just nine shots at this World Cup. England’s superior quality should just about win out, but it’s unlikely to be easy viewing yet again. Southgate’s side are the only quarter-finalists who have not kept a clean sheet in Russia so it may fall to Kane to bail them out once more. Prediction: England 2-1 Sweden. Having secured the upset of the round-of-16, if not the entire competition, Russia are beginning to believe in the seemingly impossible. With no optimism surrounding the squad or manager before the tournament, the hosts have already gone further than they would have expected and will see any progress from this stage as a huge achievement. Their odds to beat Croatia may not be as long as they were before the Spain match, but there remains little doubt about who will be the favourites in Sochi. That being said, Croatia’s performance in the round-of-16 left a lot to be desired. Zlatko Dalic’s side were among the most convincing teams in the group stage but looked well under par against Denmark. Russia manager Denis Cherchesov will have taken note of the way the Danes combated Croatia’s threat, particularly from Luka Modric and Ivan Rakitic in midfield. Reports suggest that Alan Dzagoev, who was injured when Russia played Saudi Arabia in the first game of the tournament, could return, though that would likely force star man Aleksandr Golovin out wide. Denis Cheryshev should return and Russia are also likely to revert to a back four. The likely absence of left-back Yuri Zhirkov is a blow and we could see a crucial mismatch on that flank between his replacement, Fedor Kudryashov, and the lively Croatia winger Ante Rebic. Saturday night’s game is probably the toughest to call. These two sides have taken and conceded fewer shots on target than the other six quarter-finalists, so goals may be at a premium. The hosts will hope to ride the increasing wave of optimism but Croatia will surely improve from their last match and progress to the semi-finals. Prediction: Croatia 2-0 Russia. • Follow WhoScored on Twitter and Facebook• Follow Martin Laurence on Twitter