Evan Davis has claimed that he watched an hour of The Simpsons every day for seven years. That might sound like a waste – think of everything he could have accomplished if he’d put those 2,500 or so hours to more constructive use – but it isn’t. In fact, it’s actually time incredibly well spent. Not only is The Simpsons one of the best programmes in the history of television, but it’s also the perfect crash course for any budding Newsnight presenter. Here are all the things it should have taught him. 1. First, sorry to break Evan’s heart, but Homer Simpson would definitely not watch Newsnight. In the 1991 episode Homer Defined, he revealed that his favourite news source was the softball US of A Today, “the only paper in America that’s not afraid to tell the truth: that everything is just fine”. 2. Mayor Quimby is every politician. Quimby wasn’t talking about Brexit when he said: “It is with great pride that I place the safety of our city in the hands of the first four people who showed up”, but he may as well have been. “I’ll admit I used the city treasury to fund the murder of my enemies, but ... ‘I’m a bad wittle boy’” could feasibly pass as a Boris Johnson quote. And “I’ll just amuse myself with some pornographic playing cards” is positively Trumpian. Basically, study Mayor Quimby and you’ll be granted the keys to the entire politician handbook. 3. Television often implements change for the sake of change, but the Simpsons episode The Itchy & Scratchy & Poochie Show is a compelling argument against this practice. Poochie – a cartoon dog with attitude – was a pointless, toothless addition to a beloved show that was doing just fine without him. He was a bad fit, and quickly killed off. A little bit like Newsnight Review, in fact. 4. Always do the opposite of anything Kent Brockman would do. Specifically, if Davis ever happens to see close-up footage of some ants, he should resist immediately welcoming them as his new insect overlords. 5. The episode Sideshow Bob Roberts is the definitive cultural statement about political populism. Newsnight should scrap this evening’s episode and just broadcast the whole thing in its place. Twice. 6. Bart Gets an Elephant is a top-five Simpsons episode, not least thanks to the appearance of DJ 3000: a hulking machine that spurts out random faux-topical inanities such as: “Looks like those clowns in Congress did it again. What a bunch of clowns.” Davis should be fully terrified about technology like this. 7. Both Newsnight and The Simpsons have been accused of racism in their time. In 2011 Newsnight received complaints after David Starkey said: “The whites have become black” during a segment about riots, and The Simpsons is still undergoing scrutiny for its depiction of south Asian character Apu. What can Davis learn here? That it’s better to deal with these things quickly and decisively. Let things drag out – like The Simpsons is doing with Apu – and the whole brand will be in tatters before you know it. 8. “Old man yells at cloud”: both a headline about Grandpa Simpson and a pretty dead-on description of the time they got Jeremy Paxman to read the weather. 9. The Simpsons has endured in part because all the characters have catchphrases: Homer has “D’oh”, Bart has “Eat my shorts”, Ned Flanders has “Okily dokily” and so on. If Davis wants to be remembered with any affection at all, he should introduce a catchphrase of his own as quickly as possible. My suggestions: “Has anyone seen my hammer?”, “Boopy boopy parp” and “I’m Evan Davis, dickwads”. 10. Longevity isn’t always worth it. The Simpsons has been off the boil for a decade and a half. The best a new episode can do now is not completely taint the show’s legacy, and you often wonder if the least harmful thing would just be to remove it from air. Newsnight is 25 years old. • Stuart Heritage writes about film, TV and music for the Guardian