If you are lucky, you live in a world in which the words Shopkins and Hatchimals don’t mean anything. When you go to the supermarket, you don’t pilot a course based on the rigid avoidance of stacks of small, coloured pods, inside which nestle a variety of plastic figures, the opening of which sends small children into a frenzy. The price point of these items – a few quid at most – is expertly pitched to wear down a parent’s resistance. If you have to bribe your child to pipe down, better plastic rubbish than sweets. At least, that’s what I used to think. But this week, after having a mega-clearout of my apartment, I piled up a year’s worth of disposable “collectible” toys, and it was so depressing, so environmentally horrific, that Shopkins and their ilk went instantly to the top of my list of non-Trump-related things to be furious about. I understand that a certain amount of brightly coloured plastic tat is unavoidable when you have children, and that, unless you are the type of parent who revels in spending hundreds of pounds on wooden toys crafted to look like they did in the olden days, you just have to suck it up and move on. But these things are pernicious. If they don’t get you at the supermarket, they get you at the vending machines that are in every UK service station I’ve visited, or they’re stuck to the front of children’s magazines as “free” giveaways. The amount of wasted human innovation that has gone into their creation is shocking. Hatchimals are eggs containing small creatures covered in fur. Shopkins are tiny, anthropomorphised household items, like handbags or ice-cream cones with eyes and a mouth. Some of them are scented, and there are 1,272 to collect, each belonging to some utterly mystifying classification system that the manufacturers present as a “family tree”. Yes, 1,272 of these charmless little gits. There is a fabricated mythology around them, designed to hook children’s interest the way football cards once did, with the figurines designated as common, rare, ultra rare, special edition, limited edition or exclusive. This adds to the fun of opening the package, but in my experience does nothing to make the toys more attractive once opened. They get tossed on to the pile, and on we go to the next. I know that collecting worthless stuff is an important part of childhood, and that there is, probably, nothing worse about these toys than the scratch ‘n’ sniff stickers I obsessed over or the packs of Top Trumps we collected. And yet the marketing angle sometimes seems much more sophisticated than it was when I was a kid – designed to encourage something in a child that was once left alone, some instinct to consume purely for the experience of consuming, rather than to put any value on the item itself. We loved our football cards. My kids do not love their Hatchimals, and yet still they clamour for more. Num Noms. Squinkies. Squishies. Splashlings. Fash’ems. Mash’ems. L.O.L. Surprise! Glitter Series (also Pets Series, Doll Series, Eye Spy Series and Pearl Surprise). And that’s before you get to the Happy Meals toys and the rubbish inside chocolate eggs. Please make it stop. • Emma Brockes is a Guardian columist