Previously on the Westminster sexual impropriety scandal, Andrea Leadsom, the leader of the House, promised a robust and independent system for handling the complaints of bullying and harassment suffered by those who work in and around parliament. The much-trailed system will be revealed this week and MPs will get to have their say. Hats off to Leadsom, whose feminist credentials have not always been the best. I know she cares about getting this right, not least because she has had to handle the “bants” of the one-time secretary of state for defence, Michael Fallon. When Leadsom complained of cold hands, so the story goes, Fallon allegedly replied: “I know somewhere you can put them to warm up.” I assume he wasn’t suggesting that she wrap her hands around the Trident nuclear missile... So, having knocked back Fallon, she spoke up. Leadsom gets that it doesn’t have to be rape – or even groping – for toxic attitudes and toxic comments to make people feel marginalised at work. She set the bar at any behaviour that made people “feel uncomfortable” when embarking on her overhaul. The plan she has created with a cross-party group of MPs, experts and trade unions will be brilliant, right? Well, let’s see. It will be independent as it is being overseen by the independent commissioner for standards. It will include specialist support from experts in sexual violence. For the first time, the young women pulled on to the lap of a dirty old man decked in ermine will have somewhere to go to at least report it. Tick, tick, tick, so why do I still feel a tad uneasy? It’s the politics, stupid. The new system will bear the influence of grandees from every corner of the House. Leadsom and other members of the committee will have been leaned on by their people. The smokescreen of logistical and legal problems will have watered down the recommendations. These will be presented as good governance by those advocating a little change here and there, but will be an exercise in protection. The proposal will include a new code of conduct detailing what MPs can and cannot do. But this means the new system won’t allow for historical complaints as it wouldn’t be just to hold MPs to account for behaviour that they didn’t know was wrong because it hadn’t been specifically laid out to them. MPs and peers, the people who make the laws of this land and tell the public what to do, seemingly need their own conduct fed to them like babies. The code of conduct will remove any doubt that you shouldn’t squeeze the arse of your teenage member of staff or send dick pics to the intern. Phew, I was just about to make my researcher gently rub sunscreen on my chest – thank God I dodged that bullet by reading the code of conduct that tells me that that would be inappropriate. Give me strength. It is politics that has stopped historical cases being brought. All of the cases we already know about would qualify easily for reporting, but as they have already done their damage many think that those jolly fine chaps don’t need a second going over. Why rake over old coals and damage the parties’ reputations again? Justice for one, but also because we shouldn’t want Gropey McGropison walking among us. The basic misunderstanding of this sort of protectionism is that, post-#Metoo, MPs who used to be handsy will have got the message and have mended their ways. That isn’t how powerful perpetrators work. They won’t stop feeling entitled to the odd squeeze, they won’t suddenly start respecting women and people lower down the food chain.They’ll still think suggesting that you wrap your hands around their manhood is just a joke. I’ve got news for you: I have taken complaints from people about sexual harassment since the story first broke. In the words of Theresa May, nothing has changed. I’m not suggesting that we should kick every over-zealous texter or crap joke-maker out of their job, but they do need to be held accountable. Every political party needs to face the fact that they still have a problem of trying to protect themselves at any cost. Bad behaviour must come before bad publicity in the hierarchy of concern. If you care more about the little rose logo, or the burning torch, or tree, or whatever branding the Tories currently think makes them look more modern, than the safety of your staff and volunteers, then your political party is bankrupt. The day that Westminster realises that the greatest damage to us all is when we turn a blind eye to our mates, then we will have a chance of living up to the idea that members should not bring the House in to disrepute, which, funnily enough, was always in the code of conduct. Let’s hope someone actually reads the new one.