Danijel Subasic Suspect positioning for Trippier’s free-kick and slow to react to the shot. Later denied Kane. 6 Sime Vrsaljko Recovered from a knee problem to start. Eagerly got forward and set up Perisic’s goal. 7 Dejan Lovren A liability early on and clearly targeted by England. Lucky to escape a booking. 6 Domagoj Vida Booed by the Russian fans here for that ‘Ukraine’ video. Much more solid than Lovren. 7 Ivan Strinic Seen as a weak link but the full-back provided an attacking presence on the left. 7 Luka Modric Grew into the game after a slightly slow start and, as ever, made Croatia tick. 7 Marcelo Brozovic Brought in as a screening midfielder. Saw plenty of the ball and linked play well. 7 Ivan Rakitic More influential after half-time. Played slightly to the left and showed touches of class. 7 Ante Rebic Squandered great chance after Perisic hit a post. Aggressive running troubled Young. Booked. 6 Mario Mandzukic Got better as the game went on. Forced Pickford into two point-blank saves before scoring. Booked. 7 Ivan Perisic Croatia’s biggest attacking threat. Showed scoring instincts for his goal and also hit a post. 8 Subs Pivaric (for Strinic 95) 6, Kramaric (for Rebic 101) 6, Corluka (for Mandzukic 115) 6, Badelj (for Modric 118) 6 Jordan Pickford Two important saves to thwart Mandzukic but had no chance with either Croatia goal. 7 Kyle Walker Made some vital blocks but caught out when Perisic nipped ahead of him for his goal. Booked. 7 John Stones Looked so composed for long periods but was caught ball-watching for Mandzukic’s extra-time goal. 6 Harry Maguire So dependable, close to scoring but lucky not to be penalised for grappling with Lovren. 8 Kieran Trippier Best right wing-back/right-back in the tournament. Curled in a superb free-kick after only five minutes. 7 Jordan Henderson Another impressive display. Ran himself into the ground before Dier took over in the middle. 7 Ashley Young Not a natural defender and had his work cut out against Rebic. Replaced by Danny Rose. 6 Jesse Lingard Tireless defensively and worked hard to support the attack. Missed a good chance at 1-0. 6 Dele Alli Lively in the first half, when he showed some neat footwork, but faded as Croatia improved. 7 Harry Kane Worked hard but had little impact. Crucially, should have doubled England’s lead before half-time. 6 Raheem Sterling Darting runs in behind made him a threat but end-product not there. Replaced by Rashford. 6 Subs Marcus Rashford (for Sterling 74) 6, Danny Rose (for Young 91) 6, Eric Dier (for Henderson 97) 6, Jamie Vardy (for Walker 112) 6 Referee Cuneyt Cakir (Tur)