Boris Johnson has been silent since his abrupt resignation as foreign secretary on Monday, refusing media appearances and making no public statement aside from the spiky letter he sent to the prime minister. But if he decides he wants a tilt at the Tory leadership after bottling it at the last minute in 2016, then Theresa May’s fate is likely to rest with a group of ruthless and single-minded backbench MPs – the European Research Group (ERG). Conservative party leadership rules mean rival contenders for the top job cannot simply challenge the prime minister. A contest would only be held if she loses a vote of no confidence, triggered by at least 48 MPs sending letters to the chair of the backbench 1922 Committee. After his bruising stint at the Foreign Office, even some of Johnson’s erstwhile backers have drifted away, and most Tory MPs believe he is unlikely to muster a large enough cohort of supporters to fire off sufficient letters. But the ERG does have enough members to trigger a no-confidence vote if it decides it is the best – or the only – way of trying to force the prime minister’s hand and persuade her to drop the painstakingly constructed Chequers compromise. And for ERG members, the issue of securing what they regard as an acceptable Brexit is an issue that trumps everything else – even, if necessary, party loyalty. In the run-up to the referendum, the Vote Leave mastermind Dominic Cummings referred to the small army of ardent Brexiters on the Tory backbenches as the “flying monkeys” – willing to defy their leader and the whips and unleash political chaos in the name of Brexit. Once the poll was won, the gang evolved into the ERG, and its then leader, Steve Baker, is now back among the monkeys on the backbenches after resigning as a junior Brexit minister. For the moment the group’s strategy is a drip-drip of coordinated resignations, keeping No 10 guessing. David Davis’s friends are adamant he did not coordinate his departure with Johnson, but Baker clearly decided he had more chance of influencing the government from outside, and a series of other moves since appear to have been carefully choreographed. Walkouts on Tuesday by a pair of little-known Tory vice-chairs, Ben Bradley and Maria Caulfield, did not have the impact of Johnson’s resignation, and the party’s campaign machine will roll on smoothly without them. But the timing of the announcement 15 minutes before the prime minister was due to give a press conference demonstrated that political niceties have been discarded, and will raise fears in Downing Street that there could be more to come. In his resignation letter, Bradley inverted May’s claim to her MPs on Monday night that failing to fall in behind her plan would risk the Conservatives losing a general election to Labour. Instead, he said that if voters in his marginal constituency of Mansfield – a rare Tory gain in 2017 – believed the government was not delivering “Brexit in spirit as well as in name, then we are handing Jeremy Corbyn the keys to Number 10.” Both MPs pointed to the Northern Ireland backstop, which the government signed up to in December, as a key part of how the government had ended up with what they argued was an unacceptable compromise. The Chequers plan involves the creation of a “UK-EU free trade area” for goods, governed by a “common rulebook”. Hardline Brexiters believe it would limit Britain’s ability to strike new free trade deals, and they fear more compromises are inevitable. The ERG’s chair, Jacob Rees-Mogg, has repeatedly made clear in recent days that he does not believe a change of leader is the right approach, but he has also suggested he and his colleagues could not back the Chequers deal in parliament. However, some are already calling for May’s head. When ERG members gathered in a stuffy room in Westminster on Monday night, Andrew Bridgen, a longtime critic of the government’s strategy, told his colleagues: “The longer we have this preposterous and damaging policy, the more we will haemorrhage support. This has got to be killed and it’s got to be killed before recess.” He feels so strongly that he has already written – and openly published – a letter of no confidence in Theresa May and sent it to the 1922 Committee chair, Sir Graham Brady. Nadine Dorries, the outspoken Bedfordshire MP, said: “I think that we in this room, while being reasonable, need to feel some steel in our spines. If you think that No 10 are going to capitulate to what we think is reasonable, we are wrong. They will not prepare for ‘no deal’.” Others urged more caution and suggested colleagues wait for detailed proposals in the government’s white paper on Brexit, expected to be published on Thursday. Bridgen and Dorries are both consistently outspoken, and No 10 will be unsurprised at their stance, but Bradley and Caulfield were not previously regarded as troublemakers. At the very least, these latest resignations suggest the number of MPs willing to vote against the Chequers deal is growing, increasing the need for May to call on Labour backing for it. But May’s sense that she had faced down the rebels and weathered the storm is likely to have been shaken by Tuesday’s resignations – which took the total number of departures since Chequers to seven – and she will be worried about what the flying monkeys will unleash next.