At the end of the pre-show announcement for the Broadway premiere of Straight White Men at the Hayes Theater, the non-binary Native American performer Ty Defoe explains how the play will work: “Each of the actors will play only one character. They will stay in character and pretend not to see you.” This might be the most subversive thing that Young Jean Lee, one of American theater’s most keenly seditious practitioners, has ever done. Lee made her start with plays like Songs of the Dragons Flying to Heaven and The Shipment, funny, angry, tilt-a-whirl takes on identity politics plays that made audiences laugh and then choke on that laughter. As a woman, as an Asian American, as someone who was profoundly skeptical of the normalizing work of realistic drama, theater was a dangerous place for her, and she has made it a more dangerous place for everyone else, too. For Lee to present a naturalistic drama starring white men, a demographic that has never found purchase in her work, now that’s radical. During the pre-show, music by women and people of color is meant to blare aggressively loud, but this is Broadway, so at a preview performance the volume stayed pretty moderate. Once it cuts out, Defoe and the performance artist Kate Bornstein, wearing colorful ringmaster gear, welcome the audience into the space, making them explicitly aware of questions of privilege, comfort, access, responsibility. Then a shimmery curtain rises on a punishingly ordinary living room, its tan leather sofa squatting in the middle. Around the set is a wood frame and below that frame is a plaque reading “Straight White Men”, so the whole thing looks like a diorama in a cut-rate Natural History museum. We are gradually introduced to Ed (Stephen Payne, wry and affectionate) and his three sons, Drew, Jake and Matt. Baby brother Drew (Armie Hammer, looking like a runway-ready lumberjack) is a successful novelist. Middle brother Jake (Josh Charles, nervy and excellent) is a recently divorced banker. Oldest brother Matt (Paul Schneider, cannily bland), once the family’s great white hope, is now working a temp job at a community organization, “making copies for the oppressed”, and living at with dad. Home for Christmas, his little brothers want to know what has gone wrong. If that doesn’t seem especially interesting, that’s probably the point as Straight White Men is both a realistic play and a critique of realism. As the play revs up, under Anna D Shapiro’s brisk, lucid direction and the company’s spry, self-aware acting, the drama’s engine starts to overheat. And Lee is happy to let it burn. The problem, at least on the surface, is Matt. Why hasn’t he accepted his God-given right to clamber to the top of whatever ladder he prefers to ascend? Drew thinks he’s depressed. Jake thinks he’s accepted too many of their mother’s liberal-left lessons. (She once redesigned their Monopoly game as Privilege; you lose money for being white every time you pass Go.) Matt insists he’s just fine. This is realism’s typical remit. It identifies a problem and then fixes it, or at least explains it, usually by exposing some kind of past trauma or primal scene. Though it risks spoilers to say so, that doesn’t seem to interest Lee. She’s more interested in the exquisite disappointment and frustration – for the characters and for us – when nothing gets revealed or settled or renewed or revenged. Instead of a knockdown, drag-out there’s a dance party (choreographed by the invaluable Faye Driscoll) and though there’s a final Ibsenite discussion scene nothing resolves. Because how can it? No play, however shrewd, can change or compass the profound inequalities of American life, or even of American theater, and Lee is clever enough to know that. Bornstein and Defoe run the show inside the theater, but once it ends, it isn’t their autographs the stage door crowd are clamoring for. Straight White Men quietly clocks all kinds of straight white male privilege – slamming doors, eating straight from the container, not picking up after oneself. But it doesn’t solve it. Unlike Monopoly or Privilege, that game’s unwinnable. In an illuminating scene, Jake tells Drew that he’s broken the Nintendo, a present for Ed. “You shouldn’t slam the controller down every time you lose,” Drew says. “No,” says Jake. “I shouldn’t lose.”