Rupert Murdoch has upped his offer for Sky to £24.5bn, trumping the offer tabled by rival Comcast and intensifying the bidding war for the broadcaster. The bid worth £14 per share means Murdoch’s 21st Century Fox will have to pay £14.7bn for the 61% of Sky it doesn’t already own. The bid is a significant increase on the £12.50 a share, or £22bn valuation, offer made by rival Comcast. Comcast must post its offer document to shareholders. It resulted in Sky’s independent directors withdrawing their recommendation to shareholders to accept Murdoch’s first £10.75 offer, to Sky shareholders by Friday. Murdoch’s all-cash bid, which is 30% higher than his original offer and a 12% premium on Comcast’s deal, has been recommended to shareholders by Sky’s independent committee. Murdoch has felt emboldened to forge ahead with a new offer as he is finally set to be given clearance by the government to take over Sky. The new culture secretary, Jeremy Wright, will clear the bid in an announcement scheduled to be made by the end of the day on Thursday. Earlier this week, the Guardian revealed that Murdoch would gain clearance to finally takeover Sky, after 18 months of battling regulatory red tape and political opposition to the deal, and raise his bid. Wright, who has only been in the job days, will deliver the result on a final consultation on plans to make Murdoch sell Sky News to reduce his control of UK news media. The government said on Tuesday it had only had five responses to the consultation. As well as selling Sky News, most probably to Disney, Murdoch must also top up any potential shortfall in funding by the channels’s new owner to keep its budget at £100m for the next 15 years. The battle for Sky is playing out against a larger fight between Disney and Comcast to take over most of 21st Century Fox, which owns 39% of Sky as well as assets including the Hollywood studio behind films such as Deadpool and X-Men.Last month, Disney, which has offered to buy Sky News from Murdoch to help him secure clearance to buy Sky, upped its offer for Fox to $71.3bn ($38 a share). Earlier in the month, Comcast had trumped Disney’s first offer for Fox ($55.4bn; $28) with a $65bn, or $35 a share, bid.