Anyone with even a passing interest in baseball knows that Mike Trout is, and has been since not long after breaking through as a teenager in 2012, the best player in the sport in a way that defies easy categorization. The Los Angeles Angels’ center fielder does most baseball things exceptionally and none of them badly. He hits for average (.306 career batting average, sixth among active players) and he hits for power (.571 slugging percentage, first) while playing in a park that favors pitchers. His patient plate approach routinely lands him among the league leaders in walks (.414 on-base percentage, second) and once on board he’s a menace on the basepaths, with a lifetime 162-game average of nearly 30 stolen bases (with an absurd 84% success rate, second all-time among players with at least 200 attempts). And it’s all tempered by a single-minded hunger to shore up what few holes exist in his game. Early-career nitpicks which included his average defense in center field and susceptibility to high fastballs, have been ironed out through shoe-leather dedication to his craft. Trout, who turns 27 next month, has finished either first or second in Most Valuable Player voting in every full season he’s played, coming in fourth last year despite missing nearly a quarter of the season due to injury. But the scary part, at least for pitchers, is the south Jersey native is only getting better. Behold his staggering 2018 campaign to date, which may come to represent his pièce de résistance. He doesn’t lead the league in any of the traditional Triple Crown categories (though, notably, he’s the pacesetter in walks), but a quick dive into the alphabet soup of advanced statistics make a compelling case that Trout is on pace for the most prolific individual season in baseball history, challenging Babe Ruth’s epochal 1923 campaign. The acronyms can be dizzying so let’s stick with wins above replacement player (WAR) – a rough composite figure that measures a player’s total contributions to his team. Once again Trout is so far ahead of the pack it’s laughable. His career WAR of 61.1 – 60 is considered the baseline for a Hall of Fame career – suggests he’d be a cinch for Cooperstown if he retired tomorrow. By the end of the year he will likely have the most career WAR ever for a player of his age. His only competition is himself. So how is a player who’s demonstrably operating in the rarified air of a LeBron James or Serena Williams or Lionel Messi, brokering in the sort of transcendent ability that normally commands the general public’s imagination, somehow doing it under the radar? Sure, there’s not an avid baseball fan alive who’s not in awe of Trout’s craft. But a crossover star he is not. The gnawing reality is the average person on the street, even if his name rings a bell, might struggle to pick him out of a lineup. There have been no shortage of theories proffered. The notion of east coast bias in sports media surely carries less weight than decades ago when print set the agenda and games played out west ended too late to make it into the paper, but there’s no question Trout’s exposure is undercut by playing in Los Angeles (Anaheim, really) – and not for the more fashionable Dodgers – which means a lion’s share of his games don’t start until after 10pm ET. It certainly doesn’t help that Trout’s Angels have made the playoffs but once during his career, denying him a crucial platform: the only games many casual fans watch all season. Some have put it down to his quiet, workmanlike demeanor and tendency to eschew self-promotion. Others have argued, as the sport’s TV ratings languish despite stratospheric profits, that people just don’t care as much about baseball anymore. But more than anything we’ve become anesthetized to a greatness that’s broadly unexplainable and borne from mind-numbing consistency, something that demands to be seen on a nightly basis to be fully appreciated. Yes, it’s strange that baseball’s best player, who in a decade’s time barring injury may be in the conversation for the greatest to ever play the game, is not more famous. It also couldn’t be more immaterial. So put on the coffee for those late-night first pitches and do your best to enjoy the show, because there won’t be another quite like him any time soon.