Sharp Objects is set to be the first must-see drama of the summer, a claustrophobic tale of controlling mothers and angry daughters adapted from the first novel by Gone Girl author Gillian Flynn. The eight-part TV series stars Amy Adams as troubled journalist Camille Preaker, who returns to her home town to report on a series of murders, only to find that her past threatens to engulf her. It has been described by Flynn as both a western and an examination of matriarchal power. Its main influence, however, is a book that was feverishly passed from classroom to classroom several decades ago by a generation of excited girls: Flowers in the Attic by Virginia Andrews (published in the US as V C Andrews). Like that tale, which follows the four Dollanganger siblings as they hide in the attic of their grandparents’ mansion while their untrustworthy mother fights for her inheritance, Sharp Objects has decidedly gothic undertones. Its influence can be seen clearly in the tense relationship between the furious, damaged Camille and her mother, Adora (played in the TV series by Patricia Clarkson), a fading southern belle with a strong narcissistic streak. “Anyone who reads Sharp Objects will certainly see a little of the Flowers influence in there,” Flynn told New York magazine in 2014. “I had a dime-store copy that had been passed around my friends. I still read it once a year or something, if I’m between books.” She is not the only author to feel that way. In the early 80s, long before the current boom in young adult fiction, teenage girls learned about life, love and everything in between from two books: Judy Blume’s Forever, and Flowers in the Attic. Where Blume was every girl’s cool aunt – her realistic, smartly written stories allowing us to feel less worried about everything from first periods to first sex – Andrews was memorably described as “the Emily Brontë of the MTV generation”, and her floridly written books, with their illicit subject matter – murder, incest, amputation, rape – were treated like contraband, passed down by older girls with covert whispers about the secrets within. And what secrets they were: a key plot point in Flowers in the Attic sees the older siblings, Cathy and Chris, fall in love during their captivity, a plot twist that seemed bizarrely OK to us at 13. Later books would tackle fathers selling their children, what to do when the man you love turns out to be your uncle, and how to cope with your family’s decision to name you after your dead sister and lock you away from the world. “I was told about the books by a friend’s babysitter, who was in high school,” says novelist Sara Gran. “She said: ‘But they’re too old for you’ – so then we were really interested.” Gran describes Andrews as “a genius… her work was unique, no one else could have written it”. Fellow crime writer Megan Abbott agrees, adding that the covers had an almost magnetic pull. “I’ll never forget coming across Flowers in the Attic and its original keyhole cover at my best friend’s house,” she says. “I was entranced by the very look of it – the spectral family that you could peer into through the cover cutout. They are such crazy, crazy books and I mean that as the highest compliment. They are books willing to go to all the dark places.” While teenage girls devoured Andrews, critics were not so kind. The Washington Post declared Flowers in the Attic to be “deranged swill” and “the worst writer I have ever read” and the New York Times asked of My Sweet Audrina, Andrews’s lurid 1982 standalone novel: “Does a sensible reader really want to know more?” Andrews’s sales suggested yes. Flowers in the Attic sold more than 3m copies in paperback, My Sweet Audrina topped the New York Times bestseller lists within three days of release, and by the time of her death from breast cancer in 1986 she had sold more than 24m books. “I think a big part of the appeal of her work, especially Flowers in the Attic and My Sweet Audrina, is that she takes the universal emotional realities of adolescence and projects them on to an operatic stage,” says novelist Robin Wasserman, whose bestselling Girls on Fire taps into a similar intensity of feeling. “The feeling of captivity, the sense that your life is being decided for you by remote adults who have opaque and probably nefarious purposes; the temptation of forbidden love…” Cassandra Clare, the author of the Mortal Instruments series, agrees. “Her books have the power that fairytales have and the same horrific elements,” she says. “Flowers in the Attic has a Hansel and Gretel quality that the book itself references with asides about witches and candy houses.” It’s tempting to argue that the reason Andrews could tap so directly into that teenage angst was because of her own situation. By the time Flowers in the Attic was published she was in her mid-50s (although like any good southern belle she was vague about her age, giving a different number in each of her rare interviews) and had had reduced mobility since her teens. Her accounts of what caused this differ and include suggestions of a fall, progressive arthritis and a bungled operation. Interviews suggest an adulthood lived in near-isolation with only the company of her mother, who reportedly never read her books. The truth about her state of health was similarly vague. An early interview with People magazine suggested that Andrews, who was pictured in a wheelchair, was largely immobile, and although the author would furiously deny this, she did acknowledge: “All of Cathy’s feelings about being in prison were my feelings. So that, when I read them now, I cry.” “The key to Virginia is that she was like a very romantic southern schoolgirl with Bette Davis in her soul,” says Ann Patty, who edited Andrews’s original novels – (the VC Andrews brand continued after her death under a ghost writer) and describes the author as “tiny, almost like a doll, always impeccably turned out and dressed in pastels”. “Part of that came from her own situation – she knew what it felt like to be confined, she knew what it felt like to be lonely. But she could be very funny as well. I would stand on her wheelchair when we went out and we’d whizz down the hill laughing. She’d say about her characters: ‘What new torture shall I throw their way?’” Perhaps the real key to Andrews’s success – and certainly the thing that Flynn taps into with Sharp Objects – lies in her novels’ dissection of female anger. Cathy, the heroine of Flowers in the Attic, might look perfect but inside she is furious. Indeed, the book and its sequels can be read as one long howl of almost incoherent rage. “Her books made – and make – people profoundly uncomfortable,” says Abbott. “They’re ‘hysterical’ books in that way, out of control and female and thus dangerous. I think we don’t like to ponder what they tell us about young women, about ourselves. So they’re dismissed because it’s easier that way.” Sharp Objects starts on Sky Atlantic on Monday at 9pm