What’s the naughtiest thing Theresa May has done? The prime minister would have us believe that running through fields of wheat was her greatest misdemeanour, but really a far worse habit that she still regularly indulges in is to kick things into the long grass for as long as possible. May’s tendency to procrastinate is most obvious in the way she has handled the Brexit negotiations, delaying important cabinet discussions on Britain’s future trading relationship with the EU for months. But her predilection for putting off difficult decisions is actually more dangerous when it comes to domestic policy, because she has no deadline by which she must make up her mind. There is no Michel Barnier breathing down the prime minister’s neck on social care, for instance. The sector is on its knees and has no long-term funding settlement despite decades of promises from politicians. Every day, many hospitals have hundreds of patients who are medically fit for discharge yet have no social care package in place so they can leave. Care providers are giving up and local authorities are watching the black holes in their budgets yawn wider. May’s allies insist she is acutely aware of the problems in the sector, given that she was the prime minister who tried to use a general election manifesto to solve the crisis. But of course, that 2017 manifesto fell apart, and the experience of the “dementia tax” has made leaving the matter well alone far more tempting. Health ministers are desperate for a solution soon, as is NHS England chief Simon Stevens. But though May and the health secretary, Jeremy Hunt, were able to cajole the Treasury into a £20bn settlement for the NHS over the next five years, none of that money was earmarked for social care. The chancellor, Philip Hammond, is adamant that social care must be discussed in the usual way in a spending review, alongside all the other departments vying for cash such as defence. So there is now a conflict between those ministers who don’t think social care can wait much longer, and those who believe Hunt’s department has gained more than enough money already. That most of the cabinet are demanding more money isn’t really May’s fault: many of her ministers are having to deal with the legacy of cuts made under David Cameron’s government. There is much private frustration in the departments of Health and of Local Government – which also has a responsibility for social care – that local authority budgets were plundered in the 2010 spending review. Old cuts have left deep wounds, and ministers have grown tired of applying sticking plasters. But the prime minister is lacking in sufficient authority and will to tell those loudly campaigning for more money, such as the defence secretary, Gavin Williamson, to keep quiet and negotiate in private, as Hunt did with the NHS cash. And while giving the NHS more money is an obvious piece of good political PR, social care reform isn’t nearly so easy, as it involves telling a public who largely think such provision is free that they are going to have to spend their own money, either through taxation or when they access the care. One trick Stevens in particular seems keen to pull is a little-noted line in the NHS funding settlement that the government will “ensure that social care doesn’t impose additional pressure on the NHS”. He remarked this weekend that the “obvious implication” of this is there will be more money coming for social care. It’s not clear the Treasury knows what it has signed up to, let alone whether it will honour this commitment. The sector has been waiting for a green paper on social care, but over the past year the regular conversations I’ve had with those working on it have seen it grow greener and greener: not so much long grass as deep forest. Hunt recently admitted that this document had been delayed until the autumn, and it is my understanding that the paper will set out a number of options for consultation, rather than a preferred option with a definite timetable for implementation, as campaigners have called for. This is typical May: aides report the prime minister will take ages to ensure she knows every single detail about a policy before even starting on the decision-making process, which only concludes at the very last minute. This week she plans to stage a lock-in at Chequers in order to get her ministers to agree on key aspects of Brexit. She’s only adopted this tough approach because she simply has no time left in the negotiations with the EU. Time ran out for social care a long while back, but just as those wheat fields were apparently irresistible to the young prime minister, so is the long grass that helps her avoid making the decisions her job requires. • Isabel Hardman is a political journalist and an assistant editor of the Spectator