They seem to have a penchant for musicals about mortality at this address. Last year they imported a strange off-Broadway tuner called Death Takes a Holiday. Now comes an even weirder show based on the true-life story, set in 1930s Florida, about a German immigrant’s obsession with a Cuban-American girl that led him to preserve her corpse for seven years. The show’s creators see it as a romantic love story; to me, it looks more like Psycho. To be fair, the first half has a perkily comic tone. Jill Santoriello (book, music and lyrics) and her collaborators, Jason Huza and Jeremiah James, give an amusing picture of a sun-kissed island full of beach bums, cheerful con artists and Carmen-like workers from a local cigar factory (you see why Tennessee Williams and Ernest Hemingway were drawn to the place). It also attracts a radiology technician who goes under the name of Count Carl von Cosel and becomes fixated with the beautiful Elena, who has tuberculosis. Even though Carl lavishes time, money and his questionable medical gifts on Elena, she dies and it is at this point the musical itself starts to decompose. The second half is taken up with Carl’s devotion to Elena’s abducted body and his eventual trial. The musical sees the story as a testament to Carl’s undying love. Indeed, in a shouty Lloyd Webber-style ballad, he repeatedly tells us: “I’d feel sorry for you if you never felt this way.” But the musical skates over the lurid details of Carl’s doctoring of Elena’s corpse and vainly asks us to empathise with a practising necrophiliac. It is also typical of the show’s sentimentality that Alyssa Martyn, however charming as Elena, remains to the end the immaculately bridal figure of Carl’s imagination. Wade McCollum, brought over from New York, is impressive as Carl, portraying him as a besotted Mittyesque fantasist, and there is lively support from Sophia Lewis as Elena’s predatory sister. But, although Marc Robin’s production looks fine, and Santoriello can write a jaunty tune, I can’t see a musical about mummification ever catching on.