Jacinda Ardern has welcomed sweeping government reform for families in a video filmed while she is sitting on her sofa, cradling her baby, Neve. The families package was a core part of Labour’s campaign promises, and aims to make New Zealand “the best country in the world to raise a family”, as well as lifting 64,000 children out of poverty by 2020. In the video, Ardern said the package was her proudest achievement as prime minister so far. On Sunday paid-parental leave increased from 18 to 22 weeks, and to 26 weeks from July 2020. Babies born on or after 1 July will be eligible for a NZ$60 a week payment for the first year of a child’s life, with some families able to claim the payment till the child reaches three years old. Since giving birth on 21 June, Ardern has been on maternity leave in her Auckland home with partner Clarke Gayford. In her first video since being discharged from Auckland hospital on 24 June, Ardern is pictured sitting in her living room, cradling her daughter in a woollen blanket. “This is my permanent state at the moment, either breastfeeding or this,” Ardern said, glancing at her sleeping daughter. “I’m glad no one could hear that just now!” says Ardern later in the video, laughing and glancing again at her baby. There were more than 3,000 comments on Ardern’s first video since returning home, the overwhelming majority of them supportive and encouraging of the new mother and prime minister. “A prime minister wrapped in a blanket with a new baby still putting her country first,” commented Audrie Scott on Facebook. “You are setting new boundaries prime minister!” Towards the end of the video Ardern took time to respond to questions from viewers, replying by name in real time. “Karen, I’m doing really really great thank you, I promise. I was waiting for anyone to say I look tired. I promise I am not too bad I really just don’t have any make-up on, so that’s probably why I have a bit more bags under the eyes than usual ... but we are doing great, we are doing really great.” National party finance spokeswoman Amy Adams said 1.7 million New Zealanders would be worse off under the families package. “Changes such as higher fuel taxes, rent increases and higher income taxes are costing Kiwi families over $100 a week,” said Adams. “And that’s an unacceptable burden on New Zealanders who are trying to get ahead.” Ardern signed off her video in typical fashion – with a smile– and promised to read through the thousands of comments soon. “But in the meantime I am going to sit here with my human hot-water bottle, and thanks everyone for the lovely messages.”