There is something irresistible about long foods. From spaghetti to cheese strings and strawberry laces, they offer a prolonged eating experience – stretching, slurping, sucking – which brings out my inner Augustus Gloop. Long foods offer a green light to eat with your hands, make a mess and, perhaps more than usual, turn eating into a multi-sensory theme park. So imagine my excitement at the promise of Chinese restaurant Murger Hanhan’s 12-foot noodles, a glee that most closely resembled the pink-cheeked emoji with the wiggly fingers. Gimme! And it is apt that I thought in emoji: 12-foot noodles sound like the very definition of a millennial fad, all appearance over substance, made for the Instagram generation. Inevitably, it is social media and a click-hungry press who have objectified the noodles thus: Murger Hanhan, just off Piccadilly in central London, specialises in the cuisine of Xi’an, a city in China’s Shaanxi province, and – as is authentic – its menu lists these starchy colossi with their true, onomatopoeic moniker “Biang Biang Mian”. In Xi’an, they are defined not by their length but by the noise they make – “bang, bang!” – when they are made. I went to Murger Hanhan to watch the process and eat the results. Chef Michael Lee took two sausage-shaped morsels of dough – made that morning simply with flour, water and salt, then brushed with oil – and began to rolled them out on a work surface. Sausages fast became elastic ribbons, which Lee undulated and whacked against the stainless steel before folding them to stretch still more, then ripping them in half from top to bottom to double their length in an instant. It was delightfully deft, although if you come expecting to see a chef make a noodle that is actually 12 feet long, you might be disappointed. Twelve feet is actually the cumulative length of two noodles stuck together after they have been boiled in a frothing wok of water; even then I’m not sure they’re really twice the height of my dad. But still, they are very long noodles – and wide, too, a good two inches. Once boiled, they are thrown into a deep bowl with soy, vinegar and bang bang sauce (onion, garlic, chilli). Black ribbons of fungus, cubes of boiled potato, blanched pak choi and Chinese leaves, a tomato and scrambled-egg sauce (looks weird, tastes great), sour pork, ginger, spring onions and chilli oil are all added into the mix (typically for Xi’an, the flavours have bang, too). Xi’an is known for using more wheat than rice – it is located in the Guanzhong Plain, where there is lower rainfall than elsewhere in China – so the combination of wheat noodles and punchy condiments in biang biang mian is a representative bowlful of the cuisine. Even if your chopstick swag is significantly better than mine, this dish probably isn’t the best choice for a date. It’s a hunched, unwieldy, slappy affair – less Lady and the Tramp eating spaghetti by moonlight, more Jaws – but it’s as tactile as I’d hoped, the thick, doughy belts of noodle hugging my tongue alongside the pak choi’s crunch, the egg and tomato’s velvet sweetness, the sauce’s umami piquancy. It’s a generous portion of deliciousness for the reasonable sum of £10.80. More biang biang for your buck.