As he made it to the finish line in Roubaix on Sunday, the 52nd rider to come home on a day of bone-rattling cobbles and throat-clogging dust, Mark Cavendish would have been looking forward to a rest day. The first week of the 2018 Tour de France was harsh on a man who, chasing the all-time record of stage wins, had started the season with a series of bad crashes. The signs have not been promising for one of the most remarkable British sporting figures of our lifetime. The four victories that would bring him level with Eddy Merckx’s 34 are now out of reach for this year, at least. After a 500-mile transfer to the first rest day in Annecy, three days in the high mountains come before his next chance of a win, at the end of Friday’s flat stage from Bourg d’Oisans to Valence. Two more opportunities then present themselves, in Pau on stage 18 and in Paris on the final day. Paris would be a good one to win, of course. It would bring back memories of his four consecutive triumphs on the Champs Élysées, none more resplendent than 2012, when he wore the world champion’s rainbow jersey and was led into the final kilometre by his yellow-clad teammate Bradley Wiggins. For British cycling, that seemed like the day of days. So the record will have to wait until next year at least, and there are plenty of people ready to venture the opinion that the Manxman has missed his opportunity. Cavendish himself appeared to give them support when he was asked before this year’s Grand Départ whether he still commanded the same power that was at his disposal in the years when we was winning four, five and even six stages in a single Tour. His reply was typically blunt. “No,” he said. “I’m 33 years old and I’ve got four kids at home.” Others believe that his age has yet to assume a real relevance. Clearly his power and endurance are sufficient to carry him to the end of a stage in the leading group. His instinct for the right place to be in the hectic scuffle of the closing showdown is unlikely to have deserted him. What might be more relevant is the second part of his statement. The “four kids at home” are, as this emotional man has often said, the light of his life. They include a baby son, born in May, whom he has hardly seen, thanks to his pre-Tour training regime. The writer Cyril Connolly once warned that the pram in the hallway was the enemy of promise, while Enzo Ferrari believed that marriage slowed his drivers down by dividing their concentration. While neither view might stand up to serious examination, there could be occasions when it rings true. Cavendish’s devotion to his sport at all levels is beyond question. But sprinting is a matter of fine margins, both physical and mental, and a father of four would probably not be quite as keen to expose himself to the kind of risk that led to his collision with Peter Sagan a year ago, for which the Slovak was disqualified from the Tour. The crash ended Cavendish’s race with a shoulder injury which, he told my colleague William Fotheringham recently, has permanently affected the way he rides. “Gone are the days when I got angry,” he also said during the same interview, but there have been one or two signs of the sparks that once lit the bonfire of his competitive ferocity. At the end of Friday’s stage in Chartres his temper flared briefly when he accused journalists of concentrating on his own “choppy” riding rather than that of others. But he also conceded that, although his power meter had been giving encouraging messages, he was not able to match the speed of those ahead of him, led by Dylan Groenewegen, a 25-year-old Dutchman. A day later he might have had a rueful chuckle when he found himself elevated from 10th to eighth place in Amiens following the relegation of two of his direct rivals. André Greipel and Fernando Gaviria had displeased the commissaires when they came together in the final 300 metres while trying in vain to prevent Groenewegen from taking his second stage in a row. Once upon a time it would have been Cavendish in the thick of such an elbows-out, helmet-banging alpha-sprinter tussle. He may have seen the writing on the wall during his last season with Quick-Step in 2015, when Gaviria, then aged 20, arrived from Colombia and showed himself to be the obvious candidate to become the team’s next star sprinter. Two wins over Cavendish in the early-season Tour de San Luis prompted the former world champion to strike back and beat the young pretender in the final stage, but the long-term message was not hard to decipher. No longer does he have the best team around him, as was usually the case in his days with Highroad, Team Sky and Quick-Step. At Dimension Data he can count on the presence of Mark Renshaw, his long-time pilot fish, but Bernie Eisel, the brains and engine of his most effective lead-out trains, is still recovering from brain surgery following an accident during a race in March. And, of course, they are all getting older, even the man whose precocious virtuosity once led a writer for L’Equipe to call him the Mozart of the 11-tooth sprocket. Perhaps more victories lie ahead. If not then we have been fortunate to watch him, and to call him ours.