We draped old sheets over the kitchen skylights in an attempt to shield ourselves from the sun (I knew they would come in useful one day). We dug out the old Indian fan that cooled us as we cooked, but blew icing sugar over the counters. We drank elderflower cordial and, when the day’s work was done, long icy cocktails. Yet the most effective way of cooling down this summer was found in a pair of salads that took advantage of drippingly ripe fruit – papaya and a golden fleshed cantaloupe melon – thoroughly chilled and tossed with salty, sharp and bright dressings. I often include fruit in main-course salads in high summer. Chilled watermelon, mango or papaya are my first choice. As we embark on the long slow slide into autumn I would add ice-cold grapes to that list, too. The trick is to make sure the fruit is ripe and to marry it with ingredients that are either spicy – chillies or ginger – or salty, such as Thai fish sauce or bacon. Ingredients that intensify the refreshing quality of the fruit (whoever hit on the idea of serving Parma ham with melon or watermelon with feta knew what they were doing). Chilled melon and bacon salad reminds me of a blistering hot day at cooking school in Paris Fruit works best in a savoury salad when it is truly ripe, but also paired with something crisp. Pancetta or bacon fills that role, as do chilled radishes or lengths of carrot – purple, yellow or orange – you have soaked in iced water until they curl like ribbons on a maypole. A careful mixture of textures is just as important as a marriage of flavours. Both of the salads I have made this week can be eaten as a main dish or share a plate with something else. The papaya salad worked particularly well with a dish of chicken whose skin had been crisped on the grill, the meat juices trickling into the dressing of the fruit. It held up well in the fridge overnight, too, and would have made a fine addition to a lunchbox if I hadn’t ended up wolfing it for breakfast. I find the large papayas, usually sold in halves, best for salads. They seem to ripen better than the smaller fruit. Their flesh is more luscious. The downside is apparent when you realise that your purchase takes up an entire shelf in the fridge. Serves 4radishes 12carrots 3, mediumpapaya 350g, ripecoriander 12 bushy stalksmicro herbs, coriander, mint 2 handfulsThai basil leaves 15For the dressing:palm sugar 3 tsprice vinegar 2 tbsplime 1, ripelemongrass stalks 2fish sauce 3 tsp Make the dressing: crumble the palm sugar into a small mixing bowl and pour in the rice vinegar. Halve and squeeze the lime – I like to roll it on the work surface, pressing down firmly as I do so before slicing, you get more juice that way – then squeeze the juice into the sugar and vinegar. Stir until the sugar has dissolved. Place the lemongrass on to a chopping board then bash firmly with a rolling pin to split and crush the plump end of the stalks. Push them into the dressing, add the fish sauce and leave for 30 minutes to infuse. Put the radishes into a bowl of iced water. Scrub or peel the carrots then shave them with a vegetable peeler into long thin shavings. Add them to the radishes. Shortly before serving, when the radishes and carrots have had 20 minutes in the iced water and the dressing is well infused, peel the papaya and discard the seeds and fibres. Slice the fruit into thick pieces about the size of a stamp and put them in a large mixing bowl. Pick the leaves from the coriander and add them to the papaya together with the micro-herbs (leaves and stalks) and the whole basil leaves. Drain the radishes and thinly slice them lengthways. Drain and dry the carrots then toss them and the radishes with the papaya and herbs. Discard the lemongrass stalks and pour the dressing over the papaya before tossing the ingredients gently together. This salad reminds me of being at cooking school in Paris, on a blistering hot summer’s day, when we put together a dish of chilled, ripe melon and sizzling bacon. The fat left in the pan was sharpened up with vinegar and we used it to dress the salad. Simple and stunning. Serves 4cider vinegar 200mltarragon 30g, stalks and leavescantaloupe melon 1tomatoes 2, largepancetta 100g, thinly slicedolive oil 2 tbspbasil leaves 10g Pour the cider vinegar into a jar. Crush the tarragon stalks and leaves in your hand then put them into the vinegar, pushing them down above the liquid as much as you can. Screw on the top and set aside for a minimum of four hours, if possible over night. The occasional shake of the jar will help the infusion. Slice the melon in half and scoop out and discard the seeds. Remove the melon flesh in large, juicy chunks, saving as much of the escaping juice as possible, and put the fruit and juice into a mixing bowl. Slice the tomatoes thickly and add to the melon. Put the melon and tomato, covered, into the fridge. In a shallow pan, fry the pancetta in the olive oil until very crisp, then remove and drain on kitchen paper. Reserve the fat and oil in the pan. When the salad is ready to dress, warm the pancetta fat in the pan over a moderate heat, then pour in 4 tbsp of the herb vinegar. It may spit at you, so take care. Add a little black pepper then pour the hot dressing over the chilled melon. Fold in the basil leaves. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater