Missing presumed lost, Both Directions at Once is a newly discovered session recorded on 6 March 1963 by John Coltrane with Elvin Jones (drums), McCoy Tyner (piano) and Jimmy Garrison on bass. The tape has survived in good condition but the way we hear it now has changed significantly in the 55 years spent in limbo (in care of the family of Coltrane’s first wife, Naima, apparently). Back then, what was to come, musically, was only a possibility, partly contained by what was already there. Now we also hear what was destined to be left behind. That which had not existed is now dated: literally in the sense that we know the date, but also because it has been made to sound older by virtue of what Coltrane went on to do. There is a wonderful recording of Ben Webster rehearsing Denmark’s Radio Big Band in 1970, coaxing them in his inimitable way (“Scream it! Scream that shit!”) to swing harder. So successful is he that by the end it seems that, on the first takes of each song, they had not swung at all. Coltrane’s quartet, by contrast, come powering out of the blocks. So completely were they living within the process of music-making that they could pick things up at a moment’s notice. Straight after this session they headed off for the last night of a fortnight-long residency at New York’s Birdland. The following day they were back in the same studio to record an album with singer Johnny Hartman. The result is not likely to be high on any list of jazz essentials but it illustrates how the forward momentum of creative expression was harnessed, at this point, by a constant desire to maintain and extend the commercial success achieved a couple of years earlier by My Favorite Things. In the liner notes ​Sonny Rollins​ likens the discovery of this session to '​finding a new room in the great pyramid' The week’s crowded schedule also highlights how much was happening for Coltrane and, by extension, in jazz generally, at this period. The timescale on which his career as a leader can be charted is painfully concentrated. In tandem with – and right after – his work with Miles Davis in the late 1950s, Coltrane recorded several albums under his own name but he did not settle on a definitive line-up for the quartet until late 1961. A Love Supreme was recorded in December 1964. Seven months later came Ascension, a clamorous declaration of freedom featuring an extended ensemble that still commands awe even if listening to it is no longer the essential rite of agonised passage it once was. From the autumn of 1965 drummer Rashied Ali and the young saxophonist Pharoah Sanders (who played at Ronnie Scott’s in London last week, aged 77) swelled the regular band to a sextet. By the end of the year, it had shrunk back to a quintet with the departure of Jones and Tyner (who was replaced by Coltrane’s second wife, Alice). Coltrane died on 17 July 1967 at the age of 40. Half a century later we are still measuring the effect of this comet streaking through our world: its light, its holiness, its kind of love – and the darkness left by its passing. In the liner notes Sonny Rollins likens the discovery of this session to “finding a new room in the great pyramid”. True, but the room turns out to be rather like a few of the surrounding ones, even containing versions of some of the same artefacts (including four stabs at Impressions, one of Coltrane’s most frequently performed compositions). With regard to the new numbers, it’s hard to imagine the gorgeous melody of Untitled Original 11386 – featuring Coltrane on soprano – being played with more snap. Oh, how that melody longs for a name, to distinguish itself from the opening Untitled Original 11383! The band keep returning to the melody between solos, as if it is calling and tempting them back. What’s it saying? It’s saying, delightedly, “Call me by my name!” The more they return to it the more alluring the call becomes. It’s so different to the moment at the Isle of Wight on 29 August 1970 when Miles Davis is asked what music he’d been playing. “Call it anythin’,” he rasps with characteristic indifference. 11386 also demonstrates how, in jazz, “pretty” – pretty notes, pretty tunes – has always been compatible with high seriousness. Same with being sentimental: Coltrane recorded In a Sentimental Mood with Duke Ellington, who famously liked “great big ol’ tears”. Of course jazz, in Coltrane’s final phase, became the opposite of pretty (any tears in it scald like molten lead) or at least part of the challenge of listening to it is in finding residual prettiness among the screech of bent metal and cosmological holler. Could there be an intimation of that here? The soprano, as Coltrane scribbles his solos, is sometimes on the brink of being irritating. It is redeemed by the quality we always associate with him: intensity. If, logically, this means that it can be intensely irritating then that might account for how joyously we are returned to the precarious sanctuary of melody. The surprising highlight turns out not to be an original but a cover of Nature Boy, the song made famous by Cole Porter. It’s also the shortest track: a reminder that the musician famous for his unstoppability could sometimes achieve beauty in brevity. Alabama, a profound and historically important composition, recorded in November 1963, clocked in at just five minutes. Possessed by a similar mournfulness, Nature Boy is sketched even more briefly. (The quartet will record a longer, very different version in 1965.) Nature Boy is one of two tracks – Impressions being the other – in which Tyner lays out. His absence leaves a crater in the middle over which the tenor moves, in great arcs of swing. The effect is reminiscent of “the leaden circles dissolv[ing] in the air” at the start of Mrs Dalloway (of all places!). Here the circles are not lead but brass, with the attendant capacity to retain sunlight, as Coltrane, Garrison and Jones make over the tune, “creating it every moment afresh”. The last major archaeological discovery in the ongoing Coltrane dig was Offering, a live performance from 1966 released four years ago which, like much from his final phase, tests the listener’s nerve and loyalty. “It’s all a matter,” as his near contemporary, photographer Garry Winogrand, once said, “of how much freedom you can stand.” To Jones, that freedom began to sound like “a lot of noise”. A repeated pleasure on this session is hearing Elvin setting up those complex mid-tempo grooves that he could maintain till the end of time (where, in a conceptual sense, he and Trane parted company). The best way to visualise this – aside from watching footage of Jones, Tyner and Garrison themselves in full flow – is to imagine a tree in summer, moving, if such a thing is possible, in a gale-force breeze: every leaf twitching separately, all of them swaying together. Both Directions at Once: The Lost Album by John Coltrane is out now on Impulse!. Geoff Dyer’s book about jazz, But Beautiful, is published by Canongate