While many people enjoy eating alone, recent headlines have been quick to scream that it has a dark side. But is it really bad for you? Research into eating alone is sparse, but some studies have suggested the practice might be linked to problems including depression, a blockage of blood supply to the heart, obesity and having metabolic syndrome: a combination of conditions such as diabetes and high blood pressure. Analysis of a survey of about 8,000 adults by Oxford Economics and the National Centre for Social Research for Sainsbury’s suggested eating alone has a stronger link to being unhappy than any other factor except mental illness. Researchers have suggested a multitude of factors might be at play, including that eating alone may affect how much we eat, what we eat, and our mood. But before rushing to find a lunch date, it is worth looking deeper. Some studies show different effects for men and women, while others look at people of different age groups, among other characteristics. They can also differ in how they define “frequent” solo dining, as well as using different measurement methods – meaning it is difficult to get a clear picture of what is going on. Many studies rely on self-reporting, which can be imprecise, and eating culture differs widely between countries. “It is difficult to separate out the impact of eating alone on physical, and in particular psychological, consequences due to the association between eating alone and other factors that [affect] physical and mental health such as loneliness, living alone and socioeconomic factors,” said Prof Katherine Hanna from the Queensland University of Technology in Australia. Even when studies do find a link between eating alone and health problems after controlling for these factors, many look only at a snapshot in time, meaning solo dining might be a result, rather than a cause, of health or social problems. Naveed Sattar, professor of metabolic medicine at the University of Glasgow, said eating alone might result from weight concerns, rather than being a result of them. “If you are more overweight or obese and you are a little bit embarrassed about how much you eat, you might shun eating with other people a little bit and start to eat more alone,” he said. Hanna noted that one study found older male lone eaters were more likely to be either underweight or overweight, while a review of the impact of eating in the presence of others highlighted that some studies found people ate more when in a group, but other studies found the reverse. Another study found people ate more pasta in the presence of an actor in a fat suit, regardless of what she put on her plate, suggesting who we dine with might play a role in how much is eaten. And while some work has suggested eating alone might be linked to a poorer diet, Sattar said many people chose healthy food even when eating alone. Hanna also flagged one study that found eating alone and eating healthily were linked in young adults. Dr Stephanie Cacioppo, a neurobiologist at the University of Chicago, said there are other factors to consider too. “The real question is how you feel when you eat,” she said. “Research shows that if you feel lonely when you eat – whether you are alone or at a business lunch – you will have a higher fat-calorie intake per meal.” Sam Dick of the Campaign to End Loneliness said eating alone can be a problem if it is not a choice. “Choosing to eat alone is very different to having to eat alone,” he said. “A moment of solitude to enjoy a solo dinner is not the same as not having someone to eat with on a regular basis, which is the case for many older people. “We must consider the long-term implications for the cultural movement of eating alone,. Sharing a meal with others is one of the best ways to bond and build our connections.”