The Week in Patriarchy is a weekly roundup of what’s happening in the world of feminism and sexism. If you’re not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. Gun violence hasn’t been in the news much anymore, as the crisis on the border with interned children continues and media turned its eye towards Trump’s visit to the UK. But a story this week brought the issue back into focus for me – mostly because of how everyday it is. A retired Air Force veteran shot his wife and three daughters – killing his 12-year-old daughter and wife, Charlene Orsi, who had filed for divorce just days earlier. His two other daughters – they were triplets – have survived. We tend to forget that in the US not only do most mass shooters have a history of domestic violence – but that the majority of mass shootings, like this one, are domestic violence murders. Women should not be the canaries in the coal mine of deadly male violence. And yet, for so long, we have been. So, as the news continues on to the next story, think about Orsi and her children, and all the others that don’t make national news. The baby blimp flew high on Friday, and London reminded Trump that they won’t stand for his bullshit either. That Fox doesn’t push back on this, and shows no sign of discomfort at being treated as the president’s pet network, tells you all you need to know https://t.co/aiua2w0zMI This is such horseh*t. Last weekend I was part of a group volunteering in TX with families who had been released by ICE. Every single child we saw was sick. One baby hadn't had a diaper change in four days. (Asterix because, you know, civility.) https://t.co/43Zk72sOmt The White House sent an email tonight with 34 quotes from Congress endorsing Kavanaugh.Not one quote came from a woman. pic.twitter.com/M1OcPGJ1V8 Abortion is healthcare. https://t.co/rltZ1yUEOM The incomparable Laurie Penny on “very silly man” Jordan Peterson; Annie Lowrey’s new book, Give Money, on why we need a universal basic income; and Katha Pollitt on why Roe isn’t going down without a fight. Politico’s Bill Scher interviewing Onnesha Roychoudhuri on her excellent new book, The Marginalized Majority. A Buzzfeed investigation found that pregnant immigrant women in detention miscarried without being offered medical attention. So much for pro-life. I’ve been under the weather this week and unwilling to make my brain sick as well with the news, so I did a nice binge on the comedy series Schitt’s Creek – Eugene Levy and Catherine O’Hara can cure anything that ails you.