Two Qantas pilots are in hospital with “serious injuries” and two people have been killed after a vintage plane crashed while taking off from an airport in South Africa. The 64-year-old aircraft faltered soon after takeoff from Pretoria’s Wonderboom airport on Tuesday afternoon, and crashed into a nearby factory. One passenger on board, South African flight engineer Chris Barnard, was killed and a factory worker later died in hospital. Three others were taken to hospital, including the Qantas pilots, Douglas Haywood and Ross Kelly, who had both flown for Qantas for over 30 years and had a combined 37,000 hours of flying experience. A Qantas spokesman said it was unclear whether they were piloting the plane at the time. The plane, a 1954 era Convair CV-340, was being flown on a test flight in preparation for a journey to the Aviodrome aircraft museum in the Netherlands. But shortly after takeoff, amateur footage of the plane showed one engine leaking dark brown smoke. Of the 19 people on board, 14 were South Africans and three were Dutch employees of the Aviodrome museum. VIDEO Martin's Air Charter Convair CV-340 (ZS-BRV) lifting off from Wonderboom Airport, South Africa which crashed shortly after due to engine problems. Killing 1 of 20. The aircraft was seen trailing brown smoke from the engine on takeoff. (10-JUL-2018). pic.twitter.com/feM0YtJfSH The South African Civil Aviation Authority said in a statement that there were “a number of serious injuries” in the crash. “One fatal injury was confirmed on the accident scene. In addition, three people who were on the ground were injured. One of them passed away this morning.” Private paramedic service ER24 said first responders arrived to find the wreckage alight. “Several patients were trapped in the aircraft and their injuries ranged from minor to critical,” a spokesman said. South Africa’s Times Live website also said one passenger suffered a double amputation in the crash. Kelly’s wife, Lyndal, was also on board and believed to be in a stable condition. A Qantas spokesman said: “We were deeply upset to learn that two Qantas pilots, one current and one retired, were on board the vintage aircraft involved in an accident in South Africa on Tuesday. “This news has shocked the Qantas pilot community and everyone’s thoughts are with the families. We’ve reached out and are providing whatever support we can.”