As France prepares for Sunday’s World Cup final against Croatia, the mood on the street is one of football frenzy. Fan zones across the country are to be secured by tens of thousands of police concerned about the threat of terrorism. Flag manufacturers have been working overtime to meet extra demand, beer sales are up, there is a scrabble for the last remaining team shirts in shops, and newspaper front pages are plastered with Didier Deschamps and articles on how the young France squad have ushered in a new patriotism. On the streets, fans are cheery but characteristically cautious about the result. “That’s the thing about sport, anything can happen on the day, can’t it?” shrugged a personal trainer planning to watch the final on the giant screen under the Eiffel Tower with 90,000 others, in forecast 31C heat. But the sports daily newspaper L’Équipe was unwavering. “The Indestructibles” ran the headline over a picture of the players N’Golo Kanté and Paul Pogba, adding inside: “The world is theirs.” At stake is whether France will cement its place as a football superpower after reaching three World Cup finals in 20 years. France exports vast numbers of players to top teams around the world and has invested in a solid youth training system. The sport is seen as in good health. But the bitter memory of the 2010 World Cup team mutiny in South Africa and the Euro 2016 final loss to Portugal lingers. The France team have been keen to address that baggage and move on. At Euro 2016, there had been euphoria at beating Germany in the semi-final, which gave way to losing in the final to Portugal. Olivier Giroud suggested the lessons had been learned. In 2016, he explained, “we were a little euphoric, we thought it was in the bag”. This time, he said, “we will leave nothing to chance”. Just as the England World Cup squad initially eclipsed Wimbledon tennis, the France team have overtaken the country’s giant of summer sports, the Tour de France. The nation’s hugely popular annual cycling fixture has still pulled in its two million French viewers a day, but it isn’t on the front pages or in the national conversation in a way it would normally be. “A strange feeling of not being the centre of the country’s attention,” lamented a cycling correspondent at Le Monde. Instead, the front pages have seen an outpouring of love for the diverse France football squad’s young players, regularly described as “decent”, “humble” and – crucially – “nice”. The players, in turn, have reiterated their love and “pride” in being French. Everyone is conscious that 20 years ago, after France’s 1998 World Cup win over Brazil, too much political pressure was heaped on to an ethnically diverse team labelled “Black, blanc, beur” and expected to magically fix the nation’s deep-seated race and discrimination issues by simply winning a football final. Four years after that victory, the far‑right, anti-immigration Jean‑Marie Le Pen made it to the second round of the 2002 presidential election and it was clear the nation’s identity issues were far from resolved. This time, commentators argue that the young squad should rightly be celebrated as a welcome reflection of multicultural France and all its talent, but it is up to politicians to fix society’s ills, rather than hope a sporting victory will end discrimination across France. Meanwhile, Deschamps is being hailed as a new kind of national hero. With his plodding style and Mr Ordinary persona, the coach has sometimes taken flak for being too dull. But this weekend he was being celebrated for what one French sports journalist called “his incredible link to a culture of winning”. Deschamps has a high win percentage and, in French minds, is associated with being around when there are wins – not just as a player in the World Cup team of 1998 but also in the French championship and when playing abroad. If France win on Sunday, he will become the third person to have won the World Cup as both a player and coach. Le Figaro described him as a kind of “anti-hero in the era of the star system: modest, laconic, diligent.” Meanwhile, the party mood is also linked to the official French football soundtrack. The Ivory Coast band Magic System’s upbeat Magic in the Air has had almost 200 million views on YouTube, just as the French media ran think-pieces explaining the meaning of what it saw as the pained “bittersweet” English song It’s Coming Home.