Most summer mornings, a 2kg box of North American signal crayfish arrives at Neptune, the much-hyped seafood restaurant in the bowels of a hotel in Bloomsbury, London. They are pulled six hours earlier from the River Kennet, which cuts through Wiltshire and Berkshire. Opening the box is a ritualistic moment, one punctuated by moments of violence. “Crayfish are vicious and angry,” says the chef, Will Emberson. “They cling to the edge. They fight one another. And they fight us.” He holds up his gloved hand, as if to display a war wound, before placing a large crayfish on to a platter of shaved ice. “I feel bad about eating them, but then again ... I don’t.” When pressed, he shrugs. “They’re considered pests. The signal crayfish have affected the native white-clawed ones.” So we have a grey and red squirrel situation? “In some ways, yes. In some ways ... they’re the squirrels of the river.” He smiles, before pretending to rip off the crayfish’s head. In the UK, crayfish season runs from May to October, depending on the weather. But business is up this year. Instagram has helped with demand – crayfish’s Giger-esque physique is designed for the socials – and the crustaceans have appeared on Netflix’s Ugly Delicious. It could be the Nordic effect (crayfish parties are culturally integral to the region). Then there is the World Cup. China, which produces most of the world’s crayfish, sent a cargo train of 100,000 of the crustaceans to Moscow for this year’s tournament. I would also posit the death of Anthony Bourdain, a champion of crayfish, as a sentimental boost – but with the dog days of summer warming our rivers, it may be that there are just a lot about. Behind the restaurant’s oyster bar – an ice mound of crabs and oysters, backed by a thick skyline of succulents – Emberson poaches crayfish the size of his hand for 10 minutes in a broth of dill, salt and unfiltered lager. To eat, you must split the crayfish in two (once cool), cracking the tail like you would pop a pill from a blister pack, and suck out the head. The meat is released in small, tender strips, densely flavoured with salted broth. It is labour-intensive and frenzied but communal and anti-social-media. Finger bowls aside, you can’t text while eating this crayfish. We have it with marie rose sauce (and soda bread) while sitting in a pale-pink room – both roughly the colour of a crayfish seconds after death. It is a poignant, if accidental, touch. Signal crayfish arrived in the UK in the 1970s as food. Some escaped their cages and proliferated. They are larger than our native crayfish and they eat fish – and occasionally one another. They also spread a plague to which they are immune and are thus decimating the native population. As living creatures, there is very little to like. Dead, however, there is plenty.