Canals have long offered a fine place to lose things – shopping trollies, love tokens, drowned kittens, all the unwanted objects and dark secrets many hoped would never be found, slipped into their still, dark depths. But in Amsterdam, some of those long-forgotten artefacts have found themselves exposed. In 2003, the city began the process of draining and excavating two of its canal riverbeds for the construction of its new metro line. The Damrak and the Rokin were once busy stretches of the Amstel River, though for many years now both have been filled in, repurposed as two of the city’s main thoroughfares. During the Noord/Zuidlijn project, workers dug about 20 metres below the surface, through the layers of the past, through peat bog and fen, unearthing 700,000 objects that span the 800 years of the city’s existence. Those objects have been catalogued in Below the Surface, a website, book and documentary that allows an extraordinary insight into the lives of those who have lived and visited the city: ceramic, bone, metal and leather, pieces of glass, pipe clay, building materials are all displayed chronologically. There are stone blades from between 4200BC and 2000BC, fish hooks, nails from the middle ages, bones, coins, keys and spectacles … all our modern clutter of travel cards, mobile phones and false teeth. There is a toy car – a replica of the Blue Bird used by Sir Malcolm Campbell to break the world speed record on the Bonneville Flats in Utah. It was made in Britain and probably lost just before 1937, when the Rokin was filled in. There is the tsuba of a 19th-century Japanese samurai sword, a Russian taxation seal, a peasant wedding jug, a Bugs Bunny Flippo (or Tiddleywink) and a Dutch police teargas shell. The Damrak yielded almost double the number of finds along the Rokin, though those objects found along the Damrak riverbed were more fragmented. The Damrak’s finds were also predominantly from 1400-1600, and the Rokin’s from 1650 to 1850, these dates reflecting the different periods of construction in the city and the changing shape of the waterways at those times. More recent artefacts are due to the dredging operations that maintained waterways for shipping. “The enormous quantity, great variety and everyday nature of these material remains make them rare sources of urban history,” explain the organisers. “The picture they paint of their era is extremely detailed and yet entirely random due to the chance of objects remaining or sinking down into the riverbed and being retrieved from there. This is what makes this collection so fascinating, so poetically breathtaking and abstract at one and the same time.”