“Who, if not you? When, if not now?” said the two banners held up at one end of the stadium during a stirring rendition of the Russian national anthem. It felt like a call to arms for a group of players who had already exceeded all expectations by hanging around at their own party for far longer than anyone imagined. The show will have to go on without the hosts, however, after Croatia broke Russia’s brave resistance, as well as their hearts, at the end of a long and draining night in Sochi to set up a semi‑final against England in Moscow on Wednesday. There were tears on the pitch and in the stands after Ivan Rakitic converted the winning penalty kick, just as he did in a shootout against Denmark last Sunday, to send Croatia through and bring an end to the Russian fairytale. For a moment it felt as though time stood still as sadness fell over this cavernous arena, where Russia had played with such spirit and courage to stretch Croatia to the limit, showing all their powers of recovery to equalise deep into extra time, just when it appeared as though Stanislav Cherchesov’s players had run themselves into the ground and had nothing else to give. Yet once the bitter pill of defeat had been swallowed, there was a show of pride from the Russia supporters as warm applause reverberated around the stadium. For some the crushing sense of disappointment was still too much. Fedor Smolov, one of two Russian players to miss from the spot – his opening kick was saved by Danijel Subasic – remained in the centre circle alone for five minutes before he was eventually lifted to his feet by one of the backroom staff. Cherchesov put on a brave face afterwards, with the 54 year old as colourful and engaging as ever, despite his obvious hurt. “We feel like conscripts,” he said, trying to help the translator. “It’s like to be ‘demobilised’ a little bit earlier when you wanted to stay in the army for some time longer. It would have been better if we could have stayed until the 15 July.” To get this far, though, was beyond the dreams of most Russian football fans. The lowest-ranked nation in the tournament were a punchbag for their media before a ball had been kicked. They had failed to win in seven matches and the sense of pessimism was overwhelming. “Doomed to fail” ran the headline on the front page of the Moscow Times the day before Russia’s opening game against Saudi Arabia. “Our weakest national team in history,” said Alexander Bubnov, a former USSR defender. How the narrative has strayed from that negative script over the last three weeks. To put Russia’s achievements into some sort of context, this was their first World Cup quarter-final since competing as the Soviet Union, when they got to the last eight four times in succession between 1958 and 1970. Not that Cherchesov or his players were in Sochi to bask in that success. Feeding off the energy of the patriotic and raucous home support, Russia were on the front foot from the outset, pressing high up the pitch, snapping into tackles and attacking with the sort of ambition that had been so badly lacking in their attritional battle with Spain in the previous round. “Ros-Si-Ya!” chanted the Russia fans again and again. Artem Dzyuba, a 6ft 5in wrecking ball up front, epitomised the grit and hunger in the Russia team as he fought for every ball as if his life depended on it. Mário Fernandes, who was the other Russia player to miss in the shootout, was a rampaging presence on the right and Denis Cheryshev, linking so well with Dzyuba before curling a 25-yard shot into the top corner, produced another marvellous goal to add to his World Cup collection. In the end it was not quite enough, but Russia’s players can leave the World Cup with their heads high and with the president’s praise ringing in their ears. “Vladimir Putin called me earlier in the day and right now, and he congratulated us on a very good game,” Cherchesov said. “He said what we showed on the field was great.”