He may now be considered one of the elder statesmen of Formula One but for Lewis Hamilton some moments retain their magic even 12 years into a remarkably successful career. The British Grand Prix is one of them and the driver who wears his heart on his sleeve returns to Silverstone once more revelling in being able to perform in front of his home crowd. They share his passion, his emotion and his commitment, as do his Mercedes team, who value these traits for all that it can mean he is a handful to manage. They believe Hamilton has another five years at the top of F1 in him and want him to see them out at Mercedes. Since he made his debut at the track in 2007 Hamilton has made his love of Silverstone clear and this year the four-times world champion has the chance to secure his place in the annals of a grand prix that has been on the F1 calendar since the championship began in 1950. He won for the first time at Silverstone in 2008, a magnificent performance in the wet for McLaren and has taken the flag for the past four years with Mercedes. A fifth consecutive victory would beat Jim Clark’s run of four and his sixth win would surpass Clark and Alain Prost’s record of five. He was 22 when he first took to the windswept former airfield and promptly made his mark with pole position. Since that exceptional rookie season, he has never looked back but the British Grand Prix will always be special. “It’s been a really incredible journey since 2007,” he said. “Just to be riding this positive wave every time you come to this grand prix. I’m really grateful to be in the position to fight for a win at Silverstone for the sixth time. Not many drivers get to do that. So I’m very privileged in that respect.” It has been some journey. He has 65 wins, second only to Michael Schumacher, but it has not always been smooth. Hamilton is demanding on himself, and others. Even at the previous race in Austria his frustration with the team over a poor strategy call was obvious to all. But Mercedes would have it no other way. The team principal, Toto Wolff, was clear this was the price you pay for such a rare talent. “You need a lion in the car that is giving it everything. The best ones are also sensitive,” he said. “Exceptional individuals you just have to accept they have strong opinions, views and a strong drive. That determination to win and that ambition in a situation is not an easy character trait to deal with. But it is just what we want in the team. The super nice, polite guy is not what we want. We want the guy that scores the tries and wins the trophies, so I embrace high maintenance.” The team are in the process of re-signing their contract with the 33-year-old, for what is expected to be a two-year deal. Hamilton has made it clear he wants to pursue other interests when he retires, music and fashion among them, but Wolff believes he still has more to come in F1. “I think he has another five very good years in him,” said Wolff, who wants them to be with Mercedes. “If in two years’ time we still feel the same about each other, have trust, I think it would be clear that we continue.” Hamilton is in a tight fight for the title with Ferrari’s Sebastian Vettel, who leads the championship by one point. The pair have three wins apiece, their cars are evenly matched and the advantage has swapped between them with an ebb and flow that has made predicting the outcome impossible. The lead has changed hands five times in nine races. The season will likely be decided by tiny margins and the relationship between team and driver is going to be vital. Wolff describes Hamilton as a “creative” talent and explains his role is to ensure he nurtures the best from his driver. He also stresses that one of Hamilton’s key strengths is that he is brutally honest with himself. A trait he has displayed since he was racing for Frédéric Vasseur’s ART team in GP2 in 2006. “Frédéric Vasseur told me that when Lewis was in GP2 he was the only young driver that when he got out of the car said: ‘You don’t need to look at the data as my driving was not good’. He still does the same today,” Wolff said. Mercedes have won the last four drivers’ and constructors’ championships but Wolff describes the fight with Ferrari as “the biggest challenge we have had so far”. Hamilton is at the sharp end of that task and it is one that will likely go to the wire but at this particular moment at Silverstone he is just enjoying sharing his passion with the fans he loves. “As the years go on, you appreciate the support more and more,” he said. “2007 was already pretty cool and then 2008, I really will never forget that day. I hope I can wave the flag for a little bit longer.” His weekend opened with the positive start he would have wanted. Hamilton topped the time sheets in first practice in front of his teammate Valtteri Bottas, with Vettel in third, half a second back. In the afternoon session, Vettel was on top with Hamilton second just 0.187sec behind and Bottas third. Mercedes had expected to be strong and the thinner tread on the tyres being used this weekend certainly suits their cars. Hamilton dominated and won at the last two races at which they were used in Spain and France. On this form, a sixth pole at his home grand prix on Sunday looks well within his grasp.