It is little known that the caesar salad, that brasserie mainstay, is a wholeheartedly Mexican affair. It was invented by a chef called Caesar Cardini and, unlike most of Mexico’s culinary gems, it quickly became one of the country’s most famous exports – although apparently the original recipe didn’t call for anchovies (I know!). Here is a version inspired by a delicious trip to a restaurant called Magpie in London. Flashing smoked mackerel under the grill makes its flesh beautifully soft. Prep 15 minCook 15 minServes 4-6 200g sourdough or country loaf1 garlic cloveSalt and black pepper4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil3-4 baby gem lettuces30g parmesan, finely grated For the mackerel3 smoked mackerel fillets1 anchovy fillet½ tsp sweet smoked paprika25g butter, at room temperature For the dressing1 small garlic clove, peeled 1 tsp dijon mustard3 anchovies½ tbsp Worcestershire sauce1 tbsp white-wine vinegar4 tbsp buttermilk5 tbsp extra-virgin olive oilSalt and black pepper Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas 4. Start with the croutons, ripping the bread into bite-size chunks. Crush the garlic to a paste with half a teaspoon of flaky sea salt and stir in the olive oil. Spread the chunks of bread over a large baking tray and toss in the garlicky oil. Season with black pepper and bake for about 10 minutes, until the bread is crisp and golden. To make the dressing, put the garlic, dijon and anchovies in a mortar and pound to a paste. Add the Worcestershire sauce and vinegar, and pound again. Finally, pour in the buttermilk and olive oil, and whisk. Taste and season with freshly ground black pepper and a touch of salt, if needed (remember the anchovies are salty). Break open the lettuces and rinse in cold water, then pat dry with a tea towel. Heat the grill to its highest setting. Meanwhile, for the mackerel, bash the anchovy and smoked paprika together in the mortar. Mix in the butter before putting the mackerel fillets on a foil-lined tray and dotting them with the anchovy butter. Grill for about 90 seconds until the butter is melted and bubbling. Put the lettuce in a large salad bowl with the croutons, and toss with the dressing and parmesan. Break up the mackerel into chunks, scatter on top and serve at once. The dressing is delicious tossed into boiled new potatoes with slivers of shallots and capers. You could also cook mackerel like this with other compound butters: miso butter is wonderful with an Asian-inspired avocado salad.