This summer, Paul Simon brings his touring career to an end – 54 years after he thought it was over. When Simon and Garfunkel’s 1964 debut sank without a trace, the 24-year-old travelled to England, miserable and dejected, and shrugged out this solo album. Several tracks – including Kathy’s Song and I Am a Rock – now rank among his best-loved songs. Although there are overwrought moments on the duo’s third album (7 O’Clock News/Silent Night is eerily pointed, but barely listenable) there are others of stark, dismal beauty – particularly the yearning ballad Homeward Bound, also written during Simon’s time in England. “Hope and dread,” Simon once said, “that’s the way I see the world.” The two states of mind clash fervently on his fourth solo album, a premature reflection on his regrets – he was only 34. Fifty Ways to Leave Your Lover, though, is deliciously silly. Although he must have the muscle memory to churn out a half-decent album without much effort, Simon has never done things by halves. On his lively 13th solo LP, he uses custom-made instruments, collaborates with Italian electronic artist Clap! Clap! and ruminates on the virtues of the word “motherfucker”. Kodachrome was banned from UK radio for its reference to a brand of film – a shame, because it is a brilliant, shiny pop song with bite. And there is plenty more to admire on Simon’s third solo album, particularly American Tune and St Judy’s Comet. “That may be my favourite album of the 70s,” he said. “It’s joyful.” After the failure of their 1964 debut, Wednesday Morning, 3am, Simon and Garfunkel’s career was shocked back to life by a new, electric version of that album’s The Sound of Silence. While the follow-up was hastily compiled, it was more assured than their debut, embracing a heftier folk-rock sound and showcasing Simon’s ability to dart between wit and desolation. There are a few intriguingly scruffy moments on Simon’s first post-Garfunkel album. On Everything Put Together Falls Apart, he turns from the microphone halfway through a line to scratch his beard, as if so deep in thought he has forgotten he is recording. It is fitting for an album of such candid introspection – although there are lighter moments, such as the samba-influenced Me and Julio Down by the Schoolyard. Flitting from gentle guitars to brash, experimental Moog, Bookends is Simon and Garfunkel at their poppiest (Mrs Robinson, written for The Graduate), weirdest (Punky’s Dilemma) and most agitated (Fakin’ It). The standout, though, is America, a wistful, fruitless search for the land of the free. From the chaos of Simon and Garfunkel’s imploding relationship came the best album of their career. The gospel-influenced title track is now rightly ubiquitous, and The Only Living Boy in New York – written after Garfunkel flew off to star in a film from which Simon had been dumped – is the most beautiful display of passive aggression ever committed to music. Although initially mired in controversy – Simon worked on the album with local musicians in South Africa during apartheid, ignoring the UN’s boycott – this culturally collaborative masterpiece served as its own rebuttal. Inspired by a bootleg cassette of Mbaqanga music, Simon incorporated his own melodic style and storytelling skill into the sounds he had fallen in love with, recruiting Ladysmith Black Mambazo and the Gaza Sisters to realise his ambitious ideas. After the success of its lead single, the wonderfully peculiar You Can Call Me Al, the album took Simon’s career from its lowest point to its pinnacle.