Harry Kane is the tournament’s leading scorer with six and yet has managed to fire only nine attempts at goal to date. To offer some context, Cristiano Ronaldo’s four goals came from 21 shots and Lionel Messi’s one from 17. All six he has managed on target – three of them penalties and one that freak deflection that completed his hat-trick against Panama – have yielded reward, with the other three deflected, veering wide from distance or looping on to the roof of the net. The need for England to find him more regularly in scoring positions is all too evident. The striker is ruthless but for long periods to date England have not found him in threatening areas. To all intents he has been feeding off scraps. Much has been made of Dele Alli, Raheem Sterling and Jesse Lingard as a fluid supply line but, of the 79 passes Kane has received in his four games in Russia, only 24 have come from that trio and the majority have found him with his back to goal. Furthermore, according to Opta, Kieran Trippier has made only three passes – a tally which includes crosses – to his captain to date and Ashley Young four from the opposite flank. England will need more accurate and incisive delivery from the flank in open play to unsettle a resolute Swedish backline. Sweden will be stubborn opposition. They have kept three clean sheets in their four matches to date, compressing space efficiently between the lines and defending with all 11 players. Andreas Granqvist does not quite boast the frame and presence of Colombia’s 6ft 5in centre-back Yerry Mina but he is not far off, and Janne Andersson’s side should not wilt at English set pieces, which is a worry. So the onus will be on creating from open play and discomforting awkward opponents by shifting the ball swiftly and efficiently. That has not always been a forte. For example Alli, his tournament disrupted by that thigh strain sustained against Tunisia, has given the ball away 23 times, perhaps as he strives for greater involvement having missed those two matches through injury. England need his influence in more advanced areas. “Dele did a diligent job with the ball for us against Colombia, we have to encourage him into areas where his real strengths lie and he can influence the game,” Southgate said. “We want to create more clear‑cut chances and Dele is a player who gives us a different option to do that.” Moving the ball more sharply still, stretching the play with width provided from wing-back, should create the space in which Alli can thrive. Everything has been level-headed within the England camp, even as Southgate’s players tick off their achievements: progress from the group; win a penalty shootout; secure passage through a knockout tie. Everything the manager offers up publicly comes with the caveat that this is a young and developing team, a side reconnecting with their fan base and still finding their feet at this level. Yet there is a realisation, too, that England are in a mouth-watering position. “It’s a great opportunity,” said Southgate. “Although our team will be individually better in two years’ time, we might not have this opportunity again.” Recognising that much will create its own pressures, of course, and expectancy has grown with each hint of progress. Yet England have to stay grounded. They have beaten Sweden only twice in 15 matches. “They are a team we have underestimated in the past but we shouldn’t get carried away with ourselves being better than Sweden. They are older, more experienced and have a better tournament record than us. Look at their results in qualifying – beating France, beating Italy in the play-off, knocking out Germany here. They’re obviously a very strong side and one we’ll have to play well against to beat.” The message is clear: stay calm, retain focus and make quality tell.