Explosive devices were thrown at the homes of prominent republican figures in Northern Ireland, including the former Sinn Féin leader Gerry Adams, on Friday night, the party has said. The Police Service of Northern Ireland (PSNI) confirmed on Friday it was dealing with two incidents at two addresses in west Belfast, though officers declined to give any further details. The attack on Adams’s home – and another on that of Bobby Storey, who has served as the party’s northern chairman – were condemned as “reprehensible and cowardly” by Gerry Kelly, Sinn Féin’s policing and justice spokesman. “I would appeal for calm. These attacks are the desperate acts of increasingly desperate and irrelevant groups,” he said in a statement released late on Friday night. All well here. No one hurt. Thanks 4 all the texts & phone calls. Thanks 2 all the great neighbours, the Neighbourhood Watch & Sinn Féin reps who were here very quickly. Kelly, the North Belfast MLA, said: “These were reprehensible and cowardly attacks on the family homes of Gerry Adams and Bobby Storey. Grandchildren were in the driveway of Adams’ home minutes before the attack.” Adams said no one was hurt in the incident but Sinn Féin said one of the devices damaged a car. All well here. No one hurt. Thanks 4 all the texts & phone calls. Thanks 2 all the great neighbours, the Neighbourhood Watch & Sinn Féin reps who were here very quickly. The attacks came on the same day the PSNI’s chief constable, George Hamilton, condemned violence in Derry on Thursday night, during which he said more than 70 petrol bombs and two improvised explosive devices were thrown at police officers. “This was the sixth consecutive night of reckless violence, violence that I am confident is being orchestrated by dissident republicans, with the New IRA being the primary grouping responsible.” Police said it was “nothing short of a miracle” that no one has been injured or killed so far. Hamilton added that deadly weaponry, including guns, had been brought on to the streets and, accordingly, the force was treating the Derry attacks as “attempts to murder police officers, ordinary men and women who are simply doing their jobs trying to protect the community and keep people safe”. He added: “It is heartening to see political and religious leaders coming out to condemn the violence. People in this great city need to use whatever influence they can to bring this reckless disorder to an end and I am calling on everyone within the community and all political parties to use any influence they have to make it stop immediately before someone is killed.” There was no indication on Friday night of who carried out the Belfast attacks and no suggestion they were linked to the Derry violence.