Hundreds of people are missing after a hydroelectric dam broke in southern Laos, the state news has reported. Five billion cubic metres of water swept through the surrounding countryside after the accident at the Xepian-Xe Nam Noy hydropower dam, which is still under construction. The dam collapsed at 8pm on Monday. The neighbouring villages of Yai Thae, Hinlad, Mai, Thasengchan, Tha Hin, and Samong bore the brunt of flooding, which has reportedly destroyed thousands of homes. Officials brought in boats to try to evacuate victims who were left stranded by the water. Aerial footage of the area shows the whole region under muddy water, with only roofs and the tops of trees visible. Several people have been confirmed dead, and more than 6,600 made homeless, the official news agency KPL reported. Communist Laos, one of Asia’s poorest and most secretive countries, is land-locked and aims to become the “battery of Asia” by selling power to its neighbours through a series of hydropower dams. The company building the dam said heavy rain and flooding caused the collapse and it was cooperating with the Laos government to help rescue villagers near the dam. “We are running an emergency team and planning to help evacuate and rescue residents in villages near the dam,” a SK Engineering & Construction spokesman told Reuters by telephone. The prime minister, Thongloun Sisoulith, called on government organisations, the police and the military to assist in the emergency relief effort in the south-eastern province of Attapeu. The hydropower dam project, which is estimated to be worth about $1bn (£760m), is being built by Xe Pien-Xe Namnoy Power Company and is a joint venture between several South Korean and Laos companies. Construction began in 2013 and was due for completion by the end of this year, with plans to start operations in 2019. The objective was to make the dam a lucrative source of income for Laos, a poverty-stricken country, by exporting 90% of the energy to neighbouring Thailand. Environmental campaigners have repeatedly raised concerns about plans by the government in Laos to build vast dams across the Mekong river and turn the country into a hydroelectricity hub; 11 large hydropower dams on the Mekong’s mainstream, and 120 tributary dams, are planned over the next 20 years. The International Rivers group said the accident exposed “major risks” associated with some dam designs that are “unable to cope with extreme weather conditions”. “Unpredictable and extreme weather events are becoming more frequent in Laos and the region due to climate change,” International Rivers told Reuters in an e-mail. “This also shows the inadequacy of warning systems for the dam construction and operations. The warning appeared to come very late and was ineffective in ensuring people had advance notice to ensure their safety and that of their families,” the group said. Reuters contributed to this report