Police have arrested a woman who climbed the pedestal of the Statue of Liberty in a Fourth of July protest against the Trump administration’s immigration policies. The climber huddled at the base of the monument, about 30 meters above the ground, and engaged in a four-hour standoff with police before two New York Police Department officers climbed up to the base and apprehended her. With the dramatic scene unfolding on live television, officers followed the woman around the base after she attempted to start climbing the statue. Police moved swiftly and grabbed her round the waist, holding her down until she appeared to allow a harness to be slung around her. She eventually climbed down about eight meters to the monument’s observation point and was taken into custody. “She’s been taken into custody amicably, peacefully, without any injuries, or injuries to our officers, thank God. It’s all over now.” sergeant David Somma, a spokesman for the National Park Service, told Reuters. He said prosecutors would determine any charges filed against the woman. Visitors were evacuated from Liberty Island during the standoff on Wednesday afternoon. Earlier in the day at least six protesters were arrested at the monument after hanging a banner from the pedestal emblazoned with a message about abolishing Ice, the US immigration enforcement agency. Activists with the group Rise and Resist said they had hung the banner to protest against the Trump administration and its “zero tolerance” immigration policy, which has caused families to be separated at the border. The protester appeared to be wearing a Rise and Resist T-shirt. The group initially said her action was not part of the earlier demonstration but later said the climber had been involved in that demonstration but her climb wasn’t part of the group’s plan. The protester earlier took a bottle of water offered by the police and appeared to be speaking to them, before taking off her T-shirt and displaying it. Rise and Resist planned a banner drop today at the Statue of Liberty. This action did not include the climber on the statue. Our action was completed earlier. While it was not part of our action, our first priority and concern is for the safety of the climber. After about an hour balancing at the base of the statue, she moved further around the lower edge of the structure, away from the officers, and reclined against the copper edifice. The New York police department hostage negotiators were reported to beassisting the police assigned from the National Park Service, which administers the island. The other people taken into custody on Wednesday had unfurled a banner at the statue, which said “Abolish ICE”. Federal regulations prohibit hanging banners from the monument. Ice, the Immigration and Customs Enforcement, is a division of the Department of Homeland Security whose officers arrest and deport unauthorized immigrants inside the US, among other duties. Unidentified climber scales the Statue of Liberty as part of an apparent protest against @ICEgov https://t.co/l9CtEdBYU8 pic.twitter.com/P1OdGXG5ck The Statue of Liberty is located on a tiny island in the New York Harbor, near the southern tip of Manhattan. The landmark has stood since the late 19th century as a welcoming symbol to immigrants arriving in the US, who would typically sail past it before landing at the immigration processing center on adjacent Ellis Island. The statue has been a rallying point for anti-war and pro-immigration demonstrations in the past – usually for those gathering at the tip of Manhattan within sight of the iconic torch held aloft. But Liberty has also attracted protests against her very existence. Suffragettes protested against the original unveiling of the statue in 1886 because it was a female figure of freedom, while women did not have the right to vote. Protests related to the suffrage movement then became a regular Independence Day event. Last summer the senior Trump adviser Stephen Miller sparked a furore over the president’s stated intention to try to move legal immigration to a “merit-based system”, when Miller questioned the relevance of the poem by Emma Lazarus inscribed at the base of the statue, which includes the celebrated welcoming lines: “Give me your tired, your poor, / Your huddled masses yearning to breathe free.” The Guardian then asked 21 poets to reimagine the poem as Trump would like to see it, which ended up including lines such as: “America, the door is closed now.”