Le Golf National is little more than two months away and Europe’s Ryder Cup team is starting to acquire a steelier edge after getting a lift from a perhaps unexpected quarter with Francesco Molinari’s victory in the Open Championship. This was a major tournament which had been prefaced with a common line in questioning from American journalists to US players, from whose number the previous five major winners had emerged, namely: “What sort of message would it send ahead of the Ryder Cup if it was to become six this week?” When the final round started here on Sunday with five Americans and Molinari teeing off in the final three pairings, few would have bet against the likelihood, and the perception even halfway through the afternoon was that ownership of the Claret Jug for the coming year boiled down to a shootout between Tiger Woods – himself now back in the world’s top 50 and 20th on the US Ryder Cup list, up 11 places – and Jordan Spieth. Woods was tied sixth and Spieth further adrift while two more of Europe’s heavy artillery, Rory McIlroy and Justin Rose, had shares in second place alongside two less heralded Americans, Kevin Kisner and Xander Schauffele. There were decent showings, too, from the Englishmen Tommy Fleetwood and Eddie Pepperell and Denmark’s Thorbjørn Olesen. Thomas Bjørn, the European captain who was at Carnoustie as a TV analyst, took great encouragement not only from Molinari’s bogey-free weekend for the Italian’s astonishing third tournament win in six, with two runners-up places for good measure, but from the mood it helped create. “This was a special moment for Francesco but it was also a special moment for European golf,” he told Sky Sports. “This was a win for one of the hardest workers and good guys of the Tour; I always think it’s great when you’ve got new guys winning majors. Of course we are delighted on this side of the Atlantic. “I’m looking forward to Paris. It will do his confidence a lot of good and he will come into the team as one of those guys who is in form and everyone is looking at. He’s got another major championship coming up [the US PGA at Bellerive] and the form he’s in, this could turn into one of those very, very special years for him.” Molinari was in the 2010 and 2012 Ryder Cup teams, both of them European winning years, and was memorably serenaded on to the tee at Celtic Manor in the first of them when he played foursomes and fourballs with his older brother, Edoardo – recently returned after multiple hand surgeries – with the refrain “two Molinaris, there’s only two Molinaris”. He has also been candid enough to admit that he had not thought about playing in a third until this purple patch started in May, when he won at Wentworth and followed up in the US this month. Bjørn has got eight automatic qualifying places available and four wildcards to choose as he sets out to reclaim the trophy lost at Hazeltine two years ago, with various imponderables to be sorted out in the next few weeks. Paul Casey could be one of them as he is currently eighth on that list, although he finished well down the field at Carnoustie on four over. After playing in two European winning sides up to 2008 he was overlooked for the 2010 team and relinquished his Tour status to play in the US, though he is trying to qualify again this time. “I hope I’m a part of Europe’s team because I think it’s [looking] very, very good,” he said on Sunday. “Guys like Francesco Molinari have played stellar golf the last couple of months. From where it was 12 months ago and looking at the world rankings now it’s very, very strong.”