Salisbury’s Market Square is a picturesque muddle of Tudor gabling, honey-coloured stonework and scatterings of cafe tables. At 9am midweek it feels as if the city is only just waking up, the long morning shadows receding across the deserted sweep of flagstones. Yet in the brief time it takes the local MP to pose for our photographer in the square, he is approached twice by constituents, both of whom want to talk about just one thing: the appearance of a mysterious and deadly nerve agent in their lovely city. The first complains about the continued closure of the path into town; couldn’t a special bus service be provided to spare residents the extra 45-minute walk? The second claims to be the man who had collapsed in the town the previous night, sparking a flurry of fresh panic about further novichok contamination. The man had been rushed to hospital, rumoured to be “foaming from the mouth”, while police officers in hazmat suits raced to cordon off the surrounding roads, before it transpired that the man had simply had too much to drink. If there is only one conversation in town, it also stretches across the planet. “To the outside world,” John Glen sighs, “if you’re turning the TV on in Japan or China, you see the cordons and it looks as if the whole area is out of bounds. Well, it is out of bounds, in terms of what you can do. But it’s probably not contaminated. The challenge is now in communicating that the risk is low.” The MP hesitates unhappily. “But I’ve been surprised by the desire to find, you know, a convoluted answer. The conspiracy theories have been, well, quite extraordinary.” There is nothing ostensibly remarkable about the MP for Salisbury and South Wiltshire, a 44-year-old whose biography could be out of Conservative HQ central casting. He grew up in Wiltshire, studied at Oxbridge, worked for serveral Tory MPs and ministers, completed the requisite stint in the “real world” as a management consultant, was elected to parliament in 2010 and has served in various junior ministerial roles, currently as the economic secretary to the treasury. Since 4 March, however, Glen has found himself at the centre of a global news event unlike anything he had ever anticipated. “I couldn’t even have made it up,” he says. On that date, the MP was in Westminster when his constituency aide called to say two people had been taken ill on a park bench. The pair were found near a car park used by local addicts, so at first Glen assumed they were drug casualties. The news that Sergei and Julia Skripal had, in fact, been poisoned by a nerve agent plunged the town into a frenzy of fear that was just starting to subside four months later when news broke of two new contamination casualties – Dawn Sturgess, who has since died, and her boyfriend Charlie Rowley, discharged from hospital the week before last – pitching the city back into confusion. Salisbury may not be awash with novichok, but it is teeming with conspiracy theories. According to the MP, on the morning news broke of the second pair of casualties, a dozen fake online news stories were generated within hours. “We need to understand the dynamic of fake news, because it generates speculations – particularly from people who maybe are politically very sceptical of the government, full stop. We saw some quite interesting, you know, speculations. Some people question: Why would Russia do it? Or why would Russia do it now? Why would they make such a botch of it? Why would they leave stuff lying around? Of course, you can’t completely answer without getting into speculation yourself, and that’s a bit irresponsible. So, you just do the best you can.” What can he tell constituents, to reassure them? He offers a helpless smile. “Well, you just have to say: ‘The evidence leads us to this point, I can’t tell you any more, I hope that the investigation will get to a more conclusive point soon.’” When he tells them that, I begin to ask, does he – ? “I feel,” he interrupts softly, “a bit inadequate. Yes.” Glen finds himself in the unenviable position of being the public political face of Salisbury, but also having very little power over the city’s crisis. “It is difficult, because you do feel powerless, to an extent. You can’t compel the operational decisions of the police force, and when it’s the counter-terrorism force, they are that bit further removed, because they’re not used to that interaction.” Operations have been conducted by the local council and police, Downing Street and Cobra, counter-terrorism officers and Defra, leaving the MP with the job of reassuring his constituents. The trouble is, he explains, anything resembling reassurance only makes some more suspicious. They think he is trying to pull the wool over their eyes? “Well, that is what people say.” Whatever he says is dismissed by some, he explains, with: “Well he would say that, wouldn’t he?” What would they like him to say or do instead? “People want me to challenge the authorities. But I’m not going to challenge anyone based on hearsay and armchair speculation.” In the fog of competing conspiracy theories, the one unambiguous fact on which everyone can agree is the havoc the crisis is playing with the city’s economy. Glen says that local business takings were down 50% in the immediate aftermath of the poisoning in March, and had inched their way back to a 15% shortfall when the second victims were reported. With high season approaching, he was daring to hope that international tourists would soon be reappearing, to boost the local economy. “But, of course, people go on the internet, and in places far off are less able to contextualise what’s happened. So they just say: ‘Oh I don’t fancy going there.’ Which is irritating, but understandable.” Glen had been planning a tourism drive to tempt visitors back to Salisbury with a range of arts and cultural events. “But I can see little point in them now,” he concedes, looking bleak. “It’s difficult to say with conviction to overseas visitors that everything’s fine while you’ve still got cordons in place.” The government, meanwhile, has pledged more than £5m to support the city; roughly half will go to the police, and half to the council and to local businesses reeling from their losses. Is it enough? “I think it’s a good starting point. I reserve the right to say we need more – and we may need more, because it’s difficult to know exactly how long this is going to carry on, and I would be very, very firm if we need more money. The thing is, we’ve got to get back to the pre-crisis levels with respect to the overall performance of the economy, because if we settle for minus 10%, then we’re in a different place going forward.” He pauses. “I think the bottom line is we’ve got a challenge. We’ve got a communications challenge, and we’ve got to overcome it and we’ve got to grip it very quickly.” I’m curious to know at whom people in the town are directing their anger and blame. “I wouldn’t say the sentiment is one of anger at me. I mean, it’s bewilderment, frustration and eagerness to get back to normal. I think they don’t know who to blame, but they think something very dodgy happened involving somebody related to Russia.” Glen has been very clear since early March that the Russians are responsible. I ask how he can be so sure. “Well, I was on the defence committee for a couple of years. I did a degree in international security and strategy. My instincts are that if 27 countries are given information from our intelligence services, and that leads them, within a few days, to expel over 150 diplomats from their respective missions, they would not have done that unless the evidence was compelling of culpability of the Kremlin. But, when they saw the evidence, there was an immediate response. I would rely on that fact and that decision to inform my understanding of culpability.” Could the agent have come from the nearby MoD laboratory at Porton Down? He shakes his head impatiently. “I go to Porton Down quite regularly. It’s quite difficult to get in there. It’s quite difficult to get through security, even as a member of parliament. Now, I’m not naive about sophisticated ways that individuals try and penetrate these organisations, but I believe that we are really world leaders in terms of this sort of work, and I just don’t see it as credible at all. It is fake news, conspiracy-theory territory, and that’s how I regard it.” When he says so to his constituents, however: “Some really well-educated people say: ‘Well I won’t believe it until they’ve been seen in a court of law.’ I gently say to them, you know: ‘You may need to think about the way this sort of attack is prosecuted, and the nature of modern warfare. It’s changing, and it won’t probably be possible to get to that point very quickly.’ Clearly what I want is an enquiry and an investigation that identifies individuals with evidence that allows us to challenge the Kremlin on what they’ve done, and challenge the international community on what happened, and why we think it happened, and demonstrate clearly what the case is. We need to make the case. But in terms of actually bringing that person to court, that is clearly a difficult journey.” To see President Putin lauded for hosting the World Cup, and invited to Washington, while swathes of Salisbury remain cordoned off, hasn’t been easy for Glen. “There were a lot of people in Salisbury hoping for an England v Russia semi-final. I was. It would have been an interesting spectacle,” he offers dryly. Had England reached the final, and the government relented on its refusal to send dignitaries, he would have been appalled. “I think we’ve got to go back and just remind ourselves it’s the first time a nerve agent been used on European soil since the second world war, and essentially there’s been an assassination attempt, and subsequently somebody’s died. This is not some game. This is a serious matter, and although football’s a serious game for our country, you know, the thought of my senior colleagues in government sitting alongside President Putin does not sit well with me. That would not have sat well with me at all.” The patriotic thing for British people to do at this point, according to Glen, is simple: visit Salisbury. “What we need to do is get the message out there that Salisbury’s a beautiful place, it’s a maximum hour-and-a-half from London and you can come and have a wonderful time here, and …” The sentence tails away. “I’m just desperately concerned for this city. I want it to get back on its feet.”