Geraint Thomas will be crowned the Tour de France winner in Paris on Sunday after finishing third in the individual time trial. The Team Sky rider ended 14 seconds behind his nearest rival Tom Dumoulin on the day, having eased down in the final stages of the 31km stage from Saint-Peé-sur-Nivelle to Espelette. But with a 1min 51sec buffer over the Dutchman, Thomas knows the yellow jersey is safe. And with tradition dictating the race leader is not attacked during the final stage into Paris, he will join Bradley Wiggins, who won the race in 2012, and Chris Froome, who triumphed in 2013, 2015, 2016 and 2017, in the list of British winners. As Thomas crossed the line he pounded his chest and threw his hands in the air. Then, after hugging his wife Sara Elen, he poured water over his head as if to make sure this was not an impossible dream. After that he embraced Team Sky’s principal, Dave Brailsford, and suddenly the floods of tears began to flow. “I can’t believe it,” he said. “I’m welling up. I don’t know what to say. It is just overwhelming. I didn’t think about it all race and suddenly I won the Tour. “I felt really good on the stage, actually. Really strong. I was pushing a bit hard on the corners so Nico Portal told me to relax and make sure I won the Tour. “I felt I could beat the guys here but to do it over three weeks is insane. The last time I cried was when I got married – I don’t know what has happened to me.” Dumoulin, who won the stage in 40min 52sec, was also delighted with his victory by one second from Froome. “It was an amazing last day,” he said. “I was so nervous. I had no idea of splits and thought Chris Froome was a second quicker than me. I had such a hard time yesterday and all the frustration came out after the finish. I cannot believe this. It’s amazing.” Froome may have missed out on the stage win but his performance took him into third overall in the general classification. Thomas was the last rider off the ramp in Saint-Peé-sur-Nivelle at 4.30pm local time, the challenge of a punchy course with rolling roads and sharp climbs softened by knowing he began the day with a 2min 5sec lead over Sunweb’s Dumoulin. Dumoulin is the reigning world champion, a jersey he claimed in Bergen, Norway, last year by a staggering 57 seconds from Primoz Roglic. However the prospect of the Dutchman being able to take vastly more time out of Thomas always looked highly unlikely, especially as he was on tired legs having ridden three weeks on the Tour as well as the Giro d’Italia in May. Thomas’s task was simple: ride strongly and not crash on roads left slippery by afternoon showers. There was one wobble after 12km – where the Welshman nearly stacked the bike – but he passed the first checkpoint at 13km 14 seconds clear of his nearest rival, Froome. He slowed down after that, knowing victory was safe. And as he powered down the final climb and into Espelette, passing red, green and white bunting – not just the colours of the Basque country but the Welsh flag – he knew victory was his as the crowds cheered him home. Such positivity has not always been the case on this Tour, with Thomas regularly booed on the podium by a French public sceptical of Team Sky’s achievements. Only on Friday a Team Sky car was pelted with eggs by fans. The French paper Le Monde wrote on Saturday that while it believed Thomas’s triumph was legitimate, the fans it spoke to had greater scepticism. “A Welsh track specialist who, at the age of 32, wins the Tour de France, is it a miracle? For the latter case, we would tend to answer no,” the paper wrote. “And yet, nobody believes it: we spoke Tour de France every morning in the cafes of the departed cities. Among the French, we must create folders and subfolders. Those who watch the Tour; those who watch the race; those who believe in the regularity of the race they watch. In this last file, there is no one left. They respect, of course, the efforts and the sufferings, adhere to the myth of the convicts of the road. But the dice seem stuck.” Some doubters have also pointed out that Thomas has never finished higher than 15th in a grand tour. That, however, must be placed into context, given the Welshman has usually ridden in support of other riders rather than as a general classification contender. In the past, Thomas’s progress has also been interrupted by an unfortunate history of having bad days and crashes. Not this time, though. He has ridden with maturity and class throughout this Tour de France – and he emerges as a worthy winner.