Rory McIlroy has vowed to summon the spirit of his youth as he seeks a return to winning ways at major championships. The US PGA Championship of 2014 marks the last of McIlroy’s four major triumphs. This year has seen a Masters tilt undermined by a poor final round, with McIlroy subsequently missing the cut at the US Open. His final competitive appearance before the Open, which takes place at Carnoustie, is in this week’s Irish Open at sun-drenched Ballyliffin; McIlroy’s charity foundation once again hosts the event. “I think as you get older, it’s natural instinct to become a little more careful,” McIlroy said. “You take way more risks when you’re a teenager than you do in your 20s, than you would do in your 30s and it’s only natural to be that way, not just in golf but life in general. I just need to get back to playing the game like I was a teenager.” McIlroy links matters of the mind – rather than anything technical – to his closing round at Augusta National as his playing partner, Patrick Reed, prevailed. Therein lies an Open lesson. “Not be careful, not try to be too perfect,” McIlroy added. “Not try to control things that you can’t control. Just go out and play your game. You know, get out of your own way, I guess. “That’s the one thing that I need to do better and it’s more a mental thing rather than anything physical or anything. I just have to approach it better mentally. “I think you always have to be willing to fail in order to succeed. I think the way I’ve approached the game at some times this year, I’ve been sort of too careful. I haven’t been willing to hit the right shot or hit driver when I need to be aggressive.” In keeping with an obvious plan not to become mentally constrained, McIlroy pointed to a broader picture beyond professional aspirations. “Look, if I didn’t win another major for the rest of my career, nothing is going to change in my life whether I win one or not,” McIlroy said. “But obviously I wouldn’t feel like I’ll have fulfilled my potential. At the same time, there’s other things in my life that are more important than golf. I’d be disappointed but again, it’s not going to change things. I don’t panic. It doesn’t keep me up at night. “I’ve got two more chances this year to hopefully play myself into contention. That was my goal. My goal this year, it wasn’t to win majors. It was just to give myself a chance and to put myself in positions to see how I fare.”