Controversy seems to have been following Dominika Cibulkova at this year’s Wimbledon, from being bumped out of the seedings to accommodate the returning Serena Williams to some thigh-slapping that annoyed Johanna Konta.On Monday, the Slovak reached the quarter-finals for the third time with a 6-4, 6-1 win over Hsieh Su-wei only for her sportsmanship to be called into question. It happened when Hsieh, who beat the world No 1 Simona Halep in the third round, was serving at 4-5, 0-30 in the first set. After Cibulkova’s return was called long, she challenged it and was proved to be correct. Since Hsieh had played the ball back into court, the point should have been replayed but the umpire, Zhang Juan of China, called the score as 0-40. A shocked Hsieh complained but Zhang said “she couldn’t remember” the ball going back into court. As Hsieh continued to plead her case, the crowd chanted “replay the point, replay the point,” and after consultation with the superviser the umpire announced the point would indeed be replayed. That set Cibulkova off. “It is my point, my point, she hit the ball in the net,” she said, despite the ball having landed on her side and even rolled close to her feet. Cibulkova eventually accepted the decision and broke serve to win the set before running away with the second. Afterwards she was defiant. “Is it my fault you don’t remember if she hit the net or if she put it on my side?” she said. “After [Hsieh] was complaining, they were talking in Chinese, whatever language, I don’t know. It was all wrong, I think. It really messed with me for two balls, then I tried to just calm down, to play my game. “This happened to me so many times that I had exactly the same argument and the point was given to the other player. I had no sympathy [for Hsieh] because the argument is just about the chair umpire. “I’m a fair player. When I feel like this is something that should not happen, I would maybe have sympathy with her. For my opinion, this was not right what they did.” Hsieh said had things been the other way round, she would have been more generous. “If I saw it, I [would] say, yeah, replay the point,” she said. “Sometimes maybe you don’t see it, because for me I just feel I put the ball inside the court,”she said. “I was not sure how far my ball go in. So maybe she was not concentrated on my ball. She was concentrating on the court.” Cibulkova will next play the former French Open champion Jelena Ostapenko after the Latvian No 12 seed beat Aliaksandra Sasnovich of Belarus 7-6, 6-0.