African music has always played a major role at Womad, and the most impressive newcomers this year were a young seven-piece from Soweto, South Africa. BCUC have shaken up the country’s tradition for harmony singing with a style that combines township vocals, hymns and spirituals with furious, insistent percussion, hip-hop, punk energy, and a real sense of danger. They started gently, then switched to a frantic percussion workout from bass drums, congas, whistles and shakers. The music built furiously, then ebbed away, allowing for fine, soulful vocals from their female singer Kgomotso Mokone or intense lectures about the spirit world of the ancestors from singer Jovi Nkosi. Then the barrage of percussion returned, driven by insistent, sturdy bass lines, as the crowd followed the band’s instructions to go “a bit crazy” and Nkosi declared that the frantic scenes were “beyond our wildest dreams”. This was an entertaining Womad, dampened slightly by the rain, but with a typically eclectic lineup. Headliners included Leftfield, with an engagingly fresh revival of Leftism, and the ever-reliable Malian duo Amadou & Mariam. But it was the lesser-known artists who made this festival special. From Ivory Coast came Dobet Gnahoré, an engaging, theatrical singer-songwriter who danced as well as she sang, played percussion, and used an array of props to illustrate her lyrics. She deserves to succeed with her easy-going Afro-pop fusion but needs more distinctive songs, like Miziki. The African veterans included Maâlem Hamid El Kasri from Morocco, one of the most celebrated gnawa musicians, who descended from black slaves brought north across the Sahara. He played rousing bass riffs on the ancient guembri lute, urged on by singers playing iron castanets to create insistent, hypnotic music that can send listeners into a trance. From Nairobi, where they have been based since the 70s, Orchestre Les Mangelepa proved that they are still gloriously slick exponents of Congolese rumba. Other highlights included an exquisite set from the Estonian singer-songwriter Mari Kalkun, playing the kannel zither on love songs to reindeer and other friends. Then there was Mélissa Laveaux, with her soulful folk-rock treatment of Haitian songs of Voudou and protest. The only disappointments were the no-shows, who included Wazimbo the ‘golden voice of Mozambique’, one of two artists whose visa had not come through. Womad festival director Chris Smith told me the problem was now “bigger than just visas”. Three bands declined invitations because they didn’t want to face the bureaucracy, and Brexit could make the situation worse. It was no surprise to find many of the crowd sporting ‘Bollocks to Brexit’ stickers. Making her debut UK appearance, Gaye Su Akyol from Istanbul sported high silver boots and a cape for a powerful folk-rock set, mixing traditional songs with intense guitar and keyboard passages influenced by her love of Nirvana and Nick Cave. Introducing the slow, brooding Nargile she announced that “things are getting worse, not just in Turkey”, while on the 70s song Yaz Gazeteci (Write, Journalists) she paid tribute to those who have been jailed, providing a brave, stirring reminder that Turkish artists face greater problems than Brexit.