The proverbial can has been kicked down the proverbial road ever since Britain voted to leave the European Union in 2016. Don’t get me wrong. Can-kicking has a necessary place in politics. Theresa May has often had little choice but to resort to it. But the road and the can-kicking must end at Chequers on Friday. That’s when the prime minister and her divided cabinet must finally decide what kind of relationship they seek with the EU after Brexit. In the end, May’s government faces the same two choices at Chequers that it has faced throughout all the twists and turns of the Brexit negotiations. Either the government must embrace a form of soft Brexit that it can then persuade the rest of Europe to accept as a proper basis for good future relations – the option that May herself and the chancellor, Philip Hammond, both prefer and will put forward – or it must reject that option and prepare for a no-deal Brexit, in which all of Britain’s economic and political relations with Europe and the rest of the world become matters of pure conjecture. There are no other choices on the table. If Brexit is to go ahead, it is simply one or the other. This means, therefore, that only the first of the two choices is in fact a serious option. If the cabinet rejects May’s and Hammond’s approach and adopts a no-deal option as government policy, there would be both a parliamentary and an extra-parliamentary revolt against it. Large businesses such as British Airways might relocate to Europe. Labour might even find an explicit anti-Brexit voice. One way or another, the no-deal approach would therefore explode on the launch pad. And Brexit might even not take place. A soft Brexit, while not officially defined, would keep Britain in either the single market or the customs union or both. It could be achieved along the lines of the Norway model (see EEA/EFTA) or via an FTA, but would require concessions on free movement, ECJ jurisdiction and budget payments. Brexiters do not consider a soft Brexit as really leaving the EU. See our full Brexit phrasebook. Most ministers are neither idiots nor wreckers, so the no-deal option is not going to happen. It is even questionable as to whether any of the no-dealers will resign. The much more serious question, though, is whether the soft Brexit package that May wants to sell to the cabinet is much of a runner either. This question has not been asked often enough in debates around Brexit because so much attention is focused on the splits and personalities in the Conservative party. Even if May succeeds – as she probably will – in getting the government to agree a form of customs arrangement, aspects of single market access and a soft border in Ireland, that is not the end of the matter but the beginning of it. Partly that is because the terms of the soft Brexit option can’t be known until after Chequers. May’s case to the cabinet is still a work in progress, with rebel ministers and Number 10 still negotiating about some of the details, before the publication of a government white paper on Brexit policy next week. The usual cabinet suspects may still be briefing the usual rightwing papers about the likelihood of “almighty rows” and the unacceptability of May’s “softest Brexit” approach. But a consensus looks more likely at this stage than an explosion. The larger uncertainty, though, is whether the EU will give May’s supposed compromise the time of day. On the face of it, the chances look slim to vanishing, except at a very high price to the UK. The European commission negotiator Michel Barnier has consistently – and accurately – argued the EU’s rules-and-law-based approach: that the institutions are indivisible and that bespoke deals of the sort that Britain talks about would infringe them. There is not much reason to suppose that this is going to change radically in the time available to meet the article 50 deadline next March. Many ministers and civil servants dismiss this view. They have persuaded themselves that the EU is essentially pragmatic. They think Brussels lives by political fixes – as the council did last week on migration or as the German coalition did on the same issue this week. They believe that at the 11th hour of the Brexit process, the clock will be stopped and the wheeling and dealing will kick in. This expectation underlies May’s entire approach at Chequers on Friday. It’s why on Thursday May is meeting Angela Merkel, who is still seen as possessing the power to knock heads together and make deals. Although May is often dismissed as a weak leader, she nevertheless has cards in her hand. Most of her MPs and activists still back her. She would win a confidence vote, if one was called. There is no self-evidently better Tory leader – and several worse ones. She remains focused on delivering what for leavers is still the pre-eminent prize: Brexit itself, in which the UK would be “an independent political state”, as Michael Gove put it on the radio on Wednesday. But she is attempting to do it on terms that would help to appease Tory remainers and keep the party together. These are not negligible assets. This week – in an art gallery in Munich, of all places – I found myself in front of a painting by the 18th-century Leeds artist Julius Caesar Ibbetson that looked like a metaphor for the Chequers Brexit decision. The 1785 painting shows an early hot-air balloon, painted in union jack colours, rising into the sky above south London, carrying two passengers. There has been speculation that the two, a Mr Biggin and a Mrs Sage, may have become the first members of the mile-high club while they drifted towards their eventual descent near Harrow, but that’s another story. The point, though, is that Mr Biggin and Mrs Sage in their union jack balloon only got into the sky because a lot of ballast was thrown overboard and because two other intended passengers remained on the ground because they were too heavy. So it is with Theresa May and her Brexit hot-air balloon. It will fly only if it is not weighed down by needless weight and unrealistic expectations. It may not get very far before it comes down to Earth. And in the long run, balloons were not the answer anyway. • Martin Kettle is a Guardian columnist