Hugo Lloris His terrible mistake led to Mandzukic’s second goal. Fine save to deny Rebic in the second half though. 6 Benjamin Pavard Unable to go forward in the same way as in previous games because of Croatia’s pressing. 6 Raphaël Varane Such a calming presence in the French defence. Made one mistake, but got away with it. 8 Samuel Umtiti Under pressure from the start by Croatia’s intensity. Looked uncomfortable in possession on occasions. 6 Lucas Hernandez Tactically astute, knowing when to go forward and when to stay. Set up the fourth goal. Still only 22. Booked. 8 Paul Pogba Looked a bit lost in first half but grew into game. His raking pass led to third goal, scored by himself. 7 N’Golo Kanté Not at his usual energetic best and overpowered by Croatia’s midfield. Taken off after 54 minutes. Booked. 5 Kylian Mbappé Full of running and got the goal he deserved but do not forget his defensive work either. Outstanding. 8 Antoine Griezmann His free-kick led to France’s opener and he scored from the spot. Contributed defensively too. 9 Blaise Matuidi His incredible workrate and tactical awareness was crucial in Russia – and the final was no different. 7 Olivier Giroud Won headers and ran around a lot, as he always does, but never looked like scoring. 6 Subs Steven Nzonzi (for Kanté 54) 6, Corentin Tolisso (for Matuidi 73) 6, Nabil Fekir (for Giroud 81) 6 Danijel Subasic Conceded four, true, but cannot be blamed for the first two. Slow to react to Mbappé’s goal, though. 6 Sime Vrsaljko Ostensibly a full-back but played as a winger without neglecting his defensive duties. Booked. 7 Dejan Lovren One of the best defenders in the world, according to himself, and did not look out of place in the final. 7 Domagoj Vida Another powerful display by the centre-back. Denied Mbappé with a superb sliding tackle. 8 Ivan Strinic Struggled against Mbappé’s pace at times but supported Perisic going forward superbly. 6 Luka Modric Intelligent as always but not the display he would have wanted in his bid to secure the Ballon d’Or. 7 Marcelo Brozovic Unlucky to give away free-kick that led to France’s first goal but Croatia’s least assertive midfielder. 6 Ivan Rakitic Normally so unflustered, he gave the ball away a few times and shot wildly wide towards the end. 6 Ante Rebic Worked hard throughout but did not have same impact as Perisic. Denied by Lloris’s fingertips. 7 Ivan Perisic Best player on the pitch for an hour. Scored a sublime goal and was very unlucky with the penalty. 9 Mario Mandzukic Took advantage of Lloris’s howler to score. Never stopped running and unlucky with own-goal. 7 Subs Andrej Kramaric (for Rebic 71) 6, Marko Pjaca (for Strinic 81) 5 Referee Néstor Pitana (Argentina). Attendance 78,011