Andy Murray is back at Wimbledon – for what should be a fascinating stint in the BBC commentary box – but a corner of his heart surely will beat nostalgically to have stayed in the fight as he witnesses his career-long rivals, Roger Federer and Rafael Nadal, trample over dazzled opposition into the quarter-finals. It is very much an old boys’ reunion here – with the Swiss and the Spaniard still performing heroics while the wounded Scot, unsure still of his match fitness, can only look on with a microphone in his hand. He will do proper commentary on Wednesday as well; what a treat it would be were he to ambush either of them coming off court after their quarter-finals – presumably as winners. Murray posted on Facebook on Monday, “live in the BBC studio tomorrow with Tim Henman and trying my hand at commentary on Wednesday … what could possibly go wrong?” On the evidence of Federer’s fourth straight-sets win in a row, in an hour and 45 minutes over poor Adrian Mannarino, 6-0, 7-5, 6-4, the Swiss looks the best bet to go all the way for a record ninth title. He next plays Kevin Anderson, who beat Gael Monfils 7-6 (4), 7-6 (2), 5-7, 7-6 (4). But it is equally likely the man trying to stop him will be Nadal – in a re-run of their 2008 classic, with any luck – after a workmanlike 6-2, 6-3, 6-4 win over Jiri Vesely, who saved two match points (one with his eighth ace) in a rare battle of bandana-wearing lefties. First up on Centre Court in glorious sunshine on Monday, Federer took two minutes longer to beat Mannarino than Kyle Edmund did to defeat Alex Bolt a week ago, but the intensity of the 16-minute first set raised the demolition to another level. It was the crowd’s guilty pleasure to witness such elegant and irresistible slaughter, loving it as theatre, simultaneously wishing it would never end. Only the whirlwind collapse of Nick Kyrgios on Saturday was as short as this, and the Frenchman, a very decent player, must have thought he was hurtling through space backwards. Federer allowed him five points in the first set but, when he dumped a backhand volley for 30-40 in the fifth game, he conceded his first break point of the tournament. Two minutes later he bagelled Mannarino – then, curiously, a contest broke out. The first two games of the second set took as long as the whole first frame. Mannarino held serve for the first time. Ten minutes later he held again. By the time they got to 4-all, after 57 minutes, a cloud arrived. Federer sparked up – and it left. However, 43 minutes after winning the first set in just over quarter of an hour, the great man was serving to stay in the second. Struggle does not become him; he struck his eighth ace, held to 15, broke Mannarino in the 11th game, did a little air-skip to celebrate and shouted “C’mon!” As journalists left to return to the writing area, a steward bade everyone goodbye with “Thanks for coming.” Had Mannarino followed us out of the arena? Not yet. He continued his estimable, doomed, fightback in the third. But, an hour and 42 minutes after his torment had begun, he looked up to see Federer serving for his 16th appearance in the quarter-finals. He started as he finished, polishing off the third faster than a Cabinet minister takes to resign. He has not lost a set here since 2016. Was his form now as devastating as his near-flawless run to his eighth title last year? “I feel like these streaks just happen,” he said, as if anyone in the room could possibly identify with such a sentiment. “You can’t plan for them because one point can change the outcome of a set. If you break it down, it could be one shot, really. That’s not something you can always control. Of course, if you give yourself maximum chances, you’re playing well, you have super focus, then these streaks are possible.” By his deeds and his words, Federer lives in another world. Nadal resides nearby and, the temperature cooled a little in the afternoon, he confirmed his stellar run is sparkling still, taking just under two hours to account for the unseeded but determined Czech Vesely. Nadal said immediately afterwards, “It was an important victory. Since 2011 I have not been in the quarter-finals. I’m happy to be where I am and I’m playing well. He started to play better from the baseline in the third and I made a couple of mistakes in the game I lost my serve. “But I came back straight away. In the 5-4 game I was playing with the wind, which always helps. Every day is a different story but these are very positive matches for me, as I haven’t played on grass for a year.” Novak Djokovic, meanwhile, secured his place in the quarter-finals with the minimum of fuss. The former world No 1 saw off Karen Khachanov in an hour and 49 minutes, 6-4, 6-2, 6-2 to set up a clash with Kei Nishikori. Juan Martín del Potro was leading Gilles Simon when play was suspended for bad light.