Chris Froome’s problems multiplied in the Vendée on Saturday when he tumbled into a field during the climactic moments of the opening stage. Froome may have negotiated his way through the hostile buildup to his participation in this year’s race but once the racing started he could not stay upright on the fast run-in to Fontenay-le-Comte. In a frenzied finale to the opening stage when the peloton fought for space on narrow roads, the defending champion edged too close to the verge, lost control and fell heavily on his right side, starting yet another Grand Tour with a fall, as was also the case in May’s Giro d’Italia. Froome, the right side of his white jersey shredded, chased hard to catch the field but, along with his fellow Briton Adam Yates and Australia’s Richie Porte, lost just over a minute to the stage winner, Fernando Gaviria, and 51 seconds to other contenders, including his teammate Geraint Thomas, the 2017 runner-up, Rigoberto Uran, and the 2014 Tour champion, Vincenzo Nibali. “I’m just grateful I’m not injured,” Froome said. “There were a lot of crashes out there but that’s part of the game unfortunately.” Froome said much the same after his heavy crash in Jerusalem at the start of this year’s Giro, which he went on to win, but with Monday’s crucial team time trial and the following weekend’s cobbled stage to Roubaix looming on the horizon, it is a less than ideal start to his Tour. In 2014, Froome crashed in the opening week and started the cobbled stage hampered by broken bones in both hands. In driving rain, he was forced to abandon the race even before reaching the dreaded cobbled roads of what is known as the Hell of the North. Worse for Team Sky, his climbing teammate Egan Bernal also fell victim to a crash in the last 10km of racing, that left him cut adrift from the main field. Bernal’s fellow Colombian Nairo Quintana also had a torrid time, breaking both his wheels and being left to fend for himself by his all-star Movistar team. With his team car nowhere to be seen, Quintana’s wheel changes took an age and cost him well over a minute to the co-leaders, Mikel Landa and Alejandro Valverde, who survived the chaos to finish with the front group. After one stage, Quintana’s hopes of overall victory look to be receding. Ahead, a select group of the peloton’s best sprinters fought for the stage win with the Tour debutant Gaviria, of the Quickstep team, taking Colombia’s first sprint stage win from Peter Sagan. Mark Cavendish, chasing Eddy Merckx’s record of 34 Tour stage wins, was out of contention, having lost position inside the final 5km. “There’s probably 10 teams that want to be in the front,” said Cavendish’s key lead-out man Mark Renshaw. “There’s only 10 spots in the front so there’s only 10 riders who can be there. We just missed the position today.” After a week dominated by the polemics surrounding Froome, the first stage rolled away from the Ile de Noirmoutier in a tense atmosphere. Although Froome was cheered by some, he was cat-called by others who yelled “doper, doper” while some fans held placards saying “Cheater Go Home” and “Froome=Armstrong”. Even before the race began, rider security and the hostility directed towards Froome had become a pressing issue. But Froome’s sports director, Nicolas Portal, insisted that neither his team leader nor his team would change their strategy or tactics because of intimidation. “I am never going to ask Chris ‘please stay in the bunch’, because it is too dangerous, especially if it is a moment for him to win the Tour,” Portal said. “That is why we have to have a constructive relationship with the UCI and race organiser, so we can avoid this kind of situation.” But the focus of attention has now moved from Froome’s salbutamol levels to the credibility of Wada’s testing procedures, with the UCI president, David Lappartient, among those to call for a review by Wada. “The test doesn’t seem to be strong enough, to be honest, and I think that Wada will have to review it,” Lappartient told the Observer. “But I fully understand the feelings from the fans. “Froome was guilty for some of them, so they think it’s the fault of the UCI. But that’s not the reality at all, because the Froome case does not constitute an anti-doping rule violation.” Lappartient denied he was the source of the original leak, as some within the Tour convoy have suggested. “There is no truth in that, but I know who said that and I know who has an advantage in saying that,” the Frenchman said. “The reality is that it didn’t come from me or from the UCI. What could be the advantage for me to have a big crisis like this?”