With the news ’copters hovering over the Chequers summit like a Kardashian wedding, the prime minister’s guests began rolling up. Try saying them like they’re the England squad announcement. Boris Johnson! Chris Grayling! Andreaaaaa Leadsommmmm! Liz Truss! Michael Gove! Gavin Williamson, bruv! Esther McVeeeeey … ! To watch these country house arrivals was to be struck by one powerful thought: man, I’d watch this version of And Then There Were None so hard. And then I would watch it all over again. At time of writing, it was impossible to predict what would emerge from the crunchiest Brexit crunch meeting since the last one, but – spoilers! – you can be sure the only whodunnit victim will be the British people, whichever way they voted in the EU referendum. Their destiny remains in the hands of a government that would be out-strategised by the electric gates. Cliche demands a Titanic metaphor, so let’s have one: resigning at this stage of the shitshow would be the equivalent of quitting as ship’s sub-lieutenant 10,000 feet underwater. Or as No 10 sources let it be known this morning, ministers needed to get behind the PM “or their spots will be taken by a talented new generation who will sweep them away”. Oh, prime minister … don’t do thinly disguised England football metaphors. They’re not for you. You’ve dimly heard of the golden generation, yes? You’re the golden shower generation. Once again, it’s the hysterical smallness of it all. We’ve reached the stage of our national journey when the cabinet’s phones genuinely have to be confiscated on arrival. As a senior government source told the Politico website: “Taxi cards for Aston’s taxis, the local cab firm, are in the foyer for those who decide they can’t face making the right decision for the country.” This was the merely the centrepiece of a series of quotes obviously said for a dare. “It’s a cold world outside government,” the source growled, apparently convinced they were running Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer in the 1930s, and some wannabe starlet had just refused both types of job (nose- and blow-) and was now having her Hollywood non-future explained to her. Same for cabinet ministers thinking of walking. You’ll never eat a ploughman’s in this village again. For an audience who tired of the Real Housewives of the Cabinet franchise about 30 episodes ago, the chance to watch messy bitches who live for drama pour drinks over each other feels less than enticing. Then again, given the briefing/counterbriefing/provocative leaks that characterised the buildup, this is arguably more of a Jeremy Kyle episode. Are you aware of how that show works? Without wishing to let daylight in on tragedy, producers reportedly put the various warring factions up in a hotel the night before they’re on air, and ensure the various participants hear how the other lot are slagging them off. Sound familiar? Europe has always been a Tory family row easily as toxic as classic Kyle shows such as “I’ll Prove the Child You Abused Is Really Your Son!”. Instead of settling the issue, David Cameron amplified it into a sordid circus, full of exploited people, that we’re all condemned to watch. It’s a feud the polygraph test of the referendum didn’t solve because – weirdly – life’s a bit more complicated than that. Monday kicked off with the Tory fundraiser, an auto-satirical event where lots included a ride in Rees-Mogg’s Bentley What will be the homily at the end of this Chequers-based edition of the show? At every stage in the Brexit process thus far, Theresa May’s government has squandered time searching for “a form of words” that disguises disagreement over “an actual thing”. Frequently, even the form of words has been pre-rejected by the EU. Clearly, this can’t go on for ever, so we have now moved on to forms of words that come pre-rejected by the Americans, who we wish to strike a trade deal with. Americans who – in case it has slipped the PM’s mind before he comes to play kings and queens next week – are ruled by a self-confessed aggressive protectionist. The big question, really, is whether next week can go worse for the government than this one did. Monday kicked things off with the Tory fundraiser, an auto-satirical event where auction lots included a ride in Jacob Rees-Mogg’s Bentley. Never mind straight-to-DVD: this government is straight-to-meme. Other prizes included dinner with the Goves, and a bottle of whisky signed by five Conservative prime ministers (pearl-handled revolver not included). By midweek, Brexiter Owen Paterson was suggesting he knew lot more about the car business than the chief executive of Jaguar Land Rover. This is the former environment secretary whose explanation as to why he’d missed his culling target was “the badgers moved the goalposts”. Owen, you were outfoxed by badgers. You’re going to have to defer to the man who makes broom-broom cars on why he might have to take his factories on a permanent holibobs. To cap it all, the eve of the Chequers summit saw the Telegraph drop a film called The Week That Broke Brexit, in which a selection of people in significant part responsible for where we find ourselves explained where it all had gone wrong. It was the least convincing series of denials since Shaggy’s It Wasn’t Me. Theresa May was a “third rate administrator”, said Arron Banks (it wasn’t me). “Dereliction of duty”, said the chairman of Vote Leave about Cameron (it wasn’t me). “Overweening ambition”, said Boris Johnson’s aide about Michael Gove (it wasn’t me). And yet, wasn’t it? Without wishing to adopt the impenetrable language of trade diplomacy: picture this, you were all butt naked, banging on the bathroom floor. See also: the counter, the sofa, the shower, and on camera. And now, doubtless, in the Chequers “foyer”, on the croquet lawn, and on the Sunday politics shows. Even the Shaggy song eventually decides the decent thing to do is to apologise for the pain he’s caused. “Officially more shameless than Shaggy” – what a cabinet agreement for our times. • Marina Hyde is a Guardian columnist