Police in Charlottesville have said they are braced for the “worst-case scenario” if a white supremacist group succeeds in staging another rally to mark the first anniversary of an event that led to street fighting, the death of a counter-protester and dozens of injuries. The city in Virginia is fighting in federal court to deny Jason Kessler, who was behind the “Unite the Right” rally in August 2017, from obtaining permission for rallies on 11 and 12 August this year in Emancipation Park. Charlottesville police chief RaShall Brackney told a public forum this week that authorities had spent nearly a year preparing for any effort by white supremacist groups to return to the city, and would be ready whether Kessler obtained the permits or not. “We know that someone, regardless, is going to use this as an opportunity for their national platform to be heard,” Brackney said, according to the Daily Progress. “I don’t care when any judge makes any decision about [rally organizer Jason Kessler.] … And shame on us if we don’t plan for whomever might show up.” “I can’t share details. But there will be some changes to the community,” she said. Charlottesville city manager Mike Murphy told Thursday’s public forum that the city had been already been largely successful in suing almost two dozen militia-like groups and individuals that had allegedly participated in illegal paramilitary activity in the state. He said agreements had also been reached that they would not return to Charlottesville in a similar fashion. Georgetown Law’s Institute for Constitutional Advocacy and Protection – which filed the suit on behalf of the city of Charlottesville and local businesses against Kessler and numerous paramilitary groups – announced the agreements on Thursday. Kessler was reportedly the last defendant to sign the decree saying he would not actively discourage people attending any rallies he holds in the city from acting violently. Other groups who signed the decree include Pennsylvania Light Foot Militia, Virginia Minutemen Militia, American Freedom Keepers, American Warrior Revolution, Redneck Revolt, Vanguard America, Socialist Rifle Association and the Traditionalist Worker party. 