There is no such thing as the British dream. Or at least, that’s the lesson drawn from years of clunky political attempts to articulate it; to create a version of the romantic story America tells about itself, an identity strong enough to hold a splintering nation together. On paper, Ed Miliband’s attempt while Labour leader sounded reasonable enough. The idea of a British promise – a deep, shared sense that children’s lives should be better than those of their parents – certainly described something missing from the post-crash nation. Yet it felt horribly clumsy for reasons that were hard to pin down at the time – and which, for me, finally swam into focus only earlier this summer when I read the story Raheem Sterling told the Players’ Tribune about his childhood. The sort of steady economic progress down the generations that Miliband talked about is more of an expectation than a dream, something we’d come to take for granted and are now enraged at having lost. But Sterling’s life story? Now that’s a British dream, however it ultimately ended on the pitch. Born in Jamaica, he came to England at the age of five, three years after his father’s murder. His mum worked as a cleaner while putting herself through college and had no choice but to take the children with her on the early morning shifts, waking them at 5am and roping them into scrubbing toilets. Later, once the young Raheem had been scouted by QPR, he and his older sister would take three different buses across London every Saturday just to get to training, then his sister would wait patiently for hours before the long trek home. Sterling’s mother came here with nothing, and now she’s the director of a nursing home while her son plays for his country. Or take midfielder Dele Alli’s triumph over a difficult childhood, estranged from his birth parents and drifting into gang activity. The kid who honed his skills in a car park using bikes for goalposts has now scored in a World Cup; how many little boys with tough lives fantasise about that? And while barely one in a million will come anywhere near it, that in a way is the point. That’s what makes it a dream – a wild and crazy thing that almost certainly won’t come true, but provides a tiny glimmer of light in the darkness anyway. Dreams come from a place of hardship, not of comfort, because to dream is to escape. Football has always played this role in many fans’ lives, but this tournament has allowed the rest of us to understand that, perhaps more deeply than before. England’s past few World Cup runs have been all about expectation, followed by sour inquisitions when the team failed to meet it. But this one was made magical by the fact that we no longer expected anything. We’d resigned ourselves to being rubbish again and then somehow miraculously managed not to be, which is why defeat, when it came, was for once more sad than enraging. Like the freak June heatwave, it has had that genuinely dreamlike quality: a sense that any minute now we’re going to wake up, because this can’t be real. Summers aren’t normally like this. Football isn’t normally like this. The only thing resolutely living down to expectations now is politics, but the blessed respite of not having to think about that while the football was on was a gift in itself. Even people who don’t give a stuff about sport normally have been sucked in, because like the 2012 Olympics it was about much more than sport. Fandoms can be exclusive at times, resenting those who jump on the bandwagon. But this tournament has been, in a natural and unforced way, different. As manager Gareth Southgate said, his was a diverse squad in which kids from every race and background can see themselves. But the inclusivity doesn’t stop there. Something about Southgate himself, tenderly hugging his young players and earnestly discussing their feelings, made it all right for those normally put off by all the testosterone. Here was more than one definition of Englishness: St George’s flags and God Save the Queen for some, but also waistcoats and self-deprecating jokes and pictures of the team playing like big kids on blow-up unicorns in a swimming pool. It’s this kind of English identity that has lately become lost in the shouting, something elastic and generous enough to be whatever the English need it to be. But if the football really didn’t move you after all this, then this extraordinary summer has also given us the British cave-divers in Thailand. Rick Stanton and John Volanthen were middle-aged men you wouldn’t look twice at in a crowd, yet possessed of such extraordinary hidden skill and valour that a nation glowed with borrowed pride when they helped turn what looked like inevitable disaster into success. Both the rescue effort and the football were a reminder of the astonishing power of teamwork, of humility and mucking in rather than letting egos run rampant. And that spirit of togetherness was infectious. How often do 30 million of us gather around the telly all at once? Yet the semi-final lured even surly teens from their bedrooms to the family sofa, and gave little ones the illicit thrill of staying up long past bedtime. For once, the devices we’re used to blaming for stressed and fragmented lives helped make it an even more genuinely collective experience. Family WhatsApp groups pinged like crazy through the match, strangers shared every tense moment on Twitter. And when Kieran Trippier scored, prompting thousands at open-air screenings to hurl their drinks into the sky, images of exuberant crowds lit up phone screens. Even when we lost, people hesitated before piling in to criticise: “but they’re still so young”, “they tried so hard”. The morning after felt punctured but wistful, like coming home from a beach holiday with sand still just about between your toes. “Let’s keep this unity alive,” tweeted defender Kyle Walker. But can we? One great sporting summer doesn’t make Brexit go away, reverse the Windrush scandal, paper over the cracks in British society and craft a new national identity overnight. It’s football, not a miracle. But if dreams often turn out to be of limited practical use in the cold light of day, then it’s arguably unfair to expect otherwise. We don’t dream in order to change a harsh reality, but because we crave relief from it. And if this team can’t possibly provide all the answers around national identity, then at least for a few precious weeks they let us stop hysterically overthinking the question. Not everything has to mean something. Sometimes it’s enough just to live for the moment, however fleeting; for the sheer transcendent joy of England, team or country, feeling good about itself for once. • Gaby Hinsliff is a Guardian columnist