Some say that Valtteri Bottas just does not have the aggressive, killer instinct required in Formula One given the levels of composure and control he shows in testing circumstances. But as this softly spoken, private driver prepares for what he views as almost a home grand prix in Hungary, he is insistent that the even temper he has displayed during a trying season should not be mistaken for any lack of passion or indeed, ambition. There are extra flights laid on from Helsinki to Budapest for the Hungarian Grand Prix as the Finns descend en masse to the Hungaroring. With no home race of their own, Hungary has become a popular stamping ground to support Kimi Räikkönen and his compatriot Bottas. Their aspirations for the latter have taken a beating this season with the 28-year-old Bottas plagued by a sequence of bad luck, leaving him winless after 11 races, but with five runners-up spots, his hopes of challenging Lewis Hamilton and Sebastian Vettel for the title dashed. Nor has he just suffered ill-fortune: at the last round in Germany, he was on the receiving end in a rare case of Mercedes employing team orders. These were circumstances he again took with equanimity. At Hockenheim he was crawling all over the back of Hamilton on fresher tyres after the final restart. The pair went wheel-to-wheel before Mercedes, fearing for their one-two, told Bottas to hold station. Mercedes renewed his contract for a further year last weekend and the Finn has always proved to be a team player yet for many his straight acquiescence raised question marks over his determination. The contrast with Vettel’s disregard of a team order when he sniffed a win against Mark Webber at Malaysia in 2013 was cited. Bottas says given the circumstances the decision was correct and his reaction did not betray a lack of ambition. Asked if he believes he is ruthless enough for F1, he replies, instantly and with conviction. “Yes,” he says. “I do what is the best for me. I am hungry for wins, and we will find out if I am [good] enough for a world championship one day.” Nor he insists would he be afraid to get his elbows out, yet he feels no need to change his personality, simply to fit a set driver stereotype. “Everyone is different; I have always been like this,” he adds. “It is who I am. I can be nice – I don’t need to be rude for no reason. I know when I am in the car I am always doing my best.” Bottas won three races for Mercedes last season, so he is not trying to find the winning formula but he has repeatedly come close in 2018 only to be denied, most cruelly in Azerbaijan. At Baku he had gone long on his first stint and a pit stop under the safety car ensured he had the lead and the win in his grasp. But he hit debris with three laps to go and the puncture put him out. It was a blow the Mercedes team principal, Toto Wolff, described as “brutal”. Bottas took it on the chin but admits he was disconsolate. “I felt very empty,” he says. “It was just heartbreaking, I felt like I had a good race – I felt really sad, empty.” It was not the only setback. In China he jumped race leader Vettel through the pit stops after superb in and out laps. He had the lead and likely the win until a safety car proved pivotal and Red Bull used it superbly to put Daniel Ricciardo on fresh tyres and take the win. In France, Bottas was hit by Vettel at turn one on the opening lap and could manage only seventh with a damaged car. Then in Austria his first pole of the year ended with a hydraulic failure on lap 14. In each case there was stoic disappointment rather than fireworks from the Finn. It has been difficult to take but he insists his passion for the sport is undiminished. “I love it as much as I did as a kid doing karts,” he says. “Every time I jump in the car I feel very happy. Racing is what I love to do and I am very lucky I can do it. It is my childhood dream and I still feel like that. If you want to be the best it is never easy.” Bottas began his F1 career at Williams and Sir Frank described him as “simply one of the most talented young racing drivers I have come across”. His wins last year were impressive and although he was criticised for not being more aggressive against Vettel at the death in Bahrain this season, has shown moments of breathtaking verve. Not least at Silverstone for Williams in 2014, passing Kevin Magnussen and Jenson Button around the outside at Stowe. There is then, a sense of unfulfilled potential which he acknowledges. “I feel there is a lot more to come,” he says. “I feel every year I am getting better since I joined Mercedes being a teammate of Lewis, working with new people. I have progressed a lot from last year to this year. If I keep working there is no reason my peak is not ahead.” He is careful to keep his private life private, using social media sparingly, but he does admit that with time off he likes nothing more than going to the beach, having a few beers with friends or simply doing the laundry. This is unsurprising for a grounded driver who had a down to earth back-up plan: “I studied to be a car mechanic. That was my plan B. Servicing cars and changing tyres in Finland.” The contrast in character to Hamilton could not be greater and that perhaps is why the pair have found such harmony, but Bottas is every bit as driven as the world champion. He has the focus and – for now – is keeping his cool until he finally comes into some good fortune. Hungary has not been a happy hunting ground for Mercedes in the turbo-hybrid era however, with their car not at its best around the slow and medium-speed corners of the Hungaroring. Hamilton, who leads Vettel by 17 points in the championship, was fifth in first practice with Bottas sixth. Ferrari have been more successful with two wins for Vettel in the last three years, and they still look strong here despite their switch to a longer wheelbase – Vettel was in second in the first session. Red Bull have been eyeing this meeting hungrily for some time, as the track – like Monaco – should work to their aerodynamic strengths. Early practice suggested this was the case. Ricciardo topped the timesheets in the morning, with his teammate Max Verstappen in third. With the track rubbered-in for the afternoon session and some qualifying simulations run, Vettel had the advantage, in front of Verstappen and Ricciardo with Hamilton and Bottas once again fifth and sixth.