The French have a name for presidential men like Alexandre Benalla – les couteaux suisses or Swiss army knives – loyal lieutenants, who act as a multifunctional human tool. In the past, some have occupied a more sinister, or at the very least less than transparent role, as part of a parallel or “black” cabinet. Macron had Benalla as his multi-purpose Swiss knife and having come to power in May 2017 pledging to clean up French politics and “moralise” public life, the omnipresent 26-year-old bodyguard seemed more shadow than shadowy. But Benalla’s indictment for “gang violence” and impersonating a police officer after he was caught on film assaulting protesters at a May Day demonstration, has blown this assumption to pieces, raising questions over why a security official – even one described as part of the president’s inner circle – had powers, privileges and access well above his official station. Damaging for Macron is that instead of transparence and probity, the scandal has resurrected the spectre of the bad old days of presidential forces operating outside the law, with the Élysée being accused of trying to hush up the incident. That Benalla was given an all-access pass to the Assemblée Nationale – as well as a key to the Macron’s private residence in Le Touquet – and allocated a grace-and-favour apartment in central Paris with an official car with flashing blue lights may be explicable. Perhaps the Élysée had its own reasons for requesting Benalla be issued a firearm – a Glock and 2,000 rounds – when the interior ministry had twice turned down his request for a weapon. More problematic is why the president’s spokesman insisted Benalla had been authorised to attend the May Day demonstrations with police as an “observer” when police chiefs say no authorisation was given, and how he came by a police armband and police frequency radio. These are questions the four ongoing inquiries, one criminal, two parliamentary and one internal police investigation, should answer. What is less explicable is how Macron became caught up in this deeply damaging situation. To avoid the scandals that dogged his predecessor François Hollande’s first months in office – most notably two ministers accused of fiscal fraud – Macron delayed announcing his new government while officials double-checked the honesty of his new appointees. Only last month in Canada for the G7 meeting, Macron was boasting his Élysée team was one of “exemplary probity”. Historically, this has not been the case. Gen de Gaulle created the Civic Action Service, a militia dedicated to “defend and promote” his ideas, that recruited from the underworld and organised crime groups and dug up dirt on his opponents. The CAS was disbanded in 1982 after internal rivalries led to a gruesome massacre. President Georges Pompidou employed bogus plumbers to bug the offices of the satirical paper the Canard Enchainé to uncover its sources, while his successor, Valéry Giscard D’Estaing, was at the centre of a major political scandal when it was claimed he accepted gifts of diamonds from the head of an African nation he later helped to depose. François Mitterrand established a secret “anti-terrorist” cell whose real aim was to protect his secret second family housed in an Élysée annexe, the same annexe Benalla was reportedly allocated. Mitterrand’s “black cabinet” also eavesdropped on politicians, writers, journalists and actors. President Jacques Chirac was dogged by a fake jobs scandal from when he was mayor of Paris, and his successor, Nicolas Sarkozy, is still the subject of several investigations, including charges he accepted €50m in illegal campaign funds from the Libyan dictator Muammar Gaddafi. Macron should have been aware his clean-up crusade would eventually come a cropper, but what might seem like the case of a public official exceeding his authority outside France takes on a darker side domestically, sparking fears of cover-ups, dysfunction and rottenness at the heart of the French state.