And so it continues. Government in the style of the last five minutes of an exam, when everything goes to shit and you just start scribbling random stuff down the side of the page. So Much Has Happened. In particular, the resignations of David Davis and Boris Johnson, both of whom wisely chose to step down after they had been safely delivered back to Westminster from Chequers, thereby avoiding a wait for a cancelled train. (Please continue to knock it out of the park, Chris Grayling!) The subsequent cabinet reshuffle has seen new faces (read here for full changes), and with a new term comes a new school photo. Let’s break it down below. The overall picture is blindingly white. The much-trumpeted appointment of the first Muslim home secretary is to be welcomed, but Sajid Javid must be feeling pretty lonely. However, 17% of the cabinet is now called Jeremy. Also, look closely: everybody’s mug is empty. Anybody who has ever sat through a TV show in which the actors blow on non-existent hot beverages will find this excruciating. Or at least I do, not that I have thought about this a lot. Hunt (now foreign secretary) is once again doing more leaning in than Sheryl Sandberg. Hunt’s general photo vibe is very photobomb even when it’s a photo he is supposed to be in. It’s reminiscent of the famous photobombing seal. In Jeremy’s world, #MeToo is what he shouts when spotting a group of people about to have their picture taken. At least he has remembered to take off the NHS badge, which will be much missed. Truss, back centre, looks like she’s ready to take over the world. Because she is. First she spruced up her online presence, becoming a Twitter power player: next, everything. Look at the intent. Look at the eye contact. She’s as sick of this shit as the rest of us. It’s a … she might say … disgrace. Gavin Williamson looks like the bus pass photo you had when you were 14. The one you find when your parents make you clean out your old room, and you look kinda cute and impish, but marvel at the amount of gel you once thought was a Look. Fair play though, he went from carrying the bags and handing out the remembrance poppies to defence secretary in a matter of months and that’s

irresponsible
 impressive. He’s as on-brand keen in the new cabinet pic. Kennedy is the PM’s personal private secretary. That’s her on the far right, by herself, grimacing as though on the outskirts of hell. She is holding her left wrist with her other hand, the international body language for I DO NOT WANT TO BE HERE. It is her firm wish that she could press a button on the underside of her chair that would project her backwards out of the window. The attention-seeking bright reusable coffee cup is out, bang in the centre of the pic. Gove still has the quite endearing facial expression of a secondary school kid who turns up to the careers advice session in a suit, despite being 13 and it being a waste of time. Keep being your stubborn best, sweetie. Honestly, it doesn’t matter how the new Brexit secretary sits cos I’m always just gonna think he sounds like a car, but he looks pretty squished here between Hunt and David Lidington. Danny Dyer described Brexit as a “mad riddle” that “no one understands”, and so is Geoffrey Cox’s hand. Look at it. What is it doing? Does Geoff think he’s in the middle of a relay race and missing a baton? Is it a kind of… flesh-claw? He’s the new attorney general: did nobody teach him hand etiquette? Little fact on Geoff and his hand: they once claimed 49p on expenses for a bottle of milk. You can’t really see justice secretary David Gauke, because he’s hiding behind Philip Hammond on the left. But you can sort of see that he looks – not like Richard Nixon – but like how someone would draw a cartoon version of Richard Nixon. McVey, although she used to have a career in presenting TV, has always 100% looked like the person who would ask for the manager, and then when talking to the manager, ask for her manager. Since she’s been work and pensions secretary, even more so. Nothing about her expression in this photograph changes that impression. Nothing. Anyway, great pic, guys. Can’t wait to fave and comment on Instagram.