Ever since I was 18 and backpacked round the world for a year, my focus has been on travelling as much as possible. That comes at a financial cost, of course. I’m terrible at saving because I spend most of my earnings on it. I earn £34,000 a year plus £10,000 commission as an account manager – and £10,000 of that will go on holidays. So far, I’ve ticked off 55 countries. This year alone I’ve visited Myanmar, which must have set me back about £3,000, Amsterdam for a few days, Barcelona for a hen do, the Alps for a few days, Isle of Man for a wedding, Preston for a wedding, and Cheddar near Bath for a hen do. Also in the diary is Ibiza at the end of August, and I plan to go to India or Colombia over Christmas. I might also squeeze in South Korea in October. This year’s been a quiet year for me travel-wise. Where did I go last year? Madeira, Slovakia, Israel, Cyprus, Indonesia, Norway and lots of places in the UK. I’ll always go somewhere long haul once a year on my own. During those trips, I’ll stay in a private room in a hostel – that way I’ll meet more people – and it’s cheaper than a hotel. I use a spreadsheet for my travelling. I always try to over-budget how much I will spend a day – then if I do really want to do something when I’m there, it’s OK. I have a lot of friends who have managed to save up and buy places, but also I don’t have many friends who have been to as many countries as I have. I often get called “lucky” and I get that I am – but travelling is my priority, and that’s how I choose to “invest” my money. I’ll also spend a chunk of money – about £400 a month – on experiences. I love trying new and different restaurants and bars that I’ve never been to before, and going to shows, plays, lectures, museums, crazy golf and weekends away. I am far more interested in spending my money on having a good time instead of buying material things. I will never be able to afford a “nice car”, because I will always want the next trip more. I’m really rigid in terms of how much I’m spending on food, socialising and trips every month. I use a spreadsheet to budget. I put £150 on a Sainsbury’s card once a month – then I know I can’t spend more. Other outgoings include about £120 a month on an Oyster card and £60 on gym membership. Luckily, my dad currently owns the flat that I live in. He bought it six years ago as a way to help my brother and I get on the property ladder. He never wanted us to rent off landlords as it is so expensive and it’s wasted money. My brother lived in the flat for four years before buying a place, and I’ve been living there on my own for two. I give my dad £250 a month – which covers the mortgage – and I pay all bills, which come to a couple of hundred a month. This leaves me with about £1,400 “spare” money each month, but it never feels like I have that much money – I am always paying something off, usually flights. I try to store away £300 a month, and so far have about £3,000 saved. I am in a lucky position because my parents have saved towards a deposit for me so I don’t feel a real urgency to save more. I appreciate that I won’t always be able to afford to just “have fun”, so for now I’m embracing my current financial situation with my social freedom – and, of course, planning the next big trip.