Welcome to the Guardian’s new and improved podcast newsletter. From this week onwards we are expanding our coverage, bringing you the latest podcast news in our “talking points” section and recommending the best podcasts on a specific subject in “in focus”. As ever, we will have our picks of the week, a podcast choice from the Guardian’s roster and, of course, your own listening suggestions. Currently engrossing Australia is The Teacher’s Pet, a true-crime podcast investigating the disappearance of Lyn Dawson, a Sydney resident, 36 years ago. The podcast has prompted police to apologise for their handling of Dawson’s disappearance and to re-examine the case. In other “podcasts having an impact on real life” news, the makers of the mega-hit podcast S-Town are being sued by the estate of its subject, John B McLemore, over claims including invasion of privacy. Repeating the trick of their recent punk series, BBC 6 Music have compiled Mark Riley and Rob Hughes’ A-Z of Psychedelia into a 36-part podcast. Meanwhile, BBC Radio 3 is providing a primer to another musical medium with its new podcast Classical Fix, in which Clemency Burton-Hill provide a playlist of classical bangers to newcomers to the genre. Hate joining podcasts way into their run, but don’t want to download every episode in one go? Cast Rewinder allows you to subscribe to a podcast from the beginning and receive episodes at an interval of your choosing. Try it out here. Gwilym Mumford The WildernessThe 2016 election of Donald Trump came as a shock to everyone (not least Trump himself), but especially to members of the Democratic party, who had been widely expected to retain the presidency for a third consecutive term. Now, with Republicans controlling the presidency, both houses of Congress and state and local politics, the Democrats need to find their way out of the political wilderness. This excellent 16-part documentary series from the Pod Save America host and former Obama speechwriter Jon Favreau reckons with the issue, while considering what a left-leaning political party should look like in 2018. If that sounds a little wonkish, fear not – lively archive footage and some frank talking heads help make this a compelling listen. GM You Must Remember ThisPossessed of a voice like a retro Hollywood siren and with many gossipy tales to tell, Karina Longworth is a seductive storyteller. The latest season of her podcast on forgotten film history focuses on fake news, fact-checking Kenneth Anger’s notorious 1959 book Hollywood Babylon. Stories about Fatty Arbuckle and Mae West are promised, but first Anger’s rumours about Dorothy and Lillian Gish’s close relationship are examined in detail. If you like this, there are more than 100 episodes for your bingeing delight. Hannah Verdier Everything Is AliveIf you are one of 99% Invisible’s many listeners, this new podcast from Radiotopia is worth your ears. Louis, a can of cola, is the first “interviewee” in a series that gives voices to inanimate objects. Although he describes himself as a “bottom-shelf” brand, Louis reckons he could pass a blind taste test against all the big boys such as Coca-Cola and Pepsi. For a can of fizzy drink, he has a great sense of humour. He will be followed by other objects, such as Maeve, a Brooklyn lamppost. HV As the Tour de France heads toward its halfway point, there is a wealth of options. Along with the consistently excellent fare of The Cycling Podcast, there is also Rouleur Podcast’s fortnightly offering and a new, slightly more divisive, option: Lance Armstrong’s Stage, which has recently been retitled The Move. This sees him sit in a small studio and comment on all things two-wheeled. He is candid and regularly sticks his oar into contemporary cycling issues. Armstrong’s position as cycling’s biggest villain means for some he will always been anathema, but The Move is slick and its regularity – it is daily – means it offers a useful debrief after each stage has concluded. Bradley Wiggins has got into the podcast game, too, as part of Eurosport’s coverage, with The Bradley Wiggins Show. He has already made waves by commenting on the Sky leadership contest between Geraint Thomas and Chris Froome and by calling the management style of the team’s boss, Dave Brailsford, “divisive” and “self-serving”. Unlike Armstrong, who feels as though he is looking in from the outside, Wiggins feels closely connected to contemporary cycling and Team Sky in particular. Away from racing news and conjecture, there is Home Roads, in which the host, Matt Barbet, jumps on a bike and explores local routes with a cyclist, while talking about their career and their life off the bike. It is part Desert Island Discs, part Adam Buxton. Lanre Bakare BirdBird takes a look at the UK’s prison system through interviews with prisoners and the people who work with them. It is sobering and dark, but so, so interesting. Recommended by James Cook The Pint-Sized PodcastThe Pint-Sized Podcast is like having a warm, no-nonsense friend demystify a world that often feels like a closed shop – the theatre industry. I wish this podcast had existed four years ago, when I first started pursuing a career as a playwright. Recommended by Margaret Perry This monthly podcast from the Guardian focuses on issues that matter to our supporters and features questions asked by them to our panel of experts. This month’s episode explores the negative impact of the modern news cycle on our health and wellbeing and whether a greater focus on positive, hopeful, solution-based stories could help to mitigate this. Lee Glendinning hosts a panel featuring Prof Denise Baden from the University of Southampton; Seán Dagan Wood, the publisher of Positive News; Giselle Green, the editor of Constructive Voices; and Mark Rice-Oxley, the series editor of The Upside at the Guardian. You can submit topic suggestions for future shows via email at weneedtotalkabout@theguardian.com. Please leave us your name, location and phone number so we can get in touch if needed.