Despite a tumultuous day, May remains in a strong position. Two high-profile critics of her Brexit approach have quit the government and there appears to be no immediate prospect of a challenge to her leadership. Even if there were, May remains the favourite to win a confidence vote. As a result, she now has the opportunity to consolidate her grip on the cabinet and develop her Brexit approach further, assuming the European Union responds positively to her Chequers plan. Nevertheless, the next 48 hours remain critical. May needs to ensure there are no more damaging resignations or she will be in serious trouble. Donald Trump’s arrival in the UK towards the end of the week is also critical – it will be a further coup if she can demonstrate that she can achieve something from her meeting with the US president on trade or on security. But Trump is so unpredictable that that, too, is far from certain. Few had thought May could survive a full term as prime minister after last year’s disastrous general election result in which the Conservatives lost their overall majority, but she has a rare opportunity to enhance her reputation, to show that she can be a decisive leader. The ambitious environment secretary remains in government and appears eager to prove his loyalty to Theresa May, at least judging by his appearance on the BBC’s Andrew Marr Show where he said “in all the important areas” the UK would be a sovereign country under May’s Brexit plan. Gove’s reputation within the Tory party was in tatters after he broke with Boris Johnson in 2016 and ran for the leadership himself: he now has the opportunity to show he can be loyal and perhaps earn himself a promotion to higher office. By staying in position, he can also argue that his presence in government is a demonstration of its credibility on Brexit to the party’s nervous right wing; if he were to depart in the future, it would be a signal that May has finally lost the confidence of her MPs. The European Research Group, chaired by Rees-Mogg, has a choice to make. Do they try to rally 48 names to force a vote of no confidence in May at a time when it appears she would be likely to see off a challenge? Party rules say that there can be no further challenge for 12 months, making biding time an attractive option if they are convinced May will come unstuck negotiating a soft Brexit deal they find unpalatable. Significantly, Rees-Mogg was emphasising in interviews on Monday that he would not be able to vote for May’s final exit deal if it were on the lines of the Chequers agreement. If Labour were to signal it would definitely do the same, that could, in theory, leave May with a more serious problem: a looming veto over the divorce talks leaving the prime minister in an extremely difficult position. It would also clearly strengthen their bargaining position.