‘Epic’ is Mark Webber’s typically pithy assessment of the battle for this year’s Formula One world championship between Lewis Hamilton and Sebastian Vettel. The former driver is well placed to judge. He has no little experience with both of them, racing alongside Vettel at Red Bull for five years and against Hamilton since the Briton’s debut in 2007 until the Australian retired in 2013. Webber retains great affection for the British Grand Prix, reciprocated by the crowd at Silverstone who have shown huge admiration for the Australian, not least on the occasion of his second win, in 2012. They roared their approval as he took the lead from Fernando Alonso, wheel to wheel through Brooklands and cheered his run to the flag. “I love racing everywhere but here it’s extra special,” he said that day. “I won my first race here in 1996 in Formula Ford, so the love affair continues.” He is back at the circuit that is celebrating the 70th anniversary of hosting its first grand prix in his capacity as a presenter for Channel 4, able to savour the event and the fascinating fight between Hamilton and Vettel. “It’s pretty epic,” he says. “The rivalry is absolutely there. You couldn’t have two more different characters. You have a calculating German and Lewis is just an out-and-out racer. “It’s brilliant, absolutely brilliant. There was a little bit in the move we saw in Austria, we saw Seb move Lewis across the road. They are not going to leave much on the table, they are fighting hard. It’s like Roger [Federer] and Rafa [Nadal].” The battle between the two is finely poised, neither driver having been able to gain a distinct advantage thus far and there is no sign that either is yet in a position to establish any real dominance. Webber drove alongside Vettel when the German won his four titles between 2010 and 2013 and believes the weight of the task falls heavier on him as he attempts to secure Ferrari’s first drivers’ championship since 2007. Vettel is having to push to the limit, Webber maintains. “He is carrying Ferrari, he is carrying the team and Italy. It is a fine line between the White House and the shithouse,” he says. “This is the last nut to crack in many ways for him. The last two years it has just been him and Lewis. Ferrari and Mercedes. He is mindful that he has to beat a very, very strong team and when I talk about a team I mean Valtteri Bottas as well. “There is harmony, there is technical depth, and Mercedes are battle-hardened. Ferrari are still a bit soft every now and again. And Seb as well. We have seen a few little mistakes, he is going to need a perfect finish to the year to get the job done.” Webber came closest to winning the title in 2010, when he was in a four-way fight with Hamilton, Fernando Alonso and Vettel at the final round in Abu Dhabi, where the German ultimately took his first championship. The Australian won eight races over his 11-year career, including the British Grand Prix twice. He vied with Hamilton repeatedly on track and believes the world champion is very much at the height of his powers. “We are talking about a guy with 75 pole positions,” he says. “He is probably better than [Ayrton] Senna over one lap. He is brilliant in mixed conditions and he hangs in there. If there are problems with the car he finds a way to hang in there. Lewis has been mercurial this year in general, he just wants to find another 10th in qualifying.” A tight battle is in the offing then, at a circuit where Webber is always happy to return. “Silverstone just has that feel of everyone being passionate about motorsport,” he says. “It’s a genuine love for the heroes in the cars. It is a classic, we are not talking about a little go kart-style track. Silverstone is high speed, it’s daunting. The drivers love coming here.”