“Lost” material from The Autobiography of Malcolm X, reportedly seen as too controversial to publish in the 1960s, has emerged this week at an auction in New York. Along with the original typed manuscript, which reveals the back and forth between the black activist and his collaborator Alex Haley, to whom he told his story, the unpublished writing was put up for sale on Thursday by New York auctioneer Guernsey’s. The papers, including an unpublished chapter and a series of unpublished pages, were acquired by the New York Public Library’s Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture. Kevin Young, the Schomburg’s director, announced the acquisition on Twitter and said he was honoured that the manuscripts were “coming home to Harlem”. The unpublished writings and the manuscript had originally been part of the 1992 estate sale of Haley. They were subsequently bought by Gregory Reed, who was Rosa Parks’s lawyer, said the auction house, and have been in private hands ever since. The manuscript, said Guernsey’s, includes comments throughout from Malcolm X, and reveals how editors including Haley “attempted to soften down X’s words”. At one point, the text reads: “The court orders were signed, finally. They took my mother to the State Mental Hospital at Kalamazoo … A Judge McClellan in Lansing, they called him a ‘Probate Judge’, whatever it means, had the authority over me and all of my brothers and sisters. We were ‘state children’, court wards; he had the full say so over us.” Malcolm X added the note: “Eventually my mother suffered a complete nervous breakdown”, and later of the judge: “A white man in charge of a black man’s children! Nothing but legal, modern slavery!” An editor has added to this: “however kindly intentioned” – a softening that was included in the final published book. “Haley and X in fact frequently would struggle for control during the writing of this book. This reached a culmination in the exclusion of three chapters – that Malcolm X insisted be a part of the final printing – from the published book,” said Guernsey’s “The edits in this manuscript serve as a barometer of what were actually X’s words, and what was the influence – or tyranny – of various editors.” Young told the New York Times that “the Autobiography is one of the most important books of the 20th century [and] to have the version with Malcolm X’s corrections, and to be able to see his thoughts taking shape, is incredibly powerful”. The auction house also put up for sale what it called “the ‘lost chapters’ – portions of the [autobiography] thought too controversial to be published”. According to the New York Times, the Schomburg Center paid $7,000 (£5,500) for a 25-page typescript titled The Negro. “The Western World is sick,” writes Malcolm X in the chapter. “The American society – with the song of Christianity providing the white man with the illusion that what he has done to the black man is ‘right’ – is as sick as Babylon. And the black man here in this wilderness, the so-called ‘Negro’, is sickest of them all.” The text is believed to have been written before he broke away from the Nation of Islam in 1964, members of which were convicted of his 1965 murder. “We are like the Western deserts; tumbleweed, rolling and tumbling whichever way the white wind blows,” runs the chapter. “And the white man is like the cactus, deeply rooted, with spines to keep us off.” So far, it is the only full chapter to have been identified. Young told the Associated Press that he had looked at other fragments of Malcolm X’s writing included in the sale. “I examined them, and I don’t know what those are, it’s too early to tell; they look like they were probably stapled at one time, or cut and pasted; some are half of a page, or just slips of paper,” he said. “The best way to describe them is that they’re literal fragments and literary fragments.”