Tights, capes and masks are so last season. Heroes in 2018 wear Marks & Spencer waistcoats. Gareth Southgate, now inseparable from his signature navy waistcoat, light-blue shirt and striped tie combination, has emerged as an understated paragon of civility at the 2018 World Cup. From social media devotion to thinkpieces about positive masculinity, the England manager is enjoying a swell of support and adoration as he leads his squad closer to the trophy. Geoff Hurst, whose hat-trick against West Germany helped England win the 1966 World Cup, has likened Southgate to Sir Alf Ramsey, saying his leadership has “engendered a good team spirit”. As England’s campaign in Russia got underway, Southgate showed himself to be a reflective soul in an interview with ITV that encapsulated his world view. Asked about whether supporters were “connecting” with the team, rather than offering platitudes, the manager started musing on modern English identity. “We’re a team with our diversity and youth that represents modern England and in England we’ve spent a bit of time being lost as to what our modern identity is, and I think as a team we represent that modern identity and hopefully people can connect with us.” He added: “We have a chance to affect something bigger than ourselves.” Gareth Southgate: "We're a team with our diversity and our youth that represent modern England"#England #ThreeLions pic.twitter.com/loLjJrgdFC The tournament has served as a platform for reminding football fans and non-fans of the kindness and generosity Southgate has shown. Social media is awash with memes, tweets and posts praising the 47-year-old, including a hashtag #GarethSouthgateWould. Examples included Southgate writing personally to fans and devoting his time to young players. #GarethSouthgateWould write back to the the 14yr old me after Euro96, and then when I am introduced to him 21 years later at a conference, thanks me for my support again! pic.twitter.com/08Tfc0OrtM #GarethSouthgateWould come and spend 3 full hours with a teenage girls football club in Hackney when he was only meant to stay for 30 mins. pic.twitter.com/Fw9msdgiLi Others suggested the support for Southgate reflected a desire for genuine role models. All this Gareth Southgate love - well deserved for a great bloke - only says to me how much we’re crying out for basic decency in our leading public figures. We’re tired of braggarts and buffoons and Gareth is helping to fill the void. Of course Southgate’s backstory gives his refreshed celebrity an edge. His saved penalty in the Euro 96 semi-final against Germany became one of English football’s most infamous moments. After last week’s game against Colombia, Southgate offered a hug to Mateus Uribe, who missed his spot-kick against England. The tributes continued to come on Sunday, with Andrew Marr presenting his eponymous current affairs programme on BBC One in a Southgate waistcoat and tie. Coming up... @AndrewMarr9 with his own tribute to England manager Gareth Southgate's dress style after Saturday's win #ThreeLions #WorldCup18 pic.twitter.com/qjQCWZHSYj Other fans are following suit. Arise Sir Southgate.... I think the next England kit should have a waistcoat!!! pic.twitter.com/5Z4mR1WKfM Neil Rowe, from Surrey, England, is enjoying a boom in popularity off the back of the England manager’s run of glory. Rowe’s a Southgate lookalike. Rowe, who is in Russia, told the BBC: “Some fans here in Russia believe I am the real one. Some Colombians were having a go at me yesterday, saying well done to your team for beating us.”