Musician Anna Calvi was born in 1980 in London. She studied guitar and violin at the University of Southampton before working as a guitar teacher, only beginning to sing in her mid-20s. Both her albums to date, Anna Calvi (2011) and One Breath (2013), were nominated for the Mercury music prize. She has collaborated with David Byrne and last year wrote the music for the opera The Sandman. Her third, Hunter, is released on 31 August on Domino. She performs at Green Man festival (16-19 August) and tours the UK in the autumn. The first tour I did was supporting Grinderman, Nick Cave’s other band, and he taught me a lot about how to be on stage. The way he can command a crowd feels like a religious or mythic experience. His last song in this set, Stagger Lee, was a masterclass in how to engage an audience. I’ve also seen Patti Smith several times before and it’s always really emotional. There’s something incredible about her – it’s important to see older, strong women that are so commanding. This gig was special: it gave me fire and inspiration for my own shows. This festival started in 2011, and it’s like a smaller version of the BFI’s LGBTQ+ festival, Flare. I’ve been going for a few years and it’s interesting to see how it’s grown. There’s a feeling of community because everyone volunteers and they’re really passionate about the work. It’s a great place to meet like-minded people and I’ve discovered a lot of amazing films from going. Last year there was a really elegant and interesting documentary [Out of This World] that Mykki Blanco made with Matt Lambert about going to South Africa and meeting queer artists there. I’m always looking for good vegetarian restaurants, and this one has great food and an outdoor space which is quite calm. I like calm restaurants because I talk very quietly so I often find when I’m in loud places no one can hear what I’m saying. It has nice memories for me since it was where I went with my girlfriend to celebrate the end of recording this album. Sometimes you go to a vegan or vegetarian restaurant and the food is so healthy it’s not really enjoyable, but this has a nice balance. This follows three drag kings and how they have explored their gender through creativity and playfulness. It’s really interesting, because drag queens get so much more publicity and are so much more well-known – I hope drag kings can get more recognition now. Since my new record is very much about exploring gender, when I watched this short film I was really moved by it. There’s one drag king who through performing realised that maybe being a woman wasn’t the right way to describe who they were. It’s a very intimate and introspective film but powerful. Joanna Hogg is one of my favourite directors and I love this film because it explores what it’s like to be an artist. It’s based around the idea that this couple is going to be moving out of their house and that the house somewhat represents their relationship. It’s very poetic and slow-moving. What’s really interesting is the sound design, because Joanna doesn’t use any music, she uses the sound of the traffic outside or the sound of the trees instead. It really adds to the drama and feels like you’re capturing a real moment. I love how powerful Grace Jones is and how she puts her character into everything she does – she would only have to sing one word and you would know that it’s her. Nightclubbing is one of my favourite records and sounds like nothing else. Even the cover is groundbreaking. I love the way she’s exploring gender in songs like Walking in the Rain or Pull Up to the Bumper. It’s really exciting when you see an artist who has such a strong vision. The record has a galvanising energy – it makes me feel stronger.