Late-night hosts on Monday discussed Donald Trump’s summit in Helsinki with Vladimir Putin, where the US president sided with Putin over his own intelligence agencies when asked about Russian meddling in the 2016 presidential election. Comedy Central’s Trevor Noah discussed what occurred in Helsinki. “If your name is Vladimir Putin, then today was a very good day,” he began. “Because today the president of the United States took your side in a fight between you and the United States.” On the notion that the summit marked “the most embarrassing performance by an American president”, Noah replied: “Do you know how hard it is to achieve that? George HW Bush once threw up on the Japanese prime minister, and Trump is now on top.” Noah then said that, when the summit was officially announced, it was unclear what would be addressed. Then, last week, Robert Mueller indicted 12 Russian military intelligence agents for their role in hacking the 2016 election. “So now the formerly purposeless meeting Trump and Putin had a meaning, right? It was time for Trump to put his foot down,” Noah said. “And he did, right on America’s dick.” This is what happens when you put a KGB agent up against a KFC agent. pic.twitter.com/dcDmKzyzF0 After showing footage from the press conference, Noah addressed Trump: “You don’t see any reason not to trust Vladimir Putin? The man was a top KGB spy. You can’t trust this man. On the list of people to never trust, Putin is right between WebMD and the mom from Get Out. “Once again, all of this brings up the old question of what exactly is going on between Putin and Trump,” Noah said. “If Trump was some sort of Russian Manchurian candidate, what would he have just done differently? Would there be a difference? “This,” the host concluded, “is what you get when you put a KGB agent against a KFC agent.” “Today has shaken me to my core and I don’t think I need to point out that, at 54, there’s not a lot of core left,” Stephen Colbert began. “Before we get into whether our president is the Siberian candidate, I’d like to take a moment right now to remind you of something [Abraham] Lincoln said.” The host then quoted the 16th US president, saying: “America will never be destroyed from the outside. If we falter and lose our freedoms, it will be because we destroyed ourselves.” Colbert went on: “So, Trump’s in Helsinki with his buddy Vlad, and this meeting is just three days after 12 Russian military intelligence agents, under direct Kremlin control, were indicted for hacking the 2016 election. “First the two men had a private meeting with only translators in the room,” said Colbert, who then showed news segments about the public press conference the two leaders held afterwards. The CNN anchor Anderson Cooper called it “one of the most disgraceful performances” by a US president, while others branded the meeting “the surrender summit” and the “worst-case scenario”. “Why so bad?” asked Colbert. “Well, he was asked about Russian meddling with our elections and whether he believes all of our intelligence agencies or Putin.” Trump, in response, had said: “I don’t see any reason why it would be,” referring to Russia’s hack of the 2016 election. He continued: “I have great confidence in my intelligence people, but President Putin was extremely strong and powerful in his denial today.” One reporter, Colbert said, gave Trump a chance to denounce Russian meddling, to which Trump asked “Where is the server?”, a reference to Hillary Clinton. Colbert continued: “If Trump’s spineless toadying to Putin made you think, what’s Vlad got on him? you’re not the only one.” The host then showed footage from the press conference, were Putin was asked, via translator, whether he was compromising information on Trump. In the clip, he begins to chuckle. “I’m sorry,” said Colbert, launching into a Russian accent. “I was just remembering funny video I saw of Mr Trump.” In his opening monologue, ABC’s Jimmy Kimmel called Monday “maybe the strangest of all 542 bizarre days of Donald Trump’s reign of error”. The president’s trip to Europe, where he attacked Nato allies and the British prime minister, Theresa May, “turned out to be nothing compared to what happened in Finland this morning”. “The president of the United States today publicly sided with Russia over our own FBI on the subject of cyber attacks on our election campaign,” Kimmel said. “Trump and Putin gave a joint press conference, at the top of which Trump put their meeting into historical context.” Kimmel then aired a clip from the press conference where Trump says that the relationship between the US and Russia “has never been worse than it is now; however, that changed as of about four hours ago”. Kimmel went on: “After all this tough talk, Trump was asked to weigh in on Russia’s role as hack master in the 2016 election, something the FBI, the justice department, even Trump’s own secretary of state, says happened without question.” Showing Trump’s deference to the Russian president, Kimmel said: “We haven’t seen an American so owned by a Russian since Rocky IV.” He also noted that Trump called Putin’s proposal to have his investigators work with Robert Mueller “an incredible offer”. “Putin’s just having fun with this now,” Kimmel said. “He actually offered to have his intelligence agents investigate the hacking of our election.”