A unique panoramic view of a lost London landscape including the medieval sprawl of the old Palace of Westminster, captured before the great fire of 1834 destroyed the parliament buildings, has been acquired by the Museum of London. In 1815 the French artist Pierre Prévost must have spent weeks up in the towers of St Margarets capturing an improbably immaculate and sunlit cityscape in an infamously smoky and dirty city. The watercolour is almost seven metres long and was a study for an even more epic version, now lost, which was 30 metres long and exhibited in Paris in 1817. His only other surviving work on this scale, a view of Constantinople, is now in the Louvre. Curators are considering how to put it on temporary display at the museum’s current cramped space at the Barbican, but it will undoubtedly be a star attraction – just as such panoramas were in Georgian London, as the Imax films of their day – when the museum moves to its new site in the old Smithfield market buildings. The museum raised £200,000 including a grant from the Art Fund charity to buy the painting at a recent Sotheby’s auction. Stephen Deuchar, director of the charity, said its acquisition was a coup for the museum. The museum’s director, Sharon Ament, said there was nothing like it in its collection. “Not only does it highlight London as an important centre of international artistic exchange, it also reveals a fascinating moment in time.” Prévost, who died in 1823, was one of the most accomplished artists working at the height of the craze for panoramas, creating vistas of many major cities. The first purpose-built panorama theatre opened in London in 1792, closely followed by one in Paris, where crowds queued to pay a hefty three shillings to admire the paintings, dramatically lit and stretched around the curved walls of a darkened room. Some were toured in popup panorama theatres, a history that explains why so many known to have existed were destroyed by fire or simply worn out. Prévost made an earlier London view, now also lost, when he visited London after travel between England and France became possible again with the Peace of Amiens in 1802, before Europe was torn apart by the Napoleonic wars. He is thought to have returned when peace was restored after the Battle of Waterloo in 1815. His painting shows the city as the Duke of Wellington would have known it, with great parade spaces around Whitehall and Trafalgar Square, and Westminster Abbey dominating the foreground.