Two is a coincidence, but three’s a trend – and now three Tory MPs in the space of 24 hours have uttered the phrase “national unity government”. It sounds fantastical, in a country that has had no such thing for three-quarters of a century, but could it happen – and should it? It’s no mystery why Anna Soubry, Nicholas Soames and, less directly, Dominic Grieve are suggesting an all-party national administration might be necessary. Tuesday’s Brexit votes in the Commons showed that the current Conservative government is hopelessly paralysed. It cannot drive through its own agenda, insofar as it has one at all. Indeed, it ended up whipping MPs to vote for Brexiteer amendments that undermined, if not sabotaged, the Chequers agreement that was meant to be the government’s settled position. In other words, Theresa May feared the Brexiteer rebels so much, she decided that, since she couldn’t beat them, she would compel her MPs to join them. And that’s even before the tattered and torn Chequers agreement makes contact with Brussels reality and the European Union’s negotiators, who are likely to dismiss it as unworkable. It is possible to conceive of a plan that Britain could propose and that the EU 27 might accept – but we now know that May simply would not have the votes in parliament to get such a plan through. Which is why it’s no surprise to hear that the Netherlands has hired 1,000 extra customs officers for trade with Britain: like many of our continental neighbours, they are sensibly preparing for a no-deal Brexit. A national unity government could avert that catastrophe. It could draw on the inbuilt Commons majority that exists for averting no deal, combining, as Soubry told BBC Radio 4’s Today, pragmatic MPs from the Tory, Labour, SNP and Plaid Cymru benches – all of whom would agree on one thing, if nothing else: that crashing out of the EU would be a calamity for the country’s economy and security. It would be an extreme measure, but these are extreme times: the gravest crisis since the second world war, according to Soames. And in some ways the taboo that ordinarily stands in the way of a national unity government – party loyalty – is breaking down anyway. Witness the five Labour MPs (including one who sits as an independent) who defied their party – and thereby saved May from defeat – by voting against the measure that would have kept Britain in a customs union as a backstop arrangement. And yet, for all that logic, a formal national government remains unlikely. The very phrase still strikes terror into Labour politicians, among whom the betrayal of Ramsay MacDonald – who broke from his party to lead a national administration in 1931 – has never been forgotten or forgiven. Tories who agreed to sit on the same benches as Labour MPs, perhaps – who knows? – under a Labour prime minister, would similarly be cast out as traitors for evermore. As Nick Clegg and his fellow Liberal Democrats can testify, coalition can be career-ending – if not at the hands of your own party activists, then at the hands of the electorate. So a formal national government, with an all-party cabinet and the like, is not on the cards. That does not, however, rule out a looser scenario. Grieve sketched it out on the BBC’s Newsnight on Tuesday, when he said that, should it be confronted by no deal, “parliament will assert its own authority”. He predicted that MPs would throw off the constraints of party allegiance and: “If it comes to the crunch, there would be a substantial majority to prevent no deal.” One can imagine such a vote in the Commons, instructing May to do whatever it took to avert a crash exit. But then what? May could attempt to turn that Commons majority into a government of national unity – but that’s unlikely, for all the reasons set out above. She could take it as the cue for a general election, though she would fear that amounted to handing the Downing Street keys to Jeremy Corbyn. Or she could say that, with parliament stalemated on all but its opposition to no deal, the only solution is to throw the decision back to the people in a referendum. That, for her and plenty of others, would surely be the least worst option. Which is why the likelihood of a “people’s vote” is growing. • Jonathan Freedland is a Guardian columnist