Focus, ruthless, desire, strength. These are some of the words which are the norm in the lexicon of successful football coaches and teams – assets where the head rules the heart in the pursuit of results and trophies. So much has been said and written about England since the brilliant victory over Colombia but there is one word I’d add to Gareth Southgate’s approach which is unu sual in this environment: vulnerability. Vulnerability is often viewed as a negative, especially in the competitive world of elite sport, but at times it can also be a huge strength which has the potential to maximise togetherness and team spirit. This is something so easy to see from the outside when these England players are constantly encouraging each other and admitting how much they rely on each other on and off the field. There is an obvious vulnerability in the fact it is Southgate’s first major tournament and yet he is happy to be open with the press and also to be so much closer to his players than England managers in the past. Did you see the way he embraced Harry Kane after the penalty shootout on Tuesday night? There is vulnerability in the fact the lack of seasoned experience of World Cup tournament football has been offset by youthful confidence and exuberance throughout the squad. And on a personal level there is vulnerability in the fact many of the players, including Danny Rose and Raheem Sterling, have felt comfortable enough to show their human side for the first time to the media, creating a link and bond between an England squad and the public I have never witnessed before. No matter what happens in the quarter-final against Sweden on Saturday or for the rest of this tournament no one can argue against the fact every member of this squad, management team and support staff has shown an integrity, humility, confidence and passion worthy of wearing the Three Lions shirt. The reconnection between England and everyone who loves football in this country is palpable. When Eric Dier’s penalty hit the back of the net I ran and slid on my knees across the front room, just like millions of us in that moment when Southgate’s fearless young team destroyed the mental barrier of winning a World Cup shootout. The last time I reacted so emotionally and physically to an England goal was 20 years ago at France 98 when Sol Campbell’s disqualified strike sent me from ecstasy to disappointment in a matter of seconds. The way this team have me responding in the same manner as I did as 13-year-old epitomises the fearless, confident way these players and the manager have conducted themselves and the way they have represented this country and not been afraid to be more open and communicative through the media and in turn with the public. They have set standards with a recognisable playing style and cultural identity that must be adhered to in the years to come and it is fitting it has been set by a manager who has been by far the most “inexperienced” before taking the so called “impossible” job. Southgate has impressed me so much with his calm, honest and intuitive way of dealing with everything while remaining fundamental to his strong beliefs on a playing style that has empowered and enabled John Stones, Harry Maguire and Kyle Walker to be confident in their ability to build from the back and take possession, something lacking for too long in our national team. The 3-5-2 system employed has brought rewards but the next question and obstacle this squad and Southgate in particular have to overcome is can we adapt our system if things don’t go according to plan – something we haven’t done yet? It’s happened to other teams and, for example, Belgium and Roberto Martínez had to adapt everything in their amazing encounter with Japan when they were 2-0 down. By being brave and changing from their stock 3-4-3 to a 4-3-3 they managed to come back and win the game in an almost unbelievable manner. Even Brazil made an outstanding tactical change in their game against Mexico after they struggled in the opening 30 minutes by adapting from a 4-3-3 to a more orthodox 4-4-2 to enable Neymar to play in a more central position, from where he scored, and give them more flexibility in terms of dominating the game with possession. In terms of our 3-5-2, there is huge benefit in the way we are able to construct play from the back while being able to dominate numerically in central areas of the pitch. But there were times against Colombia when we allowed them to take control of possession for long periods to take the sting out of the game. They utilised their full-backs to push our wing-backs into a back line of 5-3-2 instead of 3-5-2 , forcing us to defend deep and not press. England became less of a threat in transition moments, something Sterling, Harry Kane, Dele Alli and Jesse Lingard thrive on. This also puts a great physical demand on Alli and Lingard, who have to cover a lot of ground at high intensity without the ball, making them less fresh and creative in possession. The way England have been prepared in terms of our organisation on set plays, penalty shootouts and the strict adherence to our possession game tells me Southgate does have a plan B and I believe we will need it at some point. It wouldn’t be a surprise if at some stage we see Sterling and Rashford on the pitch at the same time and we play a 3-4-3 system or 4-3-3. Overcoming obstacles and breaking boundaries has been the theme for England and if we can answer the inevitable questions of tactical flexibility, who knows, we may actually achieve what everyone believed to be impossible.