More than 1.5 million images will be taken by photographers working for Getty Images, the photo agency, at this summer’s World Cup – and that’s just a fraction of the total number shot by the entire press pack. Yet only a handful will be recalled in years to come among the tournament’s defining images. “For me a great football picture is a moment that gets captured that people don’t necessarily appreciate on TV,” says veteran photographer Michael Regan, who’s in Russia for his fourth World Cup. “A little moment like the one of Maradona getting past the Belgium wall [in 1982],” he adds, referencing one of the most iconic and misunderstood images of old. “It’s an example of where football photography can tell it’s own story.” “I also love the overhead picture of Robert Baggio in 1994 because it just shows you how empty it must have felt for Baggio after he missed that penalty. Another angle wouldn’t show it. And the picture of Nigel de Jong taking out Xabi Alonso in 2010 encapsulates that final and that’s ultimately what you want to do. It’s the only picture you need.” Regan is among a select band of photographers who have special ‘access all areas’ passes to Fifa’s showpiece tournament this summer. From player portraits to pre-match tunnel access to prime positions on the touchlines, his memory cards are being filled with distinctive images. “It’s been a great tournament to photograph so far,” he says. “I’ve shot 11 games to date including France v Argentina, Germany getting knocked out and the opening Russia game which was such a massive event. “We were in the tunnel where people were mingling directly before that match and [when they saw Brazil’s Ronaldo] every player was like ‘wow, Ronaldo, Ronaldo!’ They were about to play the biggest game of their lives and they were behaving like excited ballboys.” Regan shares their excitement. A boyhood Leicester City fan, he began his career as a photographer in the 1990s after a stint as an assistant. Those were the days of analogue photography, when film had to be ferried from the pitch to a makeshift darkroom midway through the match. “I used to have to knock on people’s doors close to the grounds to ask if we could use their kitchen as a darkroom for 15 or 30 quid,” he explains. “So at Villa Park or wherever you were, you’d run off with the films after 15 minutes, develop them in the kitchen and scan three or four of them over. One time at Middlesborough I spilled the chemicals everywhere – it was a nightmare.” Regan eventually became one of England’s official photographers but with players “suspicious” of the press, candid opportunities were initially limited. The shot he took of Steven Gerrard and Wayne Rooney in an ice bath was a rare exception. “When Gareth Southgate came in they realised they don’t have anything to hide and that photography can show people they do care, they do work hard,” he adds. “I really like the picture I took of the squad crowding round watching the under-20s World Cup final last year. Everyone dived into a tiny changing room after training and I managed to get in behind the laptop as they were watching. It struck me as an example of how passionate they are, not just for themselves and their own careers but for the future of the England team.” Passion and personality are two of the qualities Regan and his colleagues also sought to extract from their subjects as they created a striking array of player portraits prior to the World Cup. “They loved it!” Regan says of the vibrant studio pics. “Top players like Ronaldo know photography is fun for their social media and they can put over their personality on it. They really embraced it much, much more than they would have done in past tournaments.” That said, Lionel Messi was less forthcoming. “I said ‘can you hold your hands out?’ and he said ‘no’. So I said ‘what will you do?’ and he said ‘nothing’. But that’s what I expected. That’s everyone’s perception of what Messi’s like – all he cares about is playing football.” Regan instead created a wide-angle portrait of a stressed-looking Messi which seems to capture the Argentinian’s troubled frame of mind in Russia. “He’s got the ball under his arm and all this space around him that he could be larking around in, like the others did, but he isn’t.” With two weeks of the tournament remaining and some of the most critical imagery still to be shot – not to mention countless more air miles to clock – Regan says he’s already running on adrenaline. “Normally when you’re photographing England you’re at home after the first couple of weeks,” he quips. This time, due to Getty’s partnership with Fifa, he’ll be pitchside for the final, hunting as ever for that defining image.