A Canadian woman has used her obituary to call out the medical profession for what she described as “fat-shaming”, in a message urging society to better address the health concerns of overweight women. Ellen Maud Bennett, 64, died in May, after she was diagnosed with terminal cancer in the west coast city of Victoria. In an obituary published in the Times Colonist newspaper, Bennett’s family describes Bennett as a remarkable woman with an unforgettable character whose career spanned from a stint on Parliament Hill to television and film. But the obituary also railed against how she had been treated when she sought medical help. “A final message Ellen wanted to share was about the fat-shaming she endured from the medical profession,” it noted. “Over the past few years of feeling unwell she sought out medical intervention and no one offered any support or suggestions beyond weight loss,” it continued. “Ellen’s dying wish was that women of size make her death matter by advocating strongly for their health and not accepting that fat is the only relevant health issue.” Since it was published earlier this month, the obituary has struck a chord with many on social media, racking up shares and responses. Some pointed to similar experiences. “It wasn’t until I started taking interest in my sister’s health as an adult and took her to my doctor that we found she had several ailments that had been untreated for years because doctors refused to treat her and kept telling her to lose weight first,” wrote one person on Twitter. Another accused the focus on her weight of eclipsing a degenerative genetic condition. After a decade of being told to shed pounds, she was 43 years of age when she was finally properly diagnosed, she said, adding: “The medical community sucks for heavy women.” Others argued that this kind of treatment often pushes people away from health care, including those who may already be marginalised from society. “My mother loathes going to the doctor because of the fat-shaming,” wrote one man. He added: “She also had to stop going for walks because randos in passing cars would hurl abuse at her.” The obituary noted that she filled her last days with humour, love and requests for fresh lobster, peonies and the “perfect shrimp wonton soup” – and also recognised those who had treated her differently. “Ellen’s family would like to extend our gratitude to the amazing team of angels at the Victoria Hospice who gave her the respect and kindness she needed and deserved,” it noted.