If there’s one thing that hit Netflix show The Good Place is absolutely, definitely not about, it’s The State of the World Today. Intentionally, anyway. For one thing, this feelgood sitcom isn’t even set in our world, but in a non-denominational afterlife you might call “Heaven”. This is the Good Place of the title, where Eleanor Shellstrop (Kristen Bell) finds herself in the show’s opening episode and soon concludes she’s been sent in error. The Good Place is for the likes of beautiful philanthropist Tahani (Jameela Jamil), silent Buddhist monk Jianyu (Manny Jacinto) and earnest ethics professor Chidi (William Jackson Harper). Eleanor, on the other hand, is the kind of garbage person who reads Celebrity Baby Plastic Surgery Disasters magazine and sells fake medicine to the elderly for a living. Still, understandably, she wants to stay, so spends most of season one trying to keep her secret from Michael (Ted Danson), the angel-architect overseeing the Good Place neighbourhood. The other point is that The Good Place was midway through its first season on NBC when the 2016 US presidential election took place. Even after the world entered into its Trumpian twilight zone, The Good Place’s showrunner, Michael Schur, was keen to ensure his writing team did not get sidetracked: “We talked a lot in the room about, this is not a show about Donald Trump,” he told New York magazine before the season two premiere last year. “These characters are dead. These characters don’t even know that Donald Trump is president.” Most importantly, though, The Good Place couldn’t be about Trump, Brexit, Windrush, #MeToo or any other contemporary talking point, because that’s exactly the sort of thing that fans watched the show to escape. While for some, The Handmaid’s Tale was a perfectly timed misery-watch, this show offered the opposite sort of distraction. By 2017, political drama and comedy were on the wane in TV generally, with once-popular shows such as Veep, Scandal and House of Cards all either cancelled or embarking on final seasons. Schur, meanwhile, was known and loved as the creator of optimistic, easy-watching sitcoms that found silliness and fundamental decency in the lives of local government officials (Parks and Recreation) and police officers (Brooklyn Nine-Nine). The Good Place, with its pastel hues and twee, euphemistic cursing was his most whimsically escapist yet. Or so it seemed, right up until the season one finale, which first aired on 19 January 2017, the night before Trump’s inauguration. This was the episode in which – plot twist! – Eleanor discovered that Michael (Danson) wasn’t an angel-architect, but a demon-bureaucrat who’d been messing with them all along. It wasn’t just Eleanor who belonged in the Bad Place (AKA Hell), but Tahani, Chidi and Jianyu (actually another imposter called Jason) too. And, what’s more, they were already there. They had been obligingly torturing each other as part of Michael’s reality TV-meets-Sartre experiment since episode one. As Eleanor’s catchphrase-coining moment of realisation had it: “This is the Bad Place!” This phrase chimed with viewers experiencing their own state of post-election shock. Kristen Bell saying “This is the Bad Place” soon became a liberal meme – applied, most recently, to Trump retweeting Kanye. “I frequently get messages with that line,” says Vivienne Parent, who runs @nocontexttgp, a Good Place Twitter fan account that has 72,000 followers. “I think it’s a perfect line to describe the swift change from an Obama presidency to a Trump presidency.” It wasn’t just repetition and aptness that made the phrase stick, however. Part of the reason The Good Place’s twist had impact is because audiences didn’t have this down as a “plot twist” kind of show. It relied on the audience’s comfortable complacency, and encouraged viewers to retrospectively reflect on how they’d been so thoroughly duped. In the same way, perhaps, that those non-voters or Hillary voters who’d once confidently dismissed a Trump presidency as an inconceivable joke were now considering their inadvertent complicity in paving his path to the White House. The Good Place was subverting some sitcom conventions but it was also embracing others. One of the genre’s defining features is a situation and characters that never fundamentally change. Whatever happens in an episode, however high the stakes, you are always by the next episode, or certainly by the next series, back to square one. Will and Grace still live together, Maggie Simpson never outgrows her dummy, Del Boy never makes his fortune (until the end), and whatever the news agenda throws at the United States, Trump is somehow still president. This may go some way to explaining how The Good Place continues to work as a light sitcom, even as it fearlessly explores weighty philosophical conundrums and peels back the layers of liberal self-delusion. “It can be both,” says Jason Sutherland, Parent’s co-host on Forkin’ Bullshirt: The Good Place Podcast. “You can shut off your brain, watch some lovable band of misfits try to become better people and sneak into eternal happiness. [But] if you take a moment and think, you begin to see parallels.” For a Canadian like Sutherland, deep readings needn’t stop at the US border. “Many feel like Justin Trudeau is a great face for Canada. He’s photogenic and charismatic. He shows up at all the important rallies, events, parades, and says the right things when the relevant people are listening, but behind the scenes promises aren’t being kept, millions are scratching their heads. The Good Place neighbourhood is Canada, and Michael is Trudeau in this simulation.” So while The Good Place is TV for liberals the world over, it isn’t TV that’s unchallenging of liberal attitudes. Note that the individual traits for which “Team Cockroach” (a title Eleanor gives the quartet following a Michael quip) have been eternally damned, also happen to be the traits conservatives most disparage in their defeated foe: Tahani’s smug condescension; Chidi’s indecisive idealism; Jason’s obliviousness; and Eleanor’s ironic detachment. Only the most diabolically manipulative reality TV producer could have cast four more apt personality types for the times we live in, and this meta-commentary on the TV medium is part of the joke too, right? With Ted Danson’s Michael meting out punishment and judgment in the manner of an Apprentice-era Donald Trump? In his New York interview, Schur denied that he’d named Michael after himself in order to make just this point, citing the gatekeeping role of the archangel Michael in Christian theology: “My initial response was, ‘Ha, ha, ha, you fools. No, there’s a much more complicated and intellectual, historical reason for the reason he’s named Michael,’” he said. “And then after a while I was like, ‘Well, maybe they’re right.’ Maybe in the world of literary criticism, the author’s intentions are often seen as irrelevant. Maybe subliminally somewhere, that was the reason I chose that name.” Indeed, none of the show was consciously intended to reflect the world we find ourselves in. But then it seems TV, much like the Almighty, works in mysterious ways. 1. Fantastic job securitySchur is the auteur of the workplace comedy, having written some of the most memorable episodes of the American version of The Office and created Parks and Recreation and Brooklyn Nine-Nine, both about a group of oddball co-workers. Even when he tried to break the mould with The Good Place, a complex, twist-filled sitcom about the afterlife, the show basically wound up being an office-based sitcom about middle-manager demons in hell trying to cut through red tape to find the best way to torture humans. In all these shows, the offices are all staffed by eccentric oddballs who want to do literally anything other than their day job, yet somehow they almost never get fired. Even when the entire staff of The Office sack-off work to create the Games of the 1st Dunder Mifflin Olympiad – including “flonkerton”, a race to see who can run the fastest with boxes of paper strapped to their feet – they’re always back at work next week without so much as a formal warning. 2. Those same old facesSchur has a cast of actors who follow him round the schedules, although they often go through a total personality transplant to avoid any confusion. Adam Scott, a lovable boardgame enthusiast in Parks and Rec, becomes a mansplaining demon who loves talking about his dumps in The Good Place. Kristen Bell, Rashida Jones and Nick Offerman all make similar volte-faces, but a special mention is reserved for Jason Mantzoukas. He plays Dennis Feinstein, a deranged perfumier who likes to hunt humans in Parks and Recreation; Adrian Pimento, a cop returning from 12 years undercover and struggling with return to non-mafia life in Brooklyn Nine-Nine; and Derek, a computer-generated rebound boyfriend that takes corporeal form in The Good Place. Quite the range. 3. In-jokes galoreSchur comedies are simple enough that if you just drop in on the odd episode, you can pick up what’s going on fairly quickly, but they provide most reward for those that stay loyal. Like how in every episode of The Office, you can see the certificate Michael proudly hangs in his office, not a diploma but his “Seyko” watch certificate of authenticity. The Parks season six finale involved a giant festival in tribute to all the callbacks from the show: the 90s rock band Letters to Cleo played after Ben wore their T-shirt once; a throwaway mention to Donna’s cousin being the R&B singer Ginuwine meant that he took the stage to perform Pony; and there was a tribute to Li’l Sebastian, the town’s celebrity mini-horse. 4. UniversalismVery eagle-eyed viewers have spotted small references to Schur’s sitcoms taking place in the same universe. In The Good Place, there are adverts for Dennis Feinstein’s perfumes on the back of one of Eleanor’s magazines. Parks was originally going to begin with a photocopier being shipped from Dunder Mifflin to Pawnee – although Schur later decided to scrap that, wanting the shows to stand alone. Basically, he won’t be happy until Reddit pat him on the back and give him a gold star for Easter eggs. 5. Good sitcom valuesThe modern sitcom, typified by Curb Your Enthusiasm, involves essentially awful people getting away, to various degrees, with their shitty behaviour. That kind of thing is not acceptable in Schurland. Running through all his shows is an unambiguous moral code – based around friendship, collaboration and principle – to which every character, no matter how oddball, ends up adhering. Leslie Knope is a dogged defender of her community and the Brooklyn Nine-Nine precinct always end up putting a commitment to the law above their personal lives. The Good Place takes this philosophy to its extremes, assigning a numerical value to every Schur-positive and Schur-negative act and using that as a grand unifying theory for who gets into heaven and hell. In a world of ambiguity, you can always be certain who to root for in Schurland. Sam Wolfson