Almost 1.2 million people aged over 65 do not receive the support they need with essential daily tasks such as getting washed and dressed or preparing meals, according to Age UK. The perilous state of the domiciliary care sector, which provides support in people’s own homes, is one of the main reasons for this, the charity says. It’s symptomatic of the deep problems affecting social care in England. Last week, two influential reports laid bare the scale of the problem and put further pressure on the government to find a long-term funding solution. Researchers at the Institute for Fiscal Studies and the Health Foundation calculated that households would need to pay around £300 a year each in extra taxes to fund adult social care. This is on top of the £2,000 additional tax they would need to pay to ensure the NHS can cope with the demands of an ageing population. In a similar vein, the surgeon and former Labour health minister Lord Darzi, backed by former Tory health minister Lord Prior and the IPPR thinktank, called for a 1p in the pound increase in national insurance contributions from 2019 to fund the NHS and social care. The IPPR calculates that this would deliver an extra £350m a week for health and social care, which includes domiciliary care. The plan is part of a package of proposals to be unveiled in a final report next month. “Without an adequately funded social care system, patients who could otherwise be safely discharged to their own homes have to be looked after in hospital for longer than is necessary – a waste of NHS resources, and a less happy situation for the people concerned,” says Darzi. “Providing people with the care they need at home is just as important to the nation’s wellbeing as the surgery that I do. There is no point in being able to provide the most advanced treatments if we can’t get the basics of caring for people right,” he said. “That’s why we need to be straightforward about the financial challenges we face, and honest about the need to tackle them through a modest increase in national insurance contributions. We can secure the NHS and social care, including domiciliary care, for the future by asking everyone to contribute a little more. It’s a small price to pay for a more civilised and caring society.” It follows an interim report last month , which calculated that the NHS needed an extra £50bn a year by 2030 to keep going, and a further £10bn a year was needed for social care – which includes care in people’s own homes. We can secure the NHS and social care for the future by asking everyone to contribute a little more According to the regulator, the Care Quality Commission, there are some 7,000 providers of domiciliary care in the UK, the majority of which are small, private firms. The biggest five homecare operators account for less than 9% of the market, according to figures published in April by analysts LaingBuisson. As a result, there is a lot of “churn” in the sector, as small homecare companies stop providing services. The UK Homecare Association, which represents domiciliary care providers, estimates that over a 12-month period, more than 20,000 people using homecare services may have been affected by providers exiting the market. Ruthe Isden, the head of health influencing at Age UK, says that this churn “really impacts on older people’s continuity of care as day to day they don’t know if they are going to see the same care workers” coming into their home. The other issue, she says, is the quantity of provision. “We are increasingly hearing that people are finding it difficult to actually access homecare in some areas, either because the providers local to them have no capacity or there aren’t any providers locally any more. That is particularly a problem in rural areas where they might be the only person who needs care in that village. With care workers not being paid for travel, it can mean it’s not viable for agencies to take that person on – so they don’t.” Part of the problem is that the fees local authorities can afford to pay are often far lower than providers say they can afford. The UKHCA calculates that the minimum price that homecare providers need to receive from councils is currently £18 per hour. But some only pay £13 an hour. This comes on top of the multimillion-pound bills providers face after the government announced that care staff were entitled to the minimum wage for “sleep-in” hours and to back pay where they did not receive it. Colin Angel, the UKHCA policy and campaigns director, says the £18 per hour is “based on the absolute minimum price, assuming you can recruit enough workers on the minimum or living wage. Typically we’re seeing wages that are often below local labour market expectations, which means you’ll have difficulty recruiting workers. You’ll find providers have less money left over for things like back-office staff – and one of the first things that goes in any organisation under stress is the training and development budget, which is crucial for retaining staff.” In contrast, he says, operators whose clients can afford to pay for their own care are able to provide a higher quality service. “People are buying care for much longer periods of time so usually won’t have visits of less than an hour and won’t have the kind of rushed and undignified visits you see elsewhere. They also report much lower staff turnover and find it easier to recruit.” Glen Garrod, president of the Association of Directors of Adult Social Services, describes the domiciliary market as “limping along” because of growing staff shortages. “There are over 19,000 care workers and more are needed, but when funding is so tight, there is a challenge to recruit quality staff and get them to stay. They want to see that there is a career path for them – but to do that organisations need to thrive, not just survive, so that they can provide good quality training and supervision.” The fragility of the homecare sector is exacerbated by the fact that the three largest providers – City & County, Carewatch and Allied Healthcare – are owned by private equity groups. The nature of private equity means that debt levels tend to be high and firms tend to cut costs  to boost returns. In 2015, Saga sold its homecare business, Allied Healthcare, to German private equity firm Aurelius, while last year, Mitie’s two domiciliary care enterprises were bought by Apposite Capital for £2. Last month, Allied Healthcare, which provides home visits to 13,500 older and vulnerable people, narrowly avoided going bust by agreeing a new credit agreement for its debts. Although this provides breathing space, the CQC says it is continuing to closely monitor the situation. Andrea Sutcliffe, CQC’s chief inspector of adult social care, says: “This is a dynamic situation that remains under very close review. We can and will take timely action to notify local authorities if circumstances change so they can ensure that continuity of service is preserved for the people who matter most.” Some homecare providers, such as the Mears group, have made public statements about work they are handing back to councils because it doesn’t believe care can be delivered at the price the councils are willing to pay. But the UKHCA says there are many more cancelling contracts much less publicly. Izzi Seccombe, the chairman of the Local Government Association’s Community Wellbeing Board, says that councils have “effective contingency plans in place” in case contracts are handed back so they can ensure any disruption to a person’s care is kept to a minimum and that people remain at the centre of decisions about how best to meet their care needs. “However, continued cuts to funding for adult social care is putting an impossible squeeze on councils and providers to deliver care,” she says. “This is impacting on the availability, choice and number of people receiving homecare services, with the number of people affected by contract cancellations in homecare greater than those in residential care.” Ultimately, the crisis in domiciliary care risks undermining independent living, says John Bolton, a visiting professor at the Institute of Public Care. “The whole ambition of keeping people at home, allowing them to live fulfilled lives, is being lost in the malaise of a homecare market that is increasingly reliant on goodwill to survive.”