Jos Buttler and Dom Bess are the standout names in the first squad picked by Ed Smith, England’s new head selector, for the opening Test in the series against Pakistan next week. Buttler, who last played a Test in December 2016, has been selected as a specialist batsman after England’s struggles in recent months while Bess, the uncapped Somerset off-spinner, benefited from the untimely broken thumb suffered by his team-mate Jack Leach at Taunton on Tuesday. In that same match, James Vince struck a double hundred for Hampshire the day before the selectors met at Lord’s to finalise the 12-strong squad but it was not enough to convince the panel that he should retain his place for the first Test against Pakistan. There was a reprieve, however, for the opener Mark Stoneman, despite low scores in the championship for Surrey so far. The 27-year-old Buttler is a mainstay of the one-day and Twenty20 sides but played the last of his 18 Tests in India during England’s 4-0 series defeat in 2016 and is still searching for a maiden Test century. A failure to take his chance in India saw him fall down the pecking order again and he was overlooked entirely for the 2017-18 Ashes, when Ben Foakes travelled as the back-up wicketkeeper to Jonny Bairstow. Buttler is again in scintillating form in limited overs cricket, however, having recorded five consecutive 50s for the Rajahstan Royals in the IPL. Smith, who met his fellow selectors Mick Newell and Angus Fraser, the head coach, Trevor Bayliss, and the Test captain, Joe Root, earlier on Tuesday, said: “Jos Buttler is an outstanding talent. The selection panel feels that this is the perfect moment to reintroduce Jos to Test cricket, where he has already enjoyed some success, including a stint playing as a specialist batsman at No 7.” The 20-year-old Bess has played 16 first-class matches and was impressive in the Champion County match for the MCC against Essex in March. “Dom Bess has impressed everyone with his performances for Somerset and when he has been given opportunities with England representative teams,” Smith added. “With Jack Leach missing out, the selection panel wanted to invest opportunity in a young spin bowler. Dom’s strong form, character and all-round abilities presented a compelling case.” England have awarded incremental contracts to Surrey’s Tom Curran and Middlesex’s Dawid Malan. Joe Root (Yorkshire, capt), Jimmy Anderson (Lancashire), Jonny Bairstow (Yorkshire, wkt), Dom Bess (Somerset), Stuart Broad (Nottinghamshire), Jos Buttler (Lancashire), Alastair Cook (Essex), Dawid Malan (Middlesex), Ben Stokes (Durham), Mark Stoneman (Surrey), Chris Woakes (Warwickshire), Mark Wood (Durham).