Hell, as we know, is other people. And never more so than if you are doing something they don’t understand. “I’ve been told I’m a horrendous mother … that my sons are sinners,” says Hayley Davies-Monk of the strangers who have taken it upon themselves to comment on her family when they go out in public. Her two sons, 13-year-old Spencer and nine-year-old Lewis, both have Tourette syndrome. More than that, they are two of the 10% of people with the neurological condition whose tics include swearing out loud. My F-ing Tourette’s Family followed the Davies-Monks as they embarked on a six-month effort to break out of the seclusion gradually forced on them by other people’s reactions (and, I suppose, their own reactions to those reactions, though this was an aspect the film didn’t explore) and to go out, to theme parks, to restaurants, on trains and on holiday, to build their collective and individual confidences and have a public family life again. It must be said that the children’s tics are … quite something. The physical ones are debilitating enough for them; Spencer’s legs can become paralysed, making him collapse to the floor, unable to move until the attack has passed. Hands fly out and catch other people on the face. Spencer has to be driven to school in case he collapses or inadvertently starts a fight. But it is the verbal tics that have isolated the family – and they are more painful to watch than the blows. Spencer and Lewis are clearly such lovely boys – funny, polite, mild-mannered, articulate – who are, bafflingly, unfairly, periodically controlled by completely antithetical urges. “She’s worried,” explains Spencer gently, as his mother prepares for a group outing. “Because that’s what mums do.” And then – a different pitch, a different speed – “Overprotective cunt!” “Fuck my life, it smells like rice!” adds Lewis. You would have to have a heart of stone not to know whether to laugh or cry. When they go out, Hayley is constantly scanning the periphery for dangers. People who look as if they will be unpleasant. People who have something about them that will set her boys ticcing particularly badly. “My tics can be race-based or sexuality-based,” says Spencer. “I don’t want anyone to feel like” – the intruder takes hold for a moment – “SHIIIITE! To have,” he corrects the interloper, “their feelings hurt.” Gradually, they gain confidence. A visit to a theme park in Germany that offers them the twin protections of a language barrier and noise is a particular success. Happiness exists in a place where even if a few tics translate (“Hitler!”) they can’t be heard. A lovely family, then, whom every viewer surely felt and rooted for. As a documentary, however, it of course stands in the shadow of the magisterial 1989 film by Valerie Kaye, John’s Not Mad, and the followups since about John Davidson and the severe manifestations of Tourette syndrome with which he lives. It had none of those films’ craft, subtlety or tenderness. It was a very basic delivery of a very basic story. The family’s isolation at the beginning was never firmly enough established to make their “journey” as meaningful to us as it should have been, and there were oversights – such as how the parents could become better equipped to preempt or deal with strangers’ hostile or even merely curious reactions – that raised distracting questions in the mind where there should have been empathy. (None of which, to be clear, is to imply that this is what the parents should have been doing – just that, in televisual terms, there are sometimes things that need to be addressed so that the audience can concentrate where it should. If there are any “shoulds”, it’s that people give strangers the benefit of the doubt and err on the side of kindness, wherever possible. But this is obvious, so let us not dwell.) Let us turn briefly instead to the History Channel’s new offering, Kingpin, which is a faintly (when not fully) sickening account in docudrama form of the rise of various murderous heads of various murderous organisations. Last night it was the turn of Joaquin “El Chapo” Guzman, the Mexican drug lord responsible for tens of thousands of deaths by the time of his arrest – after a long reign of terror – in 2016. It’s at first a lurid, overdramatic, self-indulgent glorification of murder that lingers on descriptions of torture and reconstructs shootings with such loving detail that you suspect it was made by and for those who long to have dicks as big as those glorious Mexican gangsters’ before deepening into a more impressive, if still wearyingly macho, elucidation of his rise and fall against a wider political background. When man will stop handing on quite such misery to man remains unanswered.