There’s a rule of thumb around talking down the product, a “doing a Ratner” kind of thing, and by God does it apply to sport. Such is the competitive nature of the business, and of the individuals involved, that saying anything remotely critical about an activity in general or a performance more specifically is about as likely as watching a free-to-air Test match. So the aftermath of the Monaco Grand Prix on Sunday was quite something to behold. “This is probably the most boring race ever,” was Fernando Alonso’s considered opinion. “Extremely boring.” Lewis Hamilton began his remarks more cautiously – “It was a super-unexciting race for everyone” – but when a fan hollered his own opinion that it was the “most boring race ever”, Hamilton put his foot down. “Thank God you said it,” he replied. “I thought I was the only one. Wow, it was intensely boring. Oh my God, yes. Forty laps to go, I was like, ‘Oh God, please.’ When it finished, I was like, ‘Thank goodness.’” Reading those remarks back, they look a little odd. It’s a bit like Hamilton has belatedly read the room and realised no one is in the market for a “I think the team did a great job” analysis. Alternatively, it’s how he actually feels and he’s delighted at being given licence to talk about it and he could go on for days. Either way it looks a bit weird. The technical explanation for Sunday’s snoozefest centred on the choice of tyres. Pirelli’s hyper-soft range, as well as sharing the marketing language usually reserved for toilet paper, were the sort that wear down easy. The faster that cars drove on them the quicker they would need changing and that might run the risk of taking more than one pit stop, a potentially catastrophic tactical error. So everyone drove slowly. Hamilton diagnosed another problem with the race, however, and that was Monaco itself. The picturesque principality, so beloved of leathery old men and their unbuttoned lilac shirts, does not have quite the right topography for modern Formula One. But Hamilton has a plan to fix that. “I spoke to Prince Albert the other day and said maybe we should make it longer,” he said. “There are more roads so maybe we can change this great track and make it even better. Or maybe the format should change.” Just chuck that in at the end there, why don’t you. A civil engineering subcommittee of Hamilton and Prince Albert is a prospect that naturally excites. Lewis lives in the principality, of course, and surely knows the streets well, flaneuring around the more obscure routes as he contemplates how little tax he pays. Albert, meanwhile, not only shares Hamilton’s elite sporting credentials (he was unfailingly selected for the Monaco bobsled team in the 80s and 90s whenever the then-heir to the Monégasque throne put his name forward), he also goes by the nickname “the Plugged-in Prince” because of his penchant for electric cars. These two men getting together over a Pschitt! and contemplating optimal traffic flow couldn’t fail to get lap times down by a second or two. “If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it” is another phrase used in business and there’s certainly been a lot of fixing in F1 of late. Since Bernie Ecclestone relinquished the steering wheel to Liberty Media last year, the sport has changed its race times to encourage European TV audiences. It has realised women are people too and replaced grid girls with grid kids. It has got a new logo and will even unveil an international theme tune, composed by the bloke who did the score for Iron Man 3. All this could be seen as a certain amount of tinkering around the edges. More systemic problems in the sport are still visible from space. These include the massive financial disparities between teams that, for instance, meant Ferrari, second in the constructors’ championship, took home nearly 10 times the amount in payments from Formula One Management in 2017 than eighth-placed Haas. Then there are the regulations around aerodynamics, which go way over my head but have contrived to create a situation where only three teams have won a race since 2014. One final problem is the tracks themselves: F1’s global expansion by chequebook has occasioned circuits in Azerbaijan, Bahrain and elsewhere that have served up tedious fare regardless of the state of the tyres. All these problems are for the owner to work out and new aerodynamic rules come into effect next year. Perhaps Liberty could also ship Hamilton off to Baku with his planometer and see how he can shake things up. Whatever is planned, it might be best to do it quickly, however. Despite a slight uptick in the UK this year, the long-term trajectory for F1 viewing figures across the world is downwards. So maybe the fixes will come in and F1’s glory days will return. But with Nascar also experiencing a sharp decline, perhaps motorsport is experiencing something more existential. In the real world people still love their cars but they don’t necessarily enjoy driving them. Most journeys are characterised by snarl-ups and that platonic ideal of an empty, winding road is increasingly a myth (I sat in traffic in the Cairngorms last year, go figure). Perhaps the car is losing the romantic association it held in the public imagination for a century. After all, the last thing driving was supposed to be was boring.