The former director of Malaysia’s anti-corruption office has lodged a complaint against the former prime minister, Najib Razak, alleging he personally blocked an investigation into the $3.2bn 1MDB scandal. Abdul Razak Idris has claimed that Najib, with the help of other civil servants, prevented a full investigation into the billions embezzled from the government fund overseen by Najib. Najib allegedly transferred $681m of the fund into his own bank account, funding lavish shopping sprees for his wife. He has denied all wrongdoing. An investigation of Najib during his time in office cleared him of all wrongdoing, but it was widely seen as a farce and vital documents were concealed or restricted under the official secrets act. The newly-elected prime minister, Mahathir Mohamad, on Monday said the that the attorney general responsible has been told to go on leave pending an investigation of his role in allegedly covering up the scandal. “There have been a lot of complaints against the AG but no formal reports. On that basis, we give him a holiday ... once investigations are carried out, then we can suspend him and prevent him from leaving the country,” Mahathir told a news conference. Anger over 1MDB helped his alliance score a stunning election victory last week, ending the 60-year rule of Najib’s coalition.Abdul Razak’s report appears to confirm the allegations that Najib used his power to blockade a full inquiry into the embezzled funds. “I am making this report so investigations on corruption cases, money laundering and such involving KWAP and 1MDB money can be reopened or continued,” said Abdul Razak on Monday. He said he was only reporting the complaint now because when Najib was in power nothing would have been done about it. However, he still expressed fear about turning against his former boss. “Some are also worried about me for boldly coming out to lodge a report but it’s all right,” he said as he entered the anti-corruption headquarters. “I’m already 69 years old. If I die, I die for the country.” Abdul Razak also called on Najib to declare all his assets, including unexplained property. Mahathir has said if Najib was implicated in any wrongdoing he must “face the consequences”. The former prime minister and his wife were put on an immigration blacklist over the weekend to make sure they did not attempt to flee the country.