I was born in Erith, Kent, a place few people have heard of and even fewer can pronounce – the first syllable rhymes with beer, not with berry. The late comedian Linda Smith was born in the same town. She once said: “Erith has a suicide pact with Dagenham.” Dagenham is directly opposite Erith, on the north side of the Thames. My father was the managing director of an old-fashioned department store: Mitchells. Although I was often in Erith, we didn’t live there. Our house was in Barnehurst, a very ordinary outer London suburb a mile or so to the south. Erith is mentioned in Conrad’s Heart of Darkness, when the protagonist sails past it on his way down the Thames at the start of his journey to Africa. As for Barnehurst in literature, the only thing I can think of is a poem of mine that refers to the bus depot and the Wimpy Bar in the adjacent parade of shops. There was some culture going on there during my childhood. My friend Dave Gelly, the jazz musician and writer, who grew up in the same area, told me that the Red Barn pub near Barnehurst station was the centre of the postwar revival of British jazz. I was entirely unaware of it. In Erith there was a theatre. I appeared there as a small child in a rabbit costume when my ballet class put on a performance. And we often went as a family to amateur operatic productions. The lasting result of this is my love of Gilbert and Sullivan. It wasn’t instant – at first I was often dragged along reluctantly. But as I became familiar with the tunes and old enough to appreciate the humour, I began to enjoy them. I’m still annoyed by people who are snooty about G&S. Sullivan wrote wonderful tunes and Gilbert was a genius. He has certainly influenced my work. I’ve written several poems that borrow forms he used, most recently one called “At 70” that goes to the tune of the Major–General’s song from The Pirates of Penzance. Erith was not prospering in the 1950s. Its riverside location reduced the catchment area and many shoppers preferred its nearby rival, Bexleyheath. Mitchells closed down in 1960 and shortly afterwards the town was redeveloped. My parents moved away in 1963. When I visited Erith a few years later, it was unrecognisable. Barnehurst had remained stolidly the same. Although the family was based in the area until 1963, I only lived there full time until I was sent away to boarding school at the age of seven. After that it was just the school holidays. As a teenager I took advantage of the half-hour train journey to central London, where I would meet school friends and go to the theatre, most often the Old Vic. When I began writing poetry I was troubled by a vague feeling that a poet needed to have grown up in a beautiful rural environment, or at least somewhere exciting. Then I read Philip Larkin’s poem “I Remember, I Remember” about his childhood in Coventry, “where I did not invent / Blinding theologies of flowers and fruits”. His lines helped me to believe that maybe I could be a poet, despite having grown up in an unremarkable suburb.