Facing an uphill struggle in an election next month, Israel has announced it is pulling out of a race for a seat on the UN security council. Israel was in a three-way contest with Germany and Belgium for two seats representing the western-democratic group of nations on the UN’s most powerful body starting in January. The security council has five permanent members – the US, Russia, China, Britain and France – and 10 members elected by the 193-member general assembly for two-year terms. Israel’s UN mission said in a statement that “after consulting with our partners, including our good friends, the state of Israel has decided to postpone its candidacy for a seat on the security council”. “It was decided that we will continue to act with our allies to allow for Israel to realise its right for full participation and inclusion in decision-making processes at the UN,” the statement said. “This includes the security council as well as an emphasis on areas related to development and innovation.” Israel’s withdrawal virtually guarantees Germany and Belgium victory in the 8 June election and seats on the council. Candidates for non-permanent seats on the council are chosen by regional groups and for 55 years Israel was not part of a regional group, which barred it from many UN positions. The late US ambassador Richard Holbrooke succeeded in 2000 in getting the western European and others regional group known as WEOG to invite Israel to be a temporary member, which later was extended indefinitely. Israel announced its withdrawal minutes before WEOG candidates were scheduled to appear and answer questions from UN member states. Germany’s UN ambassador, Christoph Heusgen, said in response to a question about Israel’s withdrawal: “We have never run against a country. There is nothing where we really oppose each other. We went for our own programme. We asked support, and we want also to seek high support from you.” He noted there had been a lot of discussion at the UN on how regional groups should put forward candidate countries. “I’m in favour of having more candidates,” Heusgen said, even though “this is tougher” because candidates then have to say what they stand for and respond to sometimes tough questions about their country. “So therefore ... I regret that Israel withdrew from the race,” he said.