While all other cakes come and go with seasons and flights of fancy, the banana cake is steady – it’s the safe bet and the crowd-pleaser, and also the secret favourite. Not all banana cakes are created equal, however. This one is so dense, you could make an indentation on a slice with your lips and it would remember them like memory foam. It’s sweet, but not so sweet that it couldn’t be eaten for breakfast with a choice spread (peanut butter) and jam. But it’s still sweet enough to be eaten on its own, all year round and for ever. You’ll need an 18cm x 8cm loaf tin and a food processor to make this. It needs to be left to rest in the tin until cool before slicing. Prep 15 minCook 1 hr 20 minServes 8 100g coconut oil, plus extra for greasing100ml maple syrup1 tsp vanilla extract 150g plain flour 100g ground almonds150g desiccated coconut 2 tsp baking powder 1½ tsp ground cinnamon 1 tsp ground nutmeg 450g ripe banana flesh (ie, from about 3-4 large bananas), cut into chunks 40g raw (untoasted) coconut chips, such as Daylesford Organic Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas 4. Grease a loaf tin with coconut oil, then line the base with a long strip of baking parchment (this will make it easier to lift out the cake later). In a small pan, heat the coconut oil until just melted, then take it off the heat, stir in the maple syrup and vanilla and set side. In a bowl, whisk together the flour, almonds, desiccated coconut, baking powder, cinnamon and nutmeg. Put the banana in a food processor and blitz to a smooth puree. Add the flour mixture and oil to the banana, and process again until just combined. Scrape down the sides of the processor and pulse once more. Scrape the mixture into the tin and spread it out evenly. Cover with enough coconut flakes to cover the top completely, then press them lightly into the batter. Bake for an hour, then turn down the heat to 160C/320F/gas 2½, turn the cake around and bake for a further 20 minutes. Take out of the oven and leave to cool completely in the tin. Brush off any scorched coconut flakes, cut into generous slices and serve.