Surrey have pulled off an almighty coup by signing of Virat Kohli, the Indian captain and cricket’s premier all-format batsman, for the whole of June. Kohli had originally declared his interest in playing county cricket ahead of India’s Test series in England this summer some 18 months ago. And now the 29-year-old will get his wish with a four-week spell that sees him grace the likes of Beckenham, Guildford and Scarborough. Hailed as “the biggest name in world cricket” by Surrey’s director of cricket, Alec Stewart, upon completion of the deal on Thursday, Kohli will be available to play in the club’s Royal London Cup matches during that month and three County Championship fixtures. It is the latter, of course, that interests him most as he looks to prevent a repeat of his last outing against the red Dukes ball when, back in 2014, he averaged 13.4 over five Tests as India went down 3-1 to England under the captaincy of MS Dhoni. Kohli, who will now skipper India’s one-off Test versus Afghanistan in mid June, said: “It has long been an ambition of mine to play county cricket. I am thankful to Alec Stewart and Surrey for allowing me the opportunity. I can’t wait to get to the Kia Oval.” Surrey have just one match at the ground during Kohli’s stay, with a 50-over fixture at home to Glamorgan on 6 June preceded by matches against Kent at Beckenham and Middlesex at Lord’s. His championship appearances will then be versus Hampshire at the Ageas Bowl, Somerset at Guilford and Yorkshire at Scarborough. The England head coach, Trevor Bayliss, has previously bemoaned a lack of overseas opportunities for his players in first-class cricket and will doubtless have had a wry smile upon learning that Kohli will join the likes of Ishant Sharma (Sussex) and Cheteshwar Pujara (Yorkshire) in getting an early tune-up for the Test series that begins on 1 August. But Stewart said: “Playing and training alongside Virat will be a massive benefit for our players. At a time when there is much discussion around the future of county cricket, the arrival of Virat should give our domestic game a massive boost and positive exposure around the cricketing world.” Kohli’s move came on the same day that India permitted Dinesh Kathik and Hardik Pandya to play for the World XI in a one-off Twenty20 against West Indies at Lord’s on 31 May - a match that is raising money for hurricane-damaged stadia in the Caribbean.