Ireland’s 3.2 million voters cast their ballots on Friday in a referendum to decide whether to repeal the eighth amendment to the country’s constitution. A yes vote would allow the government to overhaul an abortion law that is among the most restrictive in Europe. The eighth amendment is a clause inserted into the Irish constitution after a referendum in 1983. It recognises an equal right to life for both mother and unborn child, effectively prohibiting abortion in almost all cases. Abortion had been illegal in Ireland since the Offences Against the Person Act of 1861. But with reform under way around Europe and many countries opting to permit abortions on request until 12 weeks or more, anti-abortion campaigners in Ireland sought the greater security of a constitutional amendment. Two further referendums were held in 1992, resulting in the 13th amendment, which allows women to travel in and out of Ireland to have an abortion (pro-repeal campaigners say 170,000 have done so), and the 14th, which authorises information about abortion services overseas. In 2013, the law was changed to permit abortions when doctors feel a woman’s life may be at risk from pregnancy complications or suicide. Otherwise, a doctor unlawfully performing an abortion faces prosecution and up 14 years in jail. The 1992 referendums came after the supreme court overturned an order barring a 14-year-old girl (“Case X”) who was pregnant as the result of rape from going to Britain for an abortion. It ruled that the girl’s suicidal thoughts posed a “real and substantial risk” to the lives of both her and the unborn child. The European court of human rights ruled in 2010 that Ireland was violating the convention on human rights because of the lack of clarity over legal abortions. In 2012, Savita Halappanavar died in hospital in Galway after being denied an abortion during a miscarriage, prompting the 2013 Protection of Life During Pregnancy Act allowing abortions in certain very strictly controlled circumstances. In 2016, the UN called on Ireland to reverse its strict prohibition and for the first time the Irish state compensated a woman, Amanda Mellet, whose foetus had a fatal anomaly, for the trauma she suffered from having to go abroad for an abortion. In 2017, a citizens’ assembly established by the government recommended unrestricted access to abortion during early pregnancy, and the referendum – required because the proposal involves changing the constitution – was called earlier this year. If Ireland votes to repeal the eighth amendment, the relevant article in the constitution, 40.3.3, will be replaced by the phrase: “Provision may be made by law for the regulation of termination of pregnancy.” The government has published draft legislation that would allow relatively free abortions up to 12 weeks, subject to consultation with a doctor and a short waiting period. Termination will be possible up to 24 weeks if two doctors consider a woman’s life is threatened or there is serious risk to her health. Observers say anything less than a 5% margin for yes could lead to a guerrilla war in parliament to obstruct or delay the new bill. Voting begins at 7am on Friday and finishes at 10pm. Ireland’s two main political parties, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil, are not taking official positions, while Sinn Féin and Labour back yes. Politicians are campaigning personally; the taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, has described abortion in Ireland as “unsafe, unregulated and unlawful”. Polls predict a tightening race, with yes ahead, but as many as 24% of voters undecided. Irish broadcaster RTE will release an exit poll late on Friday, and final results are expected to be clear by early afternoon on Saturday.