Chris Froome knows as well as anybody that the Giro d’Italia could be the last time he rides competitively for a while. The result of his anti-doping case is expected some time between the finish of this race on 21 May and the start of the Tour de France in July. But while the Team Sky principal, Dave Brailsford, wore a battle-weary look on another bruising day for his operation, the top rider breezed through his questions in Jerusalem seemingly carefree and confident. “For me [I’m only] thinking about winning this race,” Froome said of the Giro d’Italia, which starts on Friday. “I’m not thinking about July. I’m thinking about giving my absolute best for the next few weeks and the aim is to be on the top step when we reach Rome.” Before it even reaches Italy the Giro will have to confront myriad controversies, from the decision to hold the start in Israel, to the spectre of a visiting Lance Armstrong, banned from contesting official cycling events but recording a podcast in the shadows. Then there is Froome, the favourite, attempting to be the first rider since Bernard Hinault to hold all three grand tour titles at the same time and possessing a remarkable ability to compartmentalise. He is contesting a failed drug test at last year’s Vuelta a España, where a urine sample indicated twice the permitted level of the asthma medication salbutamol in his system but to witness his relaxed manner, you would not realise it. “I need to demonstrate that I’ve done nothing wrong and that’s what I intend to do,” he said. “It’s not something I’m going to give a running commentary on, and when there is something new we’ll talk about it.” David Lappartient, the president of the UCI, world cycling’s governing body, as well as several high-profile riders, have expressed misgivings that Froome continues to compete, already doing so three times this year. There is no doubt his presence has once more overshadowed the race. Apart from a few questions, one planted by the Israeli tourist board, the discussion was dominated by the fog of doubt over Team Sky. It was the first time Brailsford had held court since a damning report by government’s department of culture, media and sport select committee (DCMS) suggested Team Sky abused the anti-doping system to allow the administration of performance-enhancing drugs. Coming after the mystery Jiffy bag delivery to Bradley Wiggins in 2011, Brailsford admits he has considered his position at the top of a team created on an ethos of total transparency and zero tolerance for drugs. But he resolved to remain. “I think anybody in this game considers their position every day,” he said. “I would say that I’m constantly asking if I’m the right man to lead these guys. I think that regardless of the DCMS or anything else, there’s a constant sense of self-questioning about whether I’m appropriately placed or do I have the right skills. Some things come and go, the situation and context around you changes, but I’m here because I think I am still in the position where I can help these guys be the best they can be.” Froome and Team Sky are being paid a reported €1.4m (£1.23m) in appearance fees by Giro d’Italia organisers and have the opportunity to make history, so their motivations for being here are manifold. But Brailsford refused to answer whether he would sack Froome should he be suspended for an anti-doping rule violation. “That’s not a question for now,” he said. “We have to respect the race.” But for all the team who want to keep the focus on the main event, that is the uncomfortable situation they are in. The organisers have also been accused of “sport-washing” by allowing the start to be held in Israel. Critics claim it is an attempt to divert attention from the killing and maiming of Palestinians on the Gaza Strip. Kate Allen, Amnesty International UK’s director, said: “We’re not going to tell the Giro D’Italia organisers where they should and shouldn’t start the race, but the Jerusalem launch inevitably means Israel’s dismal human rights record is going to be in the spotlight. “The authoritiesin Jerusalem may have thought that the glitz of the Giro D’Italia might have a sportswash effect, removing some of the stain of Israel’s human rights record. Instead, it’s likely to bring it back into focus yet again.” The Giro D’Italia riders will begin the race only weeks after the Israeli security forces unleashed excessive, deadly force against Palestinian protesters in Gaza, including children.