Chris Froome was spat at by a spectator on the penultimate stage of the Giro d’Italia shortly before he all-but confirmed his place in history by becoming the first Briton to claim the Maglia Rosa. There is still one more stage remaining, but the 10 laps of 11.5km around Rome on Sunday evening will be largely processional. To Froome, each one will feel like a fresh victory parade. He will also become the first man in 35 years to hold all three grand tours – the Tour de France, Vuelta a España and the Giro –at the same time, joining Bernard Hinault and Eddy Merckx in the pantheon. Whatever you think of the 33-year-old, who some believe should not be here after his failed test for salbutamol last September, that is some company to keep. “It is a very special victory,” said Froome. “I know it is not over until Rome tomorrow but the battle is over now. It is an incredible feeling.” Froome has been loudly applauded by crowds throughout the Giro, especially at the Sky team bus before the start of each stage. However, three kilometres before Saturday’s stage finish here, a man in a white top and red shorts appeared to come out from the crowd and spat at him. While Froome appeared not to respond, his Team Sky team-mate Wout Poels turned around in shock. That was the only negative note on a day when Froome confirmed his stunning turnaround in the race after struggling to cope with a crash before the first stage in Israel. In theory, Saturday’s penultimate stage, 214km from Susa to Cervinia, possessed enough teeth to make Froome fear its bite. The last 90km packed in three climbs, each amounting to nearly 20km in duration – with 4,000m of rise and fall along the way. Yet Froome was only rarely tested and never troubled. While the Spaniard Mikel Nieve – who was freed from the duties of supporting his Mitchelton-Scott team leader, Simon Yates – pulled away on the final climb to celebrate his 34th birthday with a stage win, Froome was content to keep a watchful eye on Tom Dumoulin, his only realistic challenger who started the day 40 seconds behind. There was plenty of watching. Up and down the Col Tsecore and then the Col St-Pantaléon, Dumoulin was impassive, content to pin his hopes on an attack on the final climb up the Cervinia. However, by then Team Sky had got to the front of the pack and were pushing the pace to make it hard for anyone to attack. Dumoulin did his best. With six kilometres to go he attacked three times in rapid succession, testing Froome’s legs, only to find them strong. He then went again three kilometres out but the Briton not only responded but attacked himself – a definite and defiant show of strength. “I gave everything I had,” said Dumoulin. “It was a real cool three weeks but I am glad it is over. He was too strong for me. I have no regrets. I gave everything I had.” Froome, meanwhile, knows there will be some that question this victory. Not only because of Friday’s stunning 80km solo breakaway, but the way he has looked so strong in the final week. Team Sky insist that he was more seriously injured than they let on when he crashed in Israel and that he came into the Giro a little heavier than usual, at 70kg rather than at the 67kg he is normally at the Tour de France. He also had saddle sores, which made riding more painful than he would have liked. Froome also denies any wrongdoing after double the permitted levels of the asthma drug salbutamol was found in his body at the Vuelta a España last September – a story first revealed by the Guardian and Le Monde in December, yet to some it has left a sour taste that he has continued to ride while fighting a potential ban. There are no doubts that he looked stronger than ever towards the finish. Indeed, as he made his way over the steepest stretch of the final climb, just before Valtournenche about three kilometres before the finish, he powered clear of Dumoulin. As he did so he passed bunches of pink Giro d’Italia balloons, some of which had been popped. A few days ago, Froome looked similarly deflated. Once again he was able to deliver when it mattered.