Made from fermented soya beans, miso has an intensely savoury flavour – one you might not imagine to belong in a sticky bun. But it does. Rippled into soft dough alongside butter, the toffee flavour of brown sugar and warm vanilla, miso offsets the sweetness, not unlike having salty bacon on syrup-sodden pancakes. It’s also no fuss to make these buns vegan, should you wish: just swap the butter for a vegetable-based butter alternative and use non-dairy milk. You can easily decrease the amount of miso here – it’ll still add a pleasing saltiness, even if you don’t add enough to taste the miso itself. Prep 30 minRise 2½ hrCook 30 minMakes 12 For the dough75g unsalted butter300ml milk1 tbsp soft light brown sugar2 tsp vanilla extract10g dried yeast500g strong white flour1 tsp salt For the filling75g unsalted butter, softened100g soft light brown sugar2-3 tsp miso paste1 tsp vanilla extract200g blueberries For the glaze100g icing sugar1 tsp vanilla extract20-25ml water Melt the butter in a small pan, then add the milk and heat until lukewarm. Remove from the heat and whisk in the sugar, vanilla and yeast, and set aside for five minutes for the yeast to spring into action. Combine the flour and salt in a large bowl, then pour in the milk mixture: you might not need all of it, so just keep adding it until the dough is soft and slightly sticky – if too dry, it’ll be tough and difficult to knead. Knead the dough for 10 minutes, until springy and smooth, then put in a bowl, cover with clingfilm and put in a warmish spot to rise. Meanwhile, for the filling, beat the butter with the sugar until smooth and fluffy. Add miso to taste: you might prefer just a hint of that saltiness, or maybe (like me) you’ll prefer a more full-on savoury kick. Stir in the vanilla and set aside. After 90 minutes or so, the dough should have more or less doubled in size (if not, leave it for a further 30 minutes). Roll it out on a lightly floured surface to a roughly 50 x 60cm rectangle. Spread with the filling, then evenly scatter over the blueberries. Roll the dough tightly from long edge to long edge, creating a swirled log. Trim off the ends, then divide into 12 equal portions using a large, sharp knife. Line a 20 x 30cm roasting tin with baking paper, then arrange the buns cut side up in the tin, spacing them evenly. Cover with clingfilm and leave to rise for 45-60 minutes; heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas 4. Once the buns are puffy and risen, put in the oven and bake for 25-30 minutes. They’re ready when they’re golden brown on top, mottled with splashes of bubbling blueberry juice and springy to the touch. Quickly whisk together the glaze, gradually adding the vanilla and water to the icing sugar to get a smooth, very runny icing. Brush this over the tops of the hot buns using a pastry brush, then leave to cool.