Texas makes no secret of its preoccupation with size. “Everything is bigger in Texas,” goes the state motto. This weekend, inside the cavernous Kay Bailey Hutchison convention center in Dallas, something predictably big is happening: the National Rifle Association Annual Meetings and Exhibits. Visitors arriving on Friday were greeted by imposing vinyl banners featuring headshots of NRA notables – Wayne LaPierre, Chris Cox and Dana Loesch. The posters also revealed the theme for the group’s 147th summit: “A show of strength for second amendment freedom.” The NRA’s framing of its convention in terms of strength in numbers – it expected 80,000 “freedom-loving patriots” to attend, it said – came in the face of increased activism by its opponents. Since the last NRA gathering, the deadliest shooting in modern American history saw 58 people killed in Las Vegas in October. That was followed in November by 26 deaths in a Baptist church in Sutherland Springs, Texas. The February shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas high school in Parkland, Florida, in which 17 students and educators were killed, touched off a national youth-led movement advocates hope will turn the tide in favor of tighter gun control. Your second amendment rights are under siege. But they will never ever be under siege as long as I’m your president The Florida school massacre galvanized criticism of the NRA and its lobbying arm, the Institute for Legislative Action. Calls for a boycott of the NRA and its corporate partners led businesses – from hotel chains and car-rental companies to major retailers and airlines – to sever relationships and rescind benefits once extended to its five million members. “Your second amendment rights are under siege,” Donald Trump duly said on Friday, addressing the NRA for a third year running. “But,” he added, in a seeming contradiction, “they will never ever be under siege as long as I’m your president.” Trump’s predilection for Texas-style superlatives served him well. “This is a record crowd, you know,” he said. “All-time record crowd!”He added: “Can you imagine if we called for a rally in Washington? There wouldn’t be enough room!” That brought thunderous applause. Outside, a small number of gun-control advocates gathered in protest. Larger demonstrations were expected on Saturday. But there appeared little prospect of dampening the mood among convention attendees. Soon after the doors to the exhibition hall opened in mid-morning, thousands flooded what was hyped as “15 acres of guns and gear”. This was a true mall of America, where patriotic motifs including the stars and stripes of the US flag and the Revolution-era maxim “Don’t tread on me” were emblazoned on apparel, holsters and handgun grips. A 24-year-old artist from Austin, Stuart Maue, paraded through the hall with a figure of Trump made from 50 balloons; he had also made a large-scale Glock that sat in one of the banquet halls. The accessories section was stockpiled with scopes and laser sights and suppressors (silencers), and even a lingerie holster, in black with hot-pink lace. Outfitters hocking hunting adventures in Alaska or Pakistan displayed eye-popping taxidermy. Down a hallway, the NRA wine club asked attendees to “support with every sip” by signing up for a $29.99 membership that includes two wines mailed each month. Nearby was the Eddie Eagle Zone, where the eponymous mascot posed with kids and handed out informational packets on a gun safety program for children. The official NRA store, in a carpeted den of its own, trafficked all manner of merch: mugs, belts, shot glasses. Splashed across the chest of a gray hoodie was the line the late actor and NRA president Charlton Heston uttered at the close of his convention speeches, hoisting a flintlock long rifle over his head: “From my cold, dead hands.” As far as Parkland goes, it’s terrible and something needs to be done … I don’t think it needs to infringe on our rights At the heart of the exhibition area were the guns, dealers displaying every conceivable make, model and caliber. In every direction, white men behaved like kids in a toy store: plucking guns from display cases, cocking them, aiming them at nothing and dry-firing them with metallic pings that in concert produced a cacophony. Alex McCandless, 27, and Amy McIlroy, 26, were a couple from Gunter, Texas, an hour’s drive away. They had dropped by the bustling Smith & Wesson booth to browse the company’s line of AR-15 semi-automatic rifles. There is perhaps no firearm that inspires more devotion and hatred. Variants of what the NRA has called “America’s rifle” were wielded by gunmen in Las Vegas, Sutherland Springs and Parkland. They were also used in Orlando, San Bernardino, Aurora and Newtown. Fans like McCandless and McIlroy say the gun is unfairly maligned. Precise and lightweight, it is a multipurpose tool, they say, for target shooting, self-defense and hunting. “It’s a hobby. It’s fun,” McCandless said. “I’ve got my AR decked out exactly the way I want it.” The couple admitted that the AR-15’s status as an object loathed by so-called “gun-grabbers” contributed to their desire to own it. Purchasing one was an expression of their rights. “After Parkland,” McCandless said, “we went out and got a second one, just to be safe.” McIlroy said she wanted “whatever I have to get now to ensure I can protect my family later”. The couple are raising a six-year-old and an 18-month-old. “Keeping children safe is a huge priority,” McCandless said. “The only thing you can do is be prepared. There are bad people in the world and you’re never going to take every gun away. As far as Parkland goes, it’s terrible and something needs to be done, but I don’t think it needs to infringe on our second amendment rights.” Sam Smith, 65, from De Queen, Arkansas and another AR-15 owner, voiced a familiar sentiment: “The guns are not the problem. It’s the people. Parents don’t raise their kids right any more. They don’t take them to church, don’t whoop their tail when they need it. When morals go away, human life don’t mean nothing.” There were occasional flashes of a younger, more colorful NRA. “Black Guns Matter” was written in big block letters on the T-shirt worn by Maj Toure as he hustled through the crowd. A thirtysomething from Philadelphia, Toure has gained renown in gun circles for conducting firearms training in cities with high homicide rates such as Los Angeles, Chicago and Detroit. “All gun control is racist,” he said. “To attempt to not allow someone to protect himself and his family in a high-crime area of a city is racism.” Keith Pantaleon, a 40-year-old admirer of Toure’s from New Jersey, said: “As a black man, I hate gun control. The question after 1865 was if black people are no longer slaves and they are people, that means they have the right to own firearms. That’s when the idea of gun control was invented.” Pantaleon looked around the room and began to ponder the future of the NRA. “It’s not that I want far less white people,” he said. “I want the NRA convention to be a more accurate representation of the demographics of the United States.” As Texas – or Trump – might say, that would be big.