Hawaii’s Kilauea volcano has erupted, releasing lava into a residential neighbourhood and prompting mandatory evacuation orders for nearby homes. Hawaii County said steam and lava poured out of a crack in Leilani Estates, which is near the town of Pahoa on the Big Island. Residents in the Puna community, home to about 10,000 people, were ordered to evacuate. County, state and federal officials had been warning residents all week that they should be prepared to evacuate, as an eruption would give little warning. Nearby community centres have opened for shelter. One resident said lava fountains were shooting 150ft (45 metres) in to the air through a crack in the volcano. Ikaika Marzo told the Honolulu Star-Advertiser that lava spread out over an area about 200 yards (182 metres) wide behind one house in Leilani Estates on Thursday. He said it sounded like a jet engine. Jeremiah Osuna, who captured drone footage of the lava stream told Honolulu television station KOHN that the sound was overwhelming. The only thing comparable is if someone “put a bunch of rocks into a dryer’ and turned it on high.He also says he could smell the sulphur, along with the burning trees and other vegetation. The US Geological Survey said new ground cracks were reported on Thursday afternoon. Hot vapour emerged from a crack and spattering lava began to erupt. The eruption comes after days of earthquakes rattled the area’s Puna district. A nearby school was closed due to the ongoing seismic activity and several roadways cracked under the strain of the constant temblors. The Puu Oo crater floor began to collapse Monday, triggering a series of earthquakes and pushing the lava into new underground chambers. The collapse caused magma to push more than 10 miles (16km ) downslope towards the populated south-east coastline of the island. Geologist Janet Babb said the magma crossed under Highway 130, which leads to a popular volcano access point, on Tuesday night. Hawaii County civil defence agency closed the area to visitors and ordered private tour companies to stop taking people into the region. Most of Kilauea’s activity has been nonexplosive, but a 1924 eruption spewed ash and 10-ton (9-tonne) of rocks into the sky, leaving one man dead. Puu Oo’s 1983 eruption resulted in lava fountains soaring over 1,500 feet high. In the decades since, the lava flow has buried dozens of square miles of land and destroyed many homes.