The news about Sir Alex Ferguson will have come as a shock to anyone who saw him on the pitch at Old Trafford last Sunday, presenting Arsène Wenger with an award in recognition of his 22 years as Arsenal manager. Though 76, the former Manchester United manager looked in good health and high spirits, as he has done throughout his retirement since standing down five years ago. Ferguson retired from football management in 2013 though in practice he has been far busier than the average pensioner, putting his name to books on leadership, frequently visiting the United States where he has been lucratively in demand as a lecturer and motivational speaker, indulging his love of horse racing and, not least, attending United games. Though careful not to overshadow any of the three managers who have succeeded him at Old Trafford, and tactfully reticent on the media front, Ferguson occupies a seat in the stand at most United matches. This time last year Ferguson even made an appearance in the Old Trafford press room, something he had not been doing in the later years of his managerial reign, turning up to present another long-service award, this time to a reporter from the Manchester Evening News. Typically, he swore a little and made a few jokes about the reporter’s footballing allegiances. He did not seem to have changed at all from the Ferguson who grew to a position of immense power and control in 26 successful years at United. Perhaps because of all the success he achieved, Ferguson avoided the usual pitfalls that bedevil football managers in retirement. He was not bitter at being forced out or replaced, because he had made the decision himself. He did not feel he had left too early or had work still undone, because he had lasted longer than anyone imagined possible and produced at least three different title-winning teams – teams that all played with the same character and shared the same work ethic as the man who grew up in the Clydeside shipbuilding community and never failed to remind anyone that that was where he learned his values. He seemed to be both enjoying his version of retirement and doing well out of his leisure time, and not many ex-football managers get to say that. One of his former players, Mark Hughes, was busy earning his relegation-threatened Southampton side a point at Everton when the news broke. “I have only heard a couple of rumours,” the Southampton manager said. “I was hoping it wasn’t true.” Sam Allardyce, the Everton manager and a close personal friend of Ferguson, described the news as tragic. “I am going to try and find out how serious it is as soon as I can,” Allardyce said. “It is obviously a brain haemorrhage or a brain bleed. I hope he is in good hands and I hope he can make a full recovery.”