An oval of blue sky hung on the wall at the end of Will Alsop’s studio, floating against a pink backdrop, the white paint from hastily daubed clouds dripping down the vast canvas into a smudgy indigo lake below. “It’s our latest project for a big new park in China,” said Alsop, opening a bottle of red wine and pouring two generous mid-afternoon glasses. “We want them to be able to have blue sky all the time, despite the smog, so we’re planning to suspend this enormous LED-screen canopy on stilts above a new lake.” It was characteristically mad thinking for the architect, who has died aged 70 following a short illness. Alsop spent his career conjuring bold, cartoonish visions, all designed to bring a little surreal joy into the world – even if many of them proved too ambitious for the laws of physics, or his clients’ patience, to stand. On this recent visit, Alsop’s east London studio was chock-full of curious cocoons, eggs and lumpy blobs on legs, some in Perspex cases, giving the place the look of a natural history museum displaying species from a parallel planet. There was a pair of wonky loofahs studded with porthole windows, destined to house expensive apartments in Vauxhall and Battersea; an office complex for Brentford in the form of baklava sweets held up on stripy straws; a spiky porcupine with illuminated fibre-optic spines, to serve as a neurological education pod for Queen Mary University in east London. It was a mind-boggling cabinet of curiosities, much of which seemed to have little to do with architecture but a lot with having fun. “Fun should be taken seriously, it’s not a trivial thing,” said Alsop, taking a seat on his office’s roof terrace, where each member of the studio was given a planter to grow something. “I always think if people are having a good time then the project will end up good. If it’s taken over by accountants then it will be a disaster.” Towards the end of his life, it seemed Alsop was having more fun than ever. He was getting large-scale commissions from a new generation of developers who were keen for a shock-dose of colour, reacting against the prevailing brick orthodoxy – and who were perhaps too young (or too geographically remote) to be put off by his bumpy track record. Having been a star of the 1990s and early 00s, only to suffer from the backlash against costly “iconic” design, and a string of high-profile hiccups, Alsop’s brand of blobitecture was enjoying an unlikely renaissance. “I wouldn’t use the word renaissance,” he said, lighting up the first of a full packet of cigarettes, which he smoked his way through during our meeting. “We never went away.” On the eve of his death, Alsop’s practice had just completed two new subway stations in Toronto, as part of the city’s $3.2bn (£1.85bn) metro expansion, one in the form of a weathering steel creature crouching over the entrance, the other a black-and-white striped barcode block jacked up on meaty concrete columns. “On one of these really cold, miserable January mornings, there will be people down there travelling to a job they’d probably rather not do,” said Alsop, when the stations opened earlier this year. “I want them to feel a little bit of cheer, a little bit of joy.” It is fitting that his last projects should be in Toronto, which was already home to his much-loved extension to the Ontario College of Art and Design, a big spotty box that hovers over the college’s existing brick building like an oblong Dalmatian with colourful crayons for legs. Described by the judges of RIBA’s 2004 worldwide award as “courageous, bold and just a little insane”, it was hailed by the mayor of Toronto, who claimed it was responsible for a 2.5% increase in tourism to the city. Other mayors weren’t always so lucky in their ambitions to use Alsop’s unique brand of fairy dust to court visitors and inward investment. In the early 2000s, hot off the back of his Stirling prize win for London’s Peckham library, which also saw him elevated to the Royal Academy and bestowed with an OBE, Alsop was engaged by a number of northern cities to concoct bold plans for their future. I first encountered him in Barnsley in 2002, while I was a teenager, when he came to present his vision to transform the place into a Tuscan hill town. His beguiling model – first unveiled at the Venice biennale, no less – showed Barnsley surrounded by a “living wall” of glowing resin blobs, crowned with a halo; even then I remember wondering why no one was calling out the emperor’s new clothes. It was a cynical PR exercise that clearly would never be built. Alsop repeated similar “visioning studies” in Middlesbrough, Bradford, Halifax and Stoke-on-Trent, each time emptying his toy box out over the city’s map, giving his imaginary buildings cute nicknames and calling it a masterplan. Fifteen years on, few of his crazed landscapes have materialised. His cloud-shaped, 10-storey Fourth Grace for Liverpool was also cancelled, while his £72m arts centre in West Bromwich closed not long after it opened. “I get into terrible trouble with masterplans,” Alsop told me. “I don’t pretend to have designed every detail, it’s just to give an impression and wake people up. They are never built out exactly like that, but if a couple of small things are done then the idea endures.” There may be no halo over Barnsley, but the developer of Gateway Plaza, the town’s monstrous slab of flats and offices, was keen to tell the Yorkshire Post that the panes of coloured glass he stuck on his facade, in a desperate attempt to jolly-up the wretched hulk, “drew inspiration from [Alsop’s] coloured boxes of light”. The architect’s legacy lives on, even it it might not be the one he would like. In other ways, Alsop was ahead of his time. His 2005 plan for a “SuperCity of the north” along the M62 corridor – where people could live in Hull, commute to Liverpool, shop in Leeds and go out in Manchester in one day – presaged George Osborne’s “northern powerhouse” by a decade. “It was misinterpreted as nonstop building from coast-to-coast,” sighed the architect, “but that was never the intention. It was about increasing urban density and maintaining local identity, without building on green fields in the usual Wimpey-esque way. You could choose to watch the sun rise over the sea on one coast, and set on the other.” For all his apparent whimsy, Alsop was an enthusiastic advocate for preservation, often arguing to leave things as they were, or augment an existing building with parasitic additions. “We shouldn’t be knocking anything down,” he said, “but always be adding, extending and adapting existing buildings, so we don’t destroy the memories people have of places.” One of his loofah-shaped towers, Heliport Heights in London’s Battersea, would see a 15-storey steel shaft raised up on stilts above an existing four-storey structure. “My client wanted to add a few floors on to their building, but the proportions were terrible, so I measured the golden section and said we should go for 15 storeys.” The result is a surreal proposition, a great rusting bulbous tube teetering above its host on spindly purple legs. “The problem is, putting things on legs is expensive,” he said, polishing off another glass of wine. “But it makes sense, especially in this country, where buildings can act as umbrellas. At ground level, buildings get in the way of walking, and I like the idea of walking in straight lines. Imagine if everything was raised up on legs, and the ground was always given over to people and gardens. Our cities would be much happier places.” For all the impracticalities of some of his wilder plans, Will Alsop’s chief legacy is exactly that: making the cities he worked in happier places to be. Whether it’s catching a glimpse of Peckham Library’s bright orange beret, or encountering the vibrant indigo tiled columns of North Greenwich tube station, or the speckled box floating on the Toronto skyline, his best projects provide a moment of joy and lift the spirits, reminding us that architecture doesn’t always have to be so po-faced. Working until the end, he showed no sign of giving up. “I would love to design a hospital,” he told me, “but I’ll never get the chance because I haven’t designed one already.” His battles against the restrictive procurement systems that preclude many practices from getting involved in much public work was a constant theme of his career. China seemed to be his biggest hope for realising his latest dreams. In the megacity of Chongqing, he had established the Testbed 2 cultural centre around his office, turning an old cluster of industrial buildings into a complex of offices, restaurants and shops, with a gallery, gym and brewery on site. “I’ve realised that selling alcohol makes more money than architecture,” he joked. “It’s my own little experiment in mixed-use. Life’s too short to be building large-scale commercial projects, because they never turn out as you would hope. I just want to be surprised, excited and have a good time.”