One of the world’s most eminent scientists says Australia needs to speed up testing and treatment for the lethal human immune virus, HTLV-1, or risk it spreading more widely, and admits he and others could have done more up to now. Dr Robert Gallo from the University of Maryland school of medicine said: “If I was in Australia and this virus was around, it’s not going to stay only in the Aboriginal community, and sooner or later I’d sure want to be tested. That’s a no brainer. Testing the population to know who’s infected, that’s a no brainer.” Gallo told Guardian Australia the HTLV-1 prevalence rates among five Aboriginal communities in central Australia, where more than 45% of the adult population has the virus, are “extraordinary”. “This is a priority. If this was in America now, I’d really be yelling.” In 1980 Gallo was the first to identify HTLV-1 as a cancer-causing human retrovirus. Then, in 1984 he helped discover HIV as a cause of AIDS and was “swept away” in the race to find a treatment and cure for the global epidemic that followed. • Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon “I just wish I was 20 years younger. The clock’s ticking, but now I’m trying to make up for lost time.” “I will give, for the rest of my days, some attention to it – more than I have in the last 25 to 30 years. But I also think it hasn’t received adequate funding or attention, and there you get into the obvious reason: it’s not common among European-derived people at all, it’s rare. Where is it common? You know where.” Human T-lymphotropic virus type 1 is spread through contaminated blood, unprotected sex and breastmilk. Like HIV, there is no cure. Like HIV, the virus causes potentially fatal complications but unlike HIV it takes much longer for symptoms to appear. Some people carry the virus for 30 years before chronic complications appear. Five to 10% develop a rapidly fatal form of leukaemia – nearly all of those will die within 12 months of diagnosis. Other life-threatening complications include kidney failure, lung disease, inflammation of the spinal cord leading to paralysis and other infections. The higher the viral load in the bloodstream, the more likely serious the symptoms. HTLV-1 infects up to 20 million people worldwide. It’s endemic to sub-Saharan Africa, South America, Papua New Guinea, Japan and central Australia, which has the highest transmission rate in the world. Essentially, once it has taken hold in an area, it is impossible to eradicate. HTLV-1 was discovered in te 1980. It was eclipsed in scientific interest by the 1984 discovery of HIV, which caused a global epidemic. Possibly as a result, HTLV-1 has been neglected by the global research community. Testing, research and clinical treatment need to be conducted before any cure can be sought. Japan is most advanced in treatment. It has reduced the transmission rate over time by 80%, through mass testing, and is trialling drug treatments. In 2014, the Global Virus Network set up an HTLV-1 taskforce, led by experts from 11 countries, to help speed up the development of drug treatments and vaccination, and educate the general public. “This virus is probably the most efficient cancer-causing agent we know of,” Gallo told Guardian Australia. “Five percent leukaemia is an immense hit. What do you know that causes cancer in a hit like that? Certainly no other microbe. It’s certainly one of the most potent carcinogens known to man. But the other thing is because it’s not a threat to European-derived people it doesn’t make the newspapers, no-one seems particularly worried about it.” Gallo also spoke about Australia’s current capacity to test for HTLV-1, echoing comments made by Japanese and British clinicians last week, who said a comprehensive testing regime was necessary to understanding the prevalence of the virus. At present, HTLV-1 testing in central Australia is only being done through a research grant by the Baker Institute, based at Alice Springs hospital. Gallo said that wasn’t enough. “Number one, you’ve got to find a way to be able to test. If you can’t test, you’re not doing a service, you’re not even doing public health, you’re not even doing medicine for your people. So you start with that,” he said. “I made a test in in1979, 1980 and it’s available to the world and you can make cheaper version of it. It doesn’t take a big brain you know. That’s just medicine, that’s just common-sense public health medicine,” he said. Gallo has issued a challenge to Australian researchers, saying HTLV-1 is “wide open” as a field of study, and is of great interest internationally. “Why doesn’t Australia lead the world in therapy and research? Why not? There’s only Japan right now. Compete with Japan, see who can do better, who can do more?” “Work on a vaccine. I think Australia making a crash through on this, you would become almost overnight the world leaders. You don’t want Australia to be pulled in by others on your own problem.” These days Gallo heads the Institute of Human Virology at the University of Maryland school of medicine, focusing on research, patient care and prevention. Gallo has the unique distinction of twice winning America’s most prestigious scientific award – the Albert Lasker Award in Medicine – in 1982 and 1986.