The Dominican Republic and China have announced that they are establishing diplomatic relations as the Caribbean country becomes the latest state to dump Taiwan, leaving it with just 19 diplomatic allies worldwide. Mainland China and Taiwan have been ruled separately since the end of a civil war in 1949, when the defeated nationalist government fled to the island. Beijing is increasing international pressure to prevent diplomatic recognition of what it considers a renegade province. Taiwan, which sees itself as a sovereign state, said it was “deeply upset” at a decision it blamed on Beijing’s “dollar diplomacy”. The move deepens the island’s international isolation while its giant neighbour flexes its economic and political might on the global stage. The Dominican Republic said in a statement that it “recognises that there is only one China in the world, and Taiwan is an inalienable part of the Chinese territory”. It said it believed its switch to ties with China would be “extraordinarily positive for the future of our country”. Beijing announced on Tuesday morning that it would exchange ambassadors with the Dominican Republic “as soon as practicable”. Taiwan’s foreign minister, Joseph Wu, said Beijing’s actions had eroded trust and he blamed financial incentives for ending Taiwan’s 77-year alliance with the Dominican Republic. He said his ministry “strongly condemns China’s objectionable decision to use dollar diplomacy to convert Taiwan’s diplomatic allies” and had summoned the Caribbean country’s ambassador to deliver a protest and tell him to close the embassy. Taiwan has 19 diplomatic allies – 10 in Latin America and the Caribbean, two in Africa, six small island states in the Pacific and the Vatican. Beijing and the Vatican severed diplomatic relations in 1951 and remain at odds over who should appoint bishops. But an apparent warming of relations between China and the Vatican has triggered concerns that the Holy See may also switch allegiance in what would be a crushing blow to Taipei. Wu insisted ties with the Vatican “would not be in immediate danger” even if there were a breakthrough agreement on designating bishops in China. Panama cut ties with Taipei last year to open relations with Beijing; Costa Rica did so in 2007. Taiwan is also regularly shut out of influential forums as organisers come under pressure from Beijing.