We moved to Orkney for the good life 15 years ago. It was a bit of a leap in the dark, for we’d only experienced the island from our honeymoon and holidays and we knew it would be a one-way trip because we could not now afford a home on the mainland. My husband and I had been renting a tiny flat in Edinburgh and we swapped that for a three-bedroom, 18th century house on the harbour front on Orkney for which the rent was 40% less. My salary nosedived, however. I had been manager of a tour company in Edinburgh earning £16,000 a year. When we decided that we were tired of city life I worked freelance for a while, earning about £6,000. I then got a job with Orkney Islands council looking after the 12th century St Magnus Cathedral. I’m now on £17,000. We have very little disposable income and, because on Orkney winters are long and prices high, we live in borderline fuel poverty. There are only six hours of daylight in the depths of winter and our electricity bill is £2,000 a year. Solid fuel costs us £25 a week. When we made our lifestyle change we accepted that we would have to be more self-sufficient and spend less on clothes and nightlife and non-essentials. Prices are higher here because everything has to be brought across the water, and locally produced things tend to be high-end and more expensive. Yet I find it easier to live frugally here than in Edinburgh. It’s the Orcadian tradition to make do and mend. It was part of the deal that we would keep hens and grow vegetables and after five years of renting we bought a one-bedroom cottage for £120,000. It’s tiny. You can just about fit four people in the living room. But it has a third of an acre and 360° views over the Atlantic, the mainland mountains, the island and lochs. We make our own wine, cook meals from scratch, spending about £60 a week on ingredients, and go out for dinner only a couple of times a year, but our social life is better than it ever was in the city. In winter especially people will take a cake round to each other’s houses. The local hall does monthly quiz nights for £1.50 which includes a cup of tea and sandwiches, and I play in a folk band. I’m also chair of the Orcadian Storytelling Trust, organising an annual festival. As a storyteller and tourist guide I can earn an extra £500 to £1,000 a year. Holidays are a couple of visits a year to family on the mainland and we usually stay with them or in a tent. B&Bs or hotels are a last-night luxury. Our two cars are the biggest expenditure. They are essential because public transport is very limited and my commute to work is 20 miles each way. The mortgage repayments are £400 a month and council tax £1,300. I pay £20 for a monthly mobile phone package and we have a basic telephone and broadband deal. £40 a month goes to charity. I wish I understood more about money and how it works. I have two degrees and a management diploma and work a 40-hour week running almost all aspects of Orkney’s biggest tourist attraction. Public sector pay increases do not keep up with inflation so in real terms I am getting less each year and I worry about when I retire. I pay £100 a month into AVC pension contributions and put £300 a month into savings accounts. I’m not advocating communism but I have never understood why some jobs are worth 10 times more than others. I feel I should be earning more. I’d like a bigger house with an extra bedroom so we can have friends to stay and space for the hundreds of books I have in storage. And I’d love more land so we could start a smallholding. Having said that, our quality of life is very high if you love ancient monuments, fantastic scenery and wildlife, and a rich social and cultural life. I’m happier here than I’ve ever been anywhere.