Karren Brady is facing pressure to drop her weekly column with the Sun after writing that “malcontents and keyboard warriors” have undermined West Ham’s efforts to make improvements to the London Stadium. It is understood that West Ham’s vice-chairman has been repeatedly urged from within the club to end her association with the newspaper, amid weariness at the problems that some consider certain columns to have caused West Ham. As reported by the Guardian, according to a source remarks Brady made in an article last year scuppered a deal to sign Islam Slimani from Leicester City in January. Her latest comments have been met with a furious response from supporters. Brady received a vote of no confidence from the West Ham United Independent Supporters’ Association before Sunday’s game against Everton at the London Stadium. It has demanded that she does not write for the Sun any more. Passions were stirred when Brady made reference to the London Stadium’s problems in her review of the season on Saturday. West Ham have struggled to settle in their new ground since leaving Upton Park two years ago and supporters mounted angry protests at the club’s board during the home defeat by Burnley two months ago. “We have some problems at the London Stadium caused to a degree by the terms of our lease, which we are tackling, but also by malcontents and keyboard warriors,” Brady wrote. She did not respond when asked by the Guardian to whom she was referring. Nor did Brady or West Ham respond to a further request for comment. According to a source, her remark has not impressed senior figures at West Ham. However Brady has offered no indication that she will shelve the column, even though it appears to have caused friction inside and outside the club. Attempts to sign Slimani were hindered, according to a source, because Brady offended Leicester’s owners with comments about the club’s chairman, Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha. Although Brady and West Ham apologised, Leicester refused to consider a deal for Slimani in the last transfer window. The Algerian striker joiner Newcastle United on loan instead.