Like that mate you have from back home who never left town or quite got over their teenage years being the best of their life, The Inbetweeners has not aged well. Ten years on from its original broadcast on E4, the multiple award-winning show about idiotic sixth formers Will, Simon, Neil and Jay feels almost relic-like. It’s not just the boot-cut jeans, wet-look hair gel and Razorlight-featuring soundtrack that give it the feel of a bygone era. The super-charged lad banter that fills it now feels tiresome. A decade ago, its depictions of underage drinking, thwarted sexual urges, bad house parties, bravado, unrequited love and public embarrassments offered an unusually accurate picture of male teenage life. It succeeded in capturing those raging anxieties: from the fear of an in-school poo, to the wrath of bullies and the humiliation of rejection. It presented a world where A-levels, scoring alcohol and putting your hand down someone else’s trousers – or your own – were primary life goals. Across its three series, The Inbetweeners operated under the cover of the characters’ age and inexperience. The show got away with such crassness and puerility because it was supposed to be crass and puerile: these were children, fully loaded with ignorance, naivety and stupidity. It laughed at the pathetic wretchedness of their behaviour, poking particular fun at Jay’s lies about his sexual triumphs. It also knew how to craft a genuinely comic scene: Simon’s accidental exposure of his testicle on the runway of a school fashion show is base but undeniably funny. For all the vulgarity and insensitivity, the TV show was always redeemed by the setting and situation. Where The Inbetweeners truly jumped the shark was during its transition to the big screen, where its characters reached adulthood but the humour didn’t. Taking the tired format of a lads’ holiday, The Inbetweeners Movie (2011), sees the foursome decamp to Malia for a sort of millennial update on Kevin & Perry Go Large. Cue: slow-mo drinking scenes, cliched storylines, repetitive dialogue, the bantz meter cranked to full and the gang bumping into their old sixth-form head teacher being a party animal. By the time The Inbetweeners 2 (2014) found the group in Australia, the well was truly dry and any semblance of charm had vanished. While the TV show had been an exploration of childhood folly with viewers invited to laugh at the boys’ inexperience, The films became a celebration of a culture for which age and ignorance were no longer exempting factors. They embraced the sort of humour that the show initially seemed to mock. School playground behaviour is understandable in a school; if you throw it out into the real world with adults then it’s just bleak. The Inbetweeners was at its funniest when its characters were at their most innocent. A man in an England football shirt out on the piss in terrible bars, saying horrible, objectifying things about women is already too much of a depressing reality to make for a funny comic construct.