We’re just here for the football,” the Leeds United manager said after the first game of their short but controversial close-season tour of Myanmar. In front of a celebratory crowd of 15,000, overwhelmingly local but including a few dozen Leeds fans, Paul Heckingbottom refused to be drawn on the political row the tour has caused. “We got what we wanted out of it. We wanted a good game that was more about the occasion. We wanted to represent the club in the correct way, and to make sure that the people here represented the club well,” the Leeds manager said. Leeds lost the game 2-1, but the wider ramifications are harder to quantify. The club attracted significant criticism since it announced the two-match tour to Myanmar, as the country’s government and its military comes under widespread international criticism for its treatment of the Rohingya minority. An estimated 700,000 have crossed the border into Bangladesh since August, fleeing a military crackdown that the United Nations has called “ethnic cleansing”. After the tour was announced Labour’s shadow sports minister, Dr Rosena Allin-Khan, said the club was “morally corrupt” for choosing to visit a country that conducts “state-sponsored mass murder”. The Leeds United Supporters Trust called it a “strange and controversial” tour. Responding to the criticism the Leeds chairman, Andrea Radrizzani, published a statement acknowledging the “serious issues within the country” but said the tour represented a chance to have a positive impact on the local community. Fans from Myanmar attending the game on Wednesday expressed excitement about it and said it was a historic moment for the development of football in the country. “We really appreciate Leeds coming here” said Pyay Sone in a rooftop bar overlooking the 32,000-capacity Thuwunna Stadium before the match. “We know they faced some criticism, but we are really happy that a team like Leeds would come here. This country is about more than what is happening [in Rakhine State]. We don’t want to be seen like this. We are a football-crazy country. We are happy to have this team here.” A similar sentiment was expressed by many of the Leeds fans attending the game after their 5,600-mile journey. “We had heard the criticism, so we did our research and looked at the pros and cons,” said Nick Dunwell, who travelled with 20 other supporters. “We heard the stories, but since we have been here we’ve had no problems – except for the heat.” It was 33C in Yangon when the game kicked off and the Leeds players, who arrived the day after their final game of the Championship season, against Queens Park Rangers on Sunday, also appeared to struggle with the weather. The Leeds contingent were vociferous, but attempts to get a rendition of the club song, Marching on Together, going were drowned out by the home crowd. At the interval the Leeds fans’ biggest concern seemed to be getting hold of some beers at a stadium with an alcohol ban. The MNL side’s starting team included five Myanmar players and the rest came from Japan, Cameroon and Nigeria, among others. They took the lead on 22 minutes when Hanthawaddy United’s Ugandan midfielder Joseph Mpande bundled home a header. Four minutes later the Leeds striker Samuel Sáiz, captain for the night, converted a penalty, but Christopher Chizoba followed suit with the winner from the spot. Leeds will now face the Myanmar national team on Friday night in Mandalay. “I’m not too worried about the result,” said Roy Schofield, who had travelled from Yorkshire. “We’re just here for the experience.” The locals were also upbeat. “The Leeds players looked tired with the heat, but I’m pleased they came here,” said a fan, Maung Maung.