Whatever historians have to say about the last nine months in America, there’s no doubt they will say that they were, well, interesting. Not always in a good way, but that interest certainly provided the writers of Saturday Night Live with a lot of material: some weeks, you might say, it was basically writing itself. Herewith the best 10 sketches in the first full season of SNL of the Trump presidency (can I say that I hope it’s the last full Trump season? Because I do). Did you know you wanted to see Ben Stiller and Robert De Niro reunited? Neither did I, but playing Michael Cohen and Robert Mueller, reprising the famous lie detector scene, they’re perfect. “How’d you like that pee pee tape?” says De Niro, and the crowd goes wild. This is one of those back-of-the-show sketches that may have been deemed too weird for the folks who tune out after the first hour, but Cecily Strong really holds the floor as the tour guide in a lab where scientists have transplanted a dog’s head onto a human body – Sam Rockwell and Mikey Day are the men behind the science. SNL was a little slow to respond to the initial Harvey Weinstein revelations – they waited a week, and were roundly criticized in the press – but the Women’s Round Table went for the jugular with Kate McKinnon as returning Hollywood legend Debette Goldry: “Women being abused is Hollywood,” she says. It’s cathartic: the right level of pointed and a great showcase of the cast’s talented women. Mikey Day does a great party-boy Prince Harry, Tina Fey is wonderful as a posh pedophile aunt, but the costume department really won it with outfits that were accurate replicas of what the real-life players had worn at the wedding that very morning. How did they sew so swiftly? Game show sketches are a too-frequent fallback for SNL – often they’re same-y and feel dated – but Black Jeopardy, hosted by Kenan Thompson, featuring categories including ‘Grown Ass’, ‘Girl, Bye’ and ‘White People’, and with Chadwick Boseman as T’Challa, is solid gold satire. Sure to enter the library of enduring Christmas classics: a church play, three wise men in lab safety glasses, and a llama – an actual llama – with an inconvenient erection. The debut of Childish Gambino’s This is America made Donald Glover’s episode the standout of the season, but the music video parody of Migos – with Glover, Kenan Thompson and Chris Redd as the rappers – was brilliantly written and produced. A great turn from Cecily Strong as their therapist, too. Tiffany Haddish’s epsiode was one of the season’s best, and her turn as the Last Black Unicorn is at once surreal and acute, predicting a tragic future for Aidy Bryant’s frizzy-haired teen. As the season progressed and the situation in Washington became ever-crazier, cold opens were increasingly a parade of Trump and his henchpeople that could feel a bit samey. But when Stormy Daniels – the actual Stormy Daniels – appeared onscreen at the end of this one, it’s hard not to feel at least a little patriotic. Saoirse Ronan’s incredible work ethic made her episode one of the season’s standouts. The Aer Lingus sketch that drew ire from Eire is worth mentioning, but the Welcome to Hell video was the cherry on top: a bubblegum pop video about the sexual abuse of women. “My dad gave me a pink gun, so – there’s a lot there,” says Ronan, blinking in pigtails and lip gloss. More than eight million views on YouTube say: this struck a chord.