The sun is shining on the rear deck of Adam Weymouth’s barge, and the hawthorn along the banks of the river Lea is bright with new growth. But despite the natural beauty all around him in this pocket of London, he’s finding it hard to believe we can avert climate catastrophe: “It’s just really hard to give a fuck.” “Living where we do, even with the best will in the world and being as informed as you could be, nature is incredibly abstract,” Weymouth says. “When the shit hits the fan, we’re going to turn up the air conditioning. The bread might get a bit more expensive, but we’ll be all right for quite a while.” This disconnect between our comfortable urban existence and the havoc it is wreaking on the environment propelled Weymouth into the far north of the Americas to paddle 2,000 miles through the wilderness by canoe on the trail of the salmon who swim through his lyrical debut book, Kings of the Yukon. “The Arctic is heating twice as fast as other places on the planet, and those changes are much more obvious,” he says. “You’ll meet a lot of people in Alaska who question why climate change is happening, but you won’t meet anyone who believes the climate is not changing, because it’s very manifest.” Alaska is also home to the most productive oilfield in America, Weymouth says, with few alternative sources of income: “It’s a very stark way of looking at what feels much more obscured in London.” Every spring the king salmon – the biggest of the five species of Pacific salmon – swim up the Yukon to spawn in the waters of their birth. But a deadly mixture of ocean warming, early melts and commercial fishing has sent numbers crashing. Weymouth set out from the furthest end of their journey, Canada’s McNeil Lake, heading down towards the sea and the approaching salmon over tumbling rapids and winding flats, past spruce forests and grizzly bears. On the way he met First Nations elders who are wrestling with decisions about how many of the threatened fish they should catch, settlers from Maryland who are rebuilding after catastrophic floods and biologists struggling to understand the king salmon’s precipitous decline. The global shifts driving all these changes are all too familiar for Weymouth. Born in Salisbury in 1984, he spent most of his 20s as an environmental activist, working with groups like Plane Stupid. In 2009, a plan to shut down the coal-fired power station at Ratcliffe-on-Soar saw him arrested alongside 113 others. His conviction for conspiracy to commit aggravated trespass was quashed two years later, after it emerged the prosecution had failed to disclose evidence from the undercover policeman Mark Kennedy, but he was already beginning to move away from direct action. “It felt like really important work,” Weymouth says, “but it was only nourishing one part of what I wanted to be doing. The writing and the thinking and the other parts of why I’d become interested in human ecology and the environment were falling by the wayside.” Not only did campaigning take up a huge amount of his time and energy, it was emotionally draining. “There’s a real exhausting cynicism about the world and its future that people almost get high on. It’s like a relationship that’s turned toxic – it’s hard to see any joy in it any more.” We’ve lost 50% of our species in 100 years – will it just be that this is the baseline we’d like to preserve? A narrowboat in London was a halfway house from which Weymouth could launch into freelance journalism, a route which saw him travel to Alaska in 2013, looking for stories about natural resources. He wound up reporting on the trial of 23 Yu’pik fishermen who had defied a ban on catching king salmon. As the salmon population crashed and restrictions were extended to cover the whole of the Yukon for the first time, Weymouth hatched a plan to travel the length of the river by canoe, charting how the changes in the environment are affecting the fish and the people who depend on them. This slow journey, always coming from the nearest town upriver and heading to the next downstream, gave Weymouth a way of making connections with the people he met along the way, and helped break down barriers to communication. “There isn’t a fantastic relationship between white people and indigenous people in the north of Canada and Alaska,” he says, “for very good reasons. Generally, the white people turning up are teachers or cops or some sort of government official, and generally with some sort of authority they’re quite keen on using.” As he paddled down towards the sea, Weymouth discovered the fate of the king salmon in Alaska is “very much in the balance”. “What really seems to have been affected at the moment is the salmon’s ability to deal with other issues [like climate change], because the fish have got a lot smaller,” he says. “If people can make decisions to build up the genetic stock and get larger salmon to lay more eggs, then hopefully they can weather the other changes that are happening.” But it could take 50 or 100 years of strict quotas or complete bans for the population to recover, long enough to have a devastating impact on the communities around the river and on indigenous cultures that have been living with the salmon for thousands of years. The situation for the salmon may be critical, Weymouth says, but alongside the modern loss of biological diversity is also an extinction of culture that has received much less attention. “Why should people not be part of that ecosystem, why is the culture not part of what we’re trying to value and keep?” A lot of British nature writing seems “deliberately apolitical”, he says. “If people are brought in at all, it might be 18th-century poets who might have written about the landscape, rather than the people who were cleared off it or the people trying to make a living on it now.” The elegiac tone that fills Kings of the Yukon, the sorrow at the loss of culture and nature in the wilderness, is an unavoidable reflection of life in the 21st century. “How will we feel the lack?” Weymouth asks. “We’ve lost 50% of our species in 100 years – will it just be that this is the baseline we’d like to preserve?” There is beauty to be found even in the heart of the city, he says, but positive signs such as the recent upsurge of interest in plastics and veganism seem like fleeting glints against a background of almost overwhelming gloom. “Finding a balance between the joy and that despair is very important,” he says. He lifts his gaze to the sunshine rippling across the glinting surface of the canal. “It’s a very easy way to burn yourself out, just thinking that everything is fucked.”