Hi Jean, Been a nice date. Like to do it again. Does one kiss, or not kiss, to make a second time possible? (Good luck answering THAT one. Lol.) E. Hi E, The best way of guaranteeing a second date comes down not to whether or not you kiss someone, but whether or not you tell them that you’ve had a nice time and ask them to go on another date with you. But if you’re hesitating over whether or not you should kiss someone at the end of a date, just say: “May I kiss you?” Some months ago I had a conversation with a young man who believed this to be a passion-killer. He had heard rumors that women don’t like to be asked for permission to be kissed because it demonstrates some kind of weakness on the part of the person who asks. This is not true. If you ask someone permission for a kiss and they want to kiss you, they’re not going to reject you because you asked first, even if they didn’t think it was necessary for you to ask. Sure, there’s also a chance that they’ll say no, and that might be embarrassing. But if you kiss a person who doesn’t want to be kissed, that’s sexual assault. Not sexually assaulting the people we date should be collectively understood as more important than saving ourselves potential embarrassment. People who don’t understand this should stay home on their own. JHE ••• Dear Jean, I am attracted to a woman at the department next door at work. I enjoy talking to her (and she seems to enjoy talking to me) but I don’t know how to flirt or ask her out without making her uncomfortable if she’s not romantically interested in me. So far I have complimented her (such as on her choice of clothes) and socialized with her in a group at lunch a few times, but I don’t know how to move forward. I am a man and a few years older than her, and she started at our company about six months ago while I have worked there for several years. Yours sincerely, F Hi F, The first question I have for anyone who is interested in dating a colleague is: do you value the possibility of romance with this person more than you value your job? It’s true that many people meet partners through work, but it’s also true that many people have to leave jobs – whether they choose to or get fired – because of an office romance that doesn’t work out. This might be a good time to review your company’s HR policy around dating within the office. If you do decide that this is worth pursuing: it’s great that you’re concerned about doing anything that’s unwelcome to the woman you’re interested in. Stick with that strategy. It means that you’re considering her feelings and you’re considering the risk of creating an environment at work that is uncomfortable for her. (On that note, I’d be careful about complimenting her choice of clothing: if you are not close friends it could be interpreted as crossing a professional line, especially if you do it frequently, even if with the kindest intention.) In a world of swipe-centered dating it sometimes seems that if something romantic doesn’t work immediately, then it’s never going to work. But in a scenario where your job could be at stake, it’s wise to take a slow, steady approach to friendship before you try to move towards something romantic. Maybe you could organize an outing after work or on the weekend with the group you lunch with in order to spend time with her and others in a more relaxed setting before asking for a drink on her own. It might also be worth asking one of those mutual friends, in confidence, for their opinion on whether she seems interested in you. If you don’t feel confident that you will be able to handle your future professional relationship if the woman you’re interested in turns you down, then do not ask her out, for the sake of her career and yours. There are plenty of other fish in seas that you don’t work in! JHE