Meghan Markle’s father has been subjected to “atrocious and intrusive” media attention, her half-sister has claimed following reports he has pulled out of attending Saturday’s royal wedding. Kensington Palace has called for “understanding and respect” to be extended to Thomas Markle Sr, 73, who was due to walk his daughter down the aisle, but has reportedly decided to stay away amid controversy that he cooperated over “staged” photographs of himself preparing for the event. It has also been claimed he suffered a heart attack last week. Markle, who is due to marry Prince Harry at St George’s Chapel at Windsor Castle, is understood to be extremely distressed and concerned about her father’s wellbeing but hoping he can be persuaded to change his mind. US celebrity website TMZ reported on Monday that Markle Sr, a retired TV lighting director now living in Mexico, decided not to attend “because he doesn’t want to embarrass the royal family or his daughter”. The claim appeared to be confirmed by Kensington Palace which said: “This is a deeply personal moment for Ms Markle in the days before her wedding. She and Prince Harry ask again for understanding and respect to be extended to Mr Markle in this difficult situation.” Samantha Markle, his daughter from his first marriage, defended their father saying he was pressured into a “dangerous situation” after being forced into the public eye. She told Good Morning Britain: “He was living a very quiet peaceful life, not as a recluse. He’s a very intelligent man, he’s been gregarious and worked in entertainment for 40 years.” She said: “[He] called me panicking on the freeway because he’s in a dangerous situation being followed by seven or eight cars. I think there have been examples in history of how dangerous that can be.” Referring to paparazzi attention, she added: “So he was so stressed out they rented the house next to him in Mexico, four or five of them, he can’t open his blinds, he can’t go anywhere without being followed and really it’s quite atrocious and intrusive and I think it’s highly unethical.” Of their father’s health, she said: “He was really having heart pains and suffered a heart attack, it was an unbelievable amount of stress.” It was unclear if Markle Sr had received medical treatment or diagnosis for chest pains. Samantha Markle said: “As far as whether or not he had had a heart attack, people have had heart attacks they didn’t know they’d had until they had an ECG (electrocardiogram). They’re not always that loud. They’re not always that dramatic. For him that was the case.” News about his health followed a report in the Mail on Sunday that Markle Sr had colluded with a photo agency to stage photographs of him being measured for a suit, working out and looking at internet reports about his daughter’s wedding. TMZ reported that he “figured there was no harm in it and it would help recast his image”, and this was his motivation rather then money. He had turned down money for interviews, TMZ said. Samantha Markle said her father’s mistake was to not give an interview to the media, therefore allowing certain elements to “absolutely rake him over the coals” and falsely portray him.