While some wealthy benefactors to Israel choose to plant forests, build scenic promenades or put their names on hospitals, Sylvan Adams loves cycling so much he seed-funded some cycleways to help transform Tel Aviv into the “Amsterdam of the Middle East”. The Canadian real-estate billionaire also supplied cash to build a new velodrome – the first in the Middle East – and created a professional Israeli cycling team. He also stumped up some of the £9m fee for staging the first three stages of the 101st Giro d’Italia in Israel, which kicked off yesterday. But will bringing a Grand Tour to Israel get people on bikes? “It’s just one of the ways to increase cycling awareness in Israel,” said the 59-year-old Adams, who was once one of the top masters road and track cyclists in the world, and emigrated from Canada to Israel two years ago. Infrastructure will also be key, he agrees. He has been working through the Jewish National Fund to expand Tel Aviv’s bike lanes. The Sylvan Adams Cycling Network is not as dense as a typical Dutch network, but Rome wasn’t built in a day, said Adams. “Tel Aviv has historically been a car-centred city, but it suffers from traffic congestion and there’s nowhere to park, just like many other large cities. Cycling is one of the solutions. In the 1950’s, Amsterdam was a car-centred city, until civic officials decided to invest heavily in cycling infrastructure and create a bicycle friendly road network. We plan to do the same in Israel’s metropolis of Tel Aviv.” He added: “Petach Tikva is just eight kilometres from the heart of Tel Aviv yet it can sometimes take over an hour to drive that distance. It takes 20 to 30 minutes to cycle it,” he said. Ron Huldai, Tel Aviv’s mayor since 1998, is on side with the plans, said Adams. Tel Aviv may be slowly becoming a cycling Mecca – of sorts – but what about Jerusalem? Not so much. Motor traffic is chronically bad, and there are precious few cycleways. Those that exist are recreational rather than being placed beside the congested main roads. However, there are plenty of cheap Chinese e-bikes dotted around, with Palestinians just as likely to ride them as Ultra Orthodox Jews. This amount of cycle use is by no means huge, but it’s a sea change from when I was last in Israel. I lived here in the mid-1980s, having cycled from the UK, planning to stay a week but ending up staying for a year. For six months I lived with Chassidic Jews in the Old City (I’m not Jewish) and for another six I lived in the new city with an Israeli mathematician and his girlfriend. I met Gil Bor on the Mount of Olives and we became instant friends, bonding over bikes. We both did double-takes – meeting another cyclist in Jerusalem at that time was unusual enough for us to jam on brakes to talk. Gil was on his touring bike when we met but, when I went home with him that night, I discovered he had a mountain bike, too. I had never seen one in the flesh. He had imported the first in Israel (it was too big for me but I tried it anyway and promptly crashed it because I wasn’t used to powerful brakes). I have fond memories of cycle touring with Gil in the West Bank, visiting Arab villages and being plied with mint tea. A few years after the first intifida, it became harder to cycle around with such freedom. I next visited during the first Gulf War in 1991, when the first Scud missiles were starting to land and there were fears that Saddam Hussein had equipped them with chemical warheads. I had a war correspondent’s press pass and bumped into Israel’s then prime minister, the diminutive Yitzhak Shamir, but I was in the country to research the Berlitz Discover Guide to Israel. When the air-raid sirens went off I took to the streets on a hired bike, riding in perfect safety because folks had hurried to underground shelters, and there was no motor traffic whatsoever. Thirty-nine Scud missiles landed in Israel during the five-and-a-half weeks of the war. I figured none would hit me. Jerusalem was the perfect cycling city when there were no pesky cars about, and if the municipality truly wants to encourage cycling after the Giro ships off to Italy after its three days in Israel, then car use will have to be restrained. Adams agrees that if his dream of making Israel as bike friendly as the Netherlands is to come true there needs to be a major change in Israel’s cycling culture. “Cycling is already the fastest growing recreational sport in Israel, and bringing the Giro Big Start here and having the first velodrome in the Middle East are building blocks to greatly expand the sport. But we also have perfect weather for cycling commuting 12 months a year, and by creating the necessary infrastructure for safe riding, I am sure we can become the Amsterdam of the Middle East, which will be ecologically friendly, take cars off the road, save travel times, and promote healthy physical activity.”