Attention America: it’s the grand final of the Eurovision song contest on Saturday. Shockingly, many Americans have no idea this momentous event is happening. I am here to rectify this and make your world a little more sparkly by introducing you to what may well be the greatest show on earth. Eurovision, which this year takes place in the Portuguese capital of Lisbon, is a song contest between European countries. However, it’s far more than that: it’s often known as the “Gay World Cup”. Or, to put it in more American terms, the Super Bowl of Camp. It’s flamboyant, kitsch, and filled with low-level political feuding. It’s like American Idol crossed with RuPaul’s Drag Race crossed with Survivor. Sprinkled with LSD. Not only is Eurovision good fun to watch, it has also just been scientifically proven to be good for your health. Well, sort of. New research led by Filippos Filippidis, a lecturer in public health at Imperial College London, suggests that competing in the competition is associated with higher life satisfaction among the population of a country. Which is good news for the 26 European countries taking part on Saturday. The study, published in BMC Public Health, was based on survey data on life satisfaction from 33 European countries, and the paper is peppered with lyrics from terrible Eurovision songs. It may well be the only scientific research study to include the line “I look over all the maps trying to escape ’cause I’m tired of your sweet cheesecake” (a lyric from Belarus’s 2014 entry). The current strained political climate in America means the country could certainly do with a little lift in life satisfaction and a respite from Trump Anxiety Disorder at the moment. Eurovision is just what the country needs. It should join immediately. Now, readers with a keen sense of geography may protest that America cannot join because it is not in Europe. However, it should be said that the “Euro”-ness of the contest is very elastic. Israel and Australia are both contestants. Morocco also entered in 1980 but came second-to-last and decided to never return. In a world increasingly defined by nationalism and border walls, Eurovision builds melodious bridges. It truly is a beautiful thing. There are also signs that an American entry into Eurovision may not be such a distant possibility. Slowly but surely, the song contest is starting to win over the hearts and minds of America. In 2016 it was broadcast live in America for the first time, on Logo TV, and Justin Timberlake performed during the interval show. Only 52,000 viewers tuned in that year, but that jumped to 64,000 in 2017. Proof that the Gay Agenda is working! There have also been rumours that America may soon get a spinoff of the song contest. Presumably rather than countries battling it out, American states would compete against each other. Rather than having its own spinoff, however, America really should just join the original Eurovision. What’s more, Trump should host. It’s the perfect job for him really, combining all of his skills. He gets to make a spectacle of himself on the world stage while belittling other countries. It’s perfect. Eurovision will be broadcast at 15.00 ET on Logo TV. It should also be airing at any self-respecting gay bar.