A somewhat contrite and possibly even cowed Max Verstappen may have been expected to emerge in the paddock for this weekend’s Spanish Grand Prix. The young Dutchman’s poor start to the season reached its nadir when he crashed into his Red Bull team-mate, Daniel Ricciardo, at the last round in Baku, but Verstappen faced down the scrutiny with a smile at the Circuit de Catalunya. However, if he is to make good on the promise of his prodigious talent, there is some serious work to be done. Verstappen and Ricciardo had been wheel to wheel for much of the race in Azerbaijan until the pair clashed on lap 40 as the Australian attempted to pass. The stewards deemed both were to blame, a view with which the team and drivers concurred. Verstappen had moved twice in the braking area but the gap Ricciardo went for was not there. Verstappen’s uncompromising style has attracted considerable criticism and he caught another backlash after Baku, but in Barcelona he was riding it out with good humour. Would he do anything differently? “No I think we will crash in every single race,” he replied with a laugh. “You need everyone to crash with your team-mates.” Of course they would try not to repeat the incident which left the team Red Bull team furious, and both drivers delivered personal apologies to the workforce in Milton Keynes. Red Bull have been clear such an incident is unacceptable within the boundaries set in their commitment to letting their drivers race, while insisting there is “no bad blood” between the drivers. “We’ll let them continue racing,” the Red Bull adviser Helmut Marko told Auto Bild. “However, we will tell the race engineers in the future that they will have to intervene when we see that it could get out of hand.” But for Verstappen, it was a salutary reminder that he still has some way to go before he is the finished Formula One article. Now in his fourth season in F1 at 20 years old, there has been time enough for the errors of inexperience to be a thing of the past, yet this year he has been far from exemplary. He is eighth in the drivers’ standings, and is without a podium finish after four races. In Australia, frustrated at losing a place to Kevin Magnussen, he was excessively zealous in trying to come back and went over a kerb, which damaged the floor of the car and contributed to a later spin. A crash in qualifying in Bahrain followed and then an ambitious attempt to pass Lewis Hamilton led to the puncture that ended his race. In China, again a clumsy charge on Sebastian Vettel cost both drivers and left Verstappen looking amateurish as Ricciardo executed a magnificent series of passes to secure the win. Verstappen has said repeatedly that his father, Jos, is his harshest critic and the former F1 driver told his son after China: “The overtake on Vettel really wasn’t on. That wasn’t possible. It was an error of judgment. In some circumstances Max just has to think more.” Verstappen recorded his first grand prix victory here in Spain on his debut for Red Bull in 2016 with a superlative drive that confirmed the talent the team had identified when promoting him from sister squad Toro Rosso, but two years on he still has considerable fine honing to do. Red Bull were under the cosh in grid terms but Verstappen has put himself under pressure as well, trying too hard, to do too much, too often. The team principal, Christian Horner, said: “Max’s hunger and determination has hurt him this year, because each grand prix there’s been an incident or a mistake.” Horner was optimistic, however, that his driver would come through it, just as Vettel did after a similar start with the team. “Ultimately, he will emerge from the other side of this,” added Horner. “The most important thing is to learn from mistakes. The start of this season has been tough for him. In many cases it’s looked like he’s overeager.” Red Bull have staked a lot on the youngster, signing him last year until the end of 2020. However much he has their sympathy now, he must show some composure – and he knows it. “I have good people around me so I always have advice,” he said in Barcelona. “A lot of people can talk to me but it’s me of course who still has to take that to the track and to perform.”