In literature, the topic of appropriation has been constantly debated, turned over and debated again. But in journalism, it’s an undisputed given. As a reporter, it’s your job to tell the stories of people often radically different from you, and to assume the voice of authority, of knowingness, of supposed objectivity. But as with most things, the roots of what we as journalists do are problematic. I’ve been a foreign correspondent for most of my career. When I first began working in east Africa, in Uganda, right out of college, people – other correspondents, my subjects – were always surprised I was there to report, since I was the only black woman in the press corps who wasn’t Ugandan. That’s partly because foreign correspondence began as a colonial enterprise, explaining the so-called others to the so-called us, and women of colour were always the subjects, never the storytellers. • Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon In places like the United States, there’s a renewed interest in reporting on communities that have been previously unexplored in depth: racial, ethnic or religious groups living on the margins, poor people, immigrants, rural people. But there’s still an uneasy framing of the unbalanced power dynamic between a journalist and her subject. There are few phrases I cringe at more than “giving voice” or “bearing witness”, as if journalists are Christopher Columbus on his ship heroically “discovering” America. Even if they are off the radar of the west or of mainstream America, these places have their own agency, and our showing up to document what is going on is not the first time the people there have grappled with the issues affecting them. Yet reporters are too often regarded as immediate experts or, worse, saviours. Subjects from marginalised communities are too often seen as passive, people whom things happen to or flattened, devoid of nuance. But whether we’re talking about the supposed constant bleakness of the Central African Republic, as Nick Kristof recently did in the New York Times, or the seemingly all-white, working-class residents of small-town America, as so many reporters did during the last US presidential election, that frame is often far from the truth. And so I think it’s time for another reckoning over how to write about those less powerful, those with less currency – about how we do our work, about what we consider right and wrong when it comes to the ways in which we do it, and what we owe to the people whose stories we take. What if we thought of our work partly as a way to justify why we have the privilege of appropriating someone else’s story in the first place, a way to prove our worthiness as the storyteller? Which would then lead us to ask how we can respect, dignify and do justice to a voice, to a life. Which would then probably lead us to wonder sometimes if we are the right person to tell a story at all, or if someone else could do it better. What would some possible differences look like in practice? Well, what about not being allowed to write a story about a place or a community without consulting and quoting analysts and observers from that very place or community? Throughout my career, I’ve always wondered why the most-quoted experts on Africa seem to be based in southern California. You would think there were no universities and thinktanks on the entire continent. Another simple standard we could use: being available to engage with feedback after the story runs, recognising that especially when we write longform stories and books, and take so much from our subjects, we owe something to them: not only transparency but also accountability. And what I think is the most needed shift: recognising, accepting that your perspective is not the only one capable of objectivity – that there are many objective truths, and race, nationality, religion and gender don’t indicate any more bias or any greater subjectivity than what you hold. For so long, being white and male was regarded as the ultimate objective, authoritative perspective – but from the #MeToo reckoning, when we discovered some of the white men narrating the American story were guilty of serial abuses against women, to flawed reporting on US police brutality, where reporters have cast moral judgement on black victims, we know that this is not true. In the American south, where I am spending time reporting [for] my next book, I am again interacting with communities on the margins, poor people, rural people, anti-government people. And even though I am from this place, I am still an interloper of sorts, one who will have to constantly wrestle with my own preconceived notions and to try to not lose sight of my subjects’ humanity and complexities. People down there are, at this point, wary of outsiders, wary of the media, wary of an authority that claims to care about them; they feel powerless, in other words. I can’t say that I blame them. The deep south is a place that we’re still allowed to get wrong, to paint in broad strokes and to rely on oversimplified terms like “Trump country”. I know that because I grew up there, but it’s also our job as writers to figure out the many sides to a place by digging deeper, spending more time and getting it right. I suppose that I think about all this a lot because I am, at my core, a descendant of traumatised colonial subjects. And the trauma lives on. In Uganda, I straddled the line of being a foreigner, a foreign correspondent but also being black, being African and in some crucial ways more similar to the natives than my fellow journalists. I was never fully comfortable. But we should never be fully comfortable, we should always feel a little ill at ease, because it means we’re still wrestling with the uneasiness of what we do. For me, that meant constantly being aware that, but for the grace of fate, I would be the subject, the constantly observed and often misunderstood, a woman in my mother’s native Delta state, or in Lagos, my father’s hometown, being described and dissected by the curious foreign writer. Maybe I would be a journalist, too, but, still, to the west, always a subject. How do we learn new ways of being and interacting in the world and unlearn old ways? We have to keep each other accountable, even if it’s awkward or uncomfortable. I want us to take stands: say no to exploitative assignments, refuse to work for publications that don’t prioritise telling nuanced stories of marginalised people and places, or that don’t employ writers and editors from those same backgrounds. That could be one way to use our power responsibly and ethically. To take care and be mindful that our own position as storyteller could be reversed but for the grace of circumstance. • Alexis Okeowo is discussing her most recent book, A Moonless, Starless Sky, at the Sydney writers’ festival on Sunday, 6 May