Prep 20 minServes 4 Juice of 1-2 lemons10 ripe cherry tomatoes, deseeded and juice kept1 garlic clove, lightly crushed½ small red onion or 1 shallot, thinly sliced 2 spring onions1 bunch radishes, cut in to eighths¼ small white cabbage, finely shredded⅛ red cabbage, finely shredded1-2 chillies, finely chopped ⅓ cucumber, deseeded and julienned (skin left on)2-3 large handfuls flat-leaf parsley, chopped2 handfuls fresh mint, chopped1 large pinch pul biber (Turkish chilli flakes) Salt and black pepper To serve3 tbsp Greek yoghurt1 tbsp harissa1 tbsp pistachios, chopped First juice the lemons, mix with the juice from the cherry tomatoes and the garlic and set aside. Combine all the vegetables in a bowl and refrigerate. Five minutes before serving add the herbs, chilli, seasoning and lemon juice mix to taste. If you add the salt and lemon too early you’ll end up with a salad that’s far too wet and lacks crunch. Serve the yoghurt, harissa and pistachios on the side.By Freddy Bird, chef-patron of The Lido in Bristol and Thames Lido in Reading. Prep 15 minCook 5 minServes 4-6 200g green beans400g sugar snap peas200g mangetout1 little gem lettuce, cut in half and thinly sliced3 spring onions, thinly sliced5 or 6 stems mint, leaves picked and finely shredded3 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil1 good pinch saltJuice of 1 lemon Fill your largest pan with salted water and bring it to a boil. Meanwhile, cut the woody tops off the green beans (and the tails if you want to). Once the water is at a rapid boil, add the green beans, cook for two minutes then add the sugar snap peas. A minute later, add the mangetout, cook for a minute, then add the lettuce and spring onions. Cook for 30 seconds, then drain well. Return the drained greens to the saucepan and add the mint, oil and salt. Gently stir so that the mint and liquids are evenly spread, then serve straight from the pan or decant into a serving dish. Add the lemon juice and serve.From On the Side by Ed Smith (Bloomsbury) Prep 10 minCook 1 hr 30 minServes 6 2 bunches spring onionsOlive oil750g new potatoesSalt and black pepper75g salted butter, cubed20g dill, fronds and stems finely chopped2 large garlic cloves, crushed150g raw fresh peas Heat a griddle pan or frying pan over a high heat, and the oven to 220C/425F/gas 7. Line a baking tray with baking paper. Bring a saucepan of water to a boil over a medium-high heat and blanch the spring onions for two minutes, then drain on kitchen paper. Drizzle the spring onions with a little oil and put them on the hot griddle pan. Sear them for a couple of minutes on each side until they are charred, then take them off the heat and set aside. Put the whole potatoes on to the prepared baking tray, drizzle generously with olive oil and season. Using your hands, toss the potatoes to coat them in the oil and seasoning. Roast for 30-40 minutes (depending on the size of the potatoes) or until they are cooked through. Put the potatoes in a mixing bowl with the butter. Using a fork, roughly crush the potatoes without mashing them to a puree. Add the dill, garlic and peas and gently fold them in. Add a little more salt and pepper to taste and a drizzle of olive oil. Cut each of the spring onions in half, fold them into the crushed potatoes and serve at once.From Sirocco: Fabulous Flavours from the East by Sabrina Ghayour (Mitchell Beazley) Prep 10 minCook 1 hr 30 minServes 4 2 litres ham stock2 bay leaves250g black-eyed beans, soaked overnight150g long-grain rice 50g unsalted butter50g bacon fat or lard100g country ham trimmings or serrano ham, finely diced1 small onion, finely diced2 garlic cloves, finely chopped1 celery stalk, finely diced1 small red pepper, finely diced ¼ tsp chilli flakes 1 jalapeño, finely dicedJuice of 1 lemonTabascoSalt and black pepper Put the stock and bay leaves into a pan, bring to a boil and add the drained beans. Simmer until tender – about an hour – then strain and chill in the fridge, reserving the cooking liquid. Bring the cooking liquid back to the boil, add the rice and cook for 10 minutes, or until tender. Drain the rice and chill. Melt the butter and lard in a frying pan, add the ham, onion, garlic, celery and red pepper and cook gently until tender but not coloured. Stir in the chilli flakes and jalapeño and cook for two minutes. Combine this mixture with the beans and rice. Season to taste with the lemon juice, Tabasco and salt and pepper.From Deep South: New Southern Cooking by Brad McDonald (Quadrille) Prep 15 minCook 40 minServes 4-6 4 sweetcorn cobs 50ml olive oil 1 large onion, finely chopped 1 garlic clove, crushed 6 sprigs thyme ½ tsp cumin seeds 150ml dry white wine 250ml chicken or veg stock Salt and black pepper Stand each cob upright on a board and cut the sides downwards with a sharp knife to remove the kernels. Heat the olive oil in a small, heavy-based saucepan and saute the onion and garlic until lightly caramelised. Add the sweetcorn, thyme and cumin to the pan and saute for several minutes, until the ingredients start to catch on the pan base. Pour in the wine and stock, reduce the heat and simmer for 20-30 minutes, stirring occasionally, until the corn is tender. Discard the thyme sprigs and set aside a large spoonful of corn. Blend the remaining amount for two minutes. Pass through a sieve, mix with the saved corn and season well.Recipe by Jane Baxter, chef/co-owner Wild Artichokes, Devon; wildartichokes.co.uk Prep 15 minCook 20 minServes 4 2 small green cabbages, quartered from the top into four wedges 150ml extra-virgin olive oil, plus more for drizzlingSalt and black pepper60ml cider vinegar1 tbsp dijon mustard1 tbsp honey70g crumbly blue cheese (such as Roquefort)150g yellow or orange cherry tomatoes, halved140-170g smoked bacon, cooked and crumbled6 to 8 radishes, thinly sliced 1 bunch chives, cut into 1cm lengths Quarter each cabbage into four fat wedges, keeping the core intact to keep it together on the grill. In a large bowl, drizzle the cabbages with enough olive oil to lightly coat, season generously, and gently toss to combine. Prepare a charcoal grill or barbecue for two-zone cooking and build a medium-high flame, or heat a gas grill to high. Carefully wipe the heated grates with a lightly oiled paper towel. Using a grill brush, scrape the grill grates clean, then carefully wipe with a lightly oiled towel again. Grill the cabbage wedges over a direct heat until charred on all sides – four to six minutes. Transfer to a cooler portion of the grill and cook until the interior has softened but still has a bit of crunch – five to six minutes more. Use a paring knife to test doneness. When cooked, transfer to a plate and leave to cool while you make the dressing. In a bowl, whisk together the vinegar, dijon, honey, a half-teaspoon of salt and plenty of pepper. Whisk in 150ml olive oil until the mixture has emulsified, then stir in the blue cheese. Drizzle the dressing over the cabbage wedges and top with the cherry tomatoes, bacon, radishes and chives.From Food52 Any Night Grilling by Paula Disbrowe (Random House)