England’s bold new era proved something of a damp squib after a limp batting performance on day one at Lord’s left them facing an uphill battle in the first Test with Pakistan. There was one negative for Pakistan, though, as they were spoken to by the ICC anti-corruption officer after a couple of their players were spotted wearing what appeared to be smart watches out in the middle. Joe Root, the England captain who has called on his players to up the ante after a poor winter, was as culpable as any of the batsmen with a loose drive as he went for four; their sub-par 184 all out that followed was compounded when the tourists reached 50 for one in reply. Not since 1955 against South Africa have England won the toss at Lord’s and returned a lower total batting first – from 133 all out they went on to win by 71 runs. Alastair Cook, who top-scored with 70, is now hoping for a similar turnaround. Reflecting on a collapse that began from 149 for four and saw Mohammad Abbas and Hasan Ali share eight wickets, the former captain said: “We scrapped hard and knew the first two hours would be tough. It’s frustrating, we needed a lower-order partnership and 270/280 changes the day. [The wicket] did more than we expected. It did swing and nip all day. But if bowlers missed lengths or lines, you could score. “Pakistan bowled good lines and lengths and got their rewards. It could be one of those first innings plays fourth-innings matches. Or I could be totally wrong. They gutsed it out well but their 50 for one could be 80 for four, 120 for seven and the game changes.” On the dismissal of Root, who has returned to No 3, Cook added: “We’ve all played a bad shot and will play another; as a batter you don’t mean to nick it. Sometimes you have to hold your hands up and say ‘bad shot’. But the bloke averages 50 and is a world-class player, so we don’t need to worry. If he scores 150 in the second innings it doesn’t matter, does it?” While there was no suggestion of any wrongdoing by Pakistan, an ICC spokesman told ESPNcricinfo: “Apple watches in any way connected to a phone/Wifi or in any way capable of receiving comms such as messages, are not allowed. In effect, it is considered a phone unless ‘disabled’ and just a watch.” Hasan, who took a career-best four for 51, added: “Yes, the anti-corruption officer came to us and told us this is not allowed, so nobody will wear it again. I don’t know who was wearing one.”