‘Don’t put it in the fridge” is something you are told when you buy mozzarella in Italy. Leave it in its plastic bag surrounded by the cloudy siero (whey), at room temperature, until you are ready to eat it. Placed on a chilly shelf, mozzarella is like an inadequately dressed person on a cold day: it braces and seizes up, losing its soft, velvety texture and, like a cold tomato, doesn’t taste of much. Do put mozzarella in the fridge, however, if you are going to cook with it. The seizing-up and drying-out is exactly what you want for an aubergine parmigiana or baked pasta, the slightly drier slices or cubes not weeping liquid the way they would if the mozzarella was spankingly fresh. Once upon a time, all mozzarella was di bufala, made from the milk of the buffalos that have grazed on the pastures of Campania – the southern region of which Naples is capital – since the ninth century. Buffalo milk has a higher fat content than cow’s, so produces creamier, more fragrant mozzarella, managing to be both sweet and decidedly savoury. Growing popularity and demand for mozzarella throughout Italy in the 19th century, and then the world, meant people began making it with cow’s milk, or with a mixture of milks, but there was little differentiation – every stretched cheese simply became “mozzarella”. Classification has helped, the protecting DOP means it must state origin and whether it is di bufala, a mix, or cow’s milk (which is rightly known as fior di latte and can be extremely good). If you live in Campania and have an abundance of mozzarella di bufala, you might well cook with it, but even in nearby Rome, I rarely do: mozzarella di bufala is a prize and to be eaten just so – possibly with tomato and basil; an anchovy maybe. For cooking, mixed milk or fior di latte is fine: it, too, is best left in the fridge for a day or two to dry out a little. Today’s recipe is another from Oretta Zanini de Vita, a weekday dinner dish she calls gratin alla Sorrentina, coming from the Sorrento region of Campania. It is the simplest of the baked pasta family; the butter and cheese sauce is created on the surface of al dente pasta in the pan, then tipped into a dish and baked. It is neither creamy nor gloopy, rather gently flavoured and crisp on top. Plainly good. Oretta is quite bossy – which I like – and says you shouldn’t add anything. Sometimes I listen, sometimes I don’t, adding more cheese, peas, hard-boiled egg (my Sicilian partner Vincenzo would add them to every baked pasta if he could), and a big spoonful of mascarpone. Boil 500g pasta in salted water – fusilli is ideal – until al dente, then drain. Put the pasta back in the hot, empty pan with 75g room-temperature butter, 400g small-diced mozzarella, 75g grated pecorino or parmesan, (or a mix of the two) and a few good grinds of black pepper, then stir over a low flame until the mozzarella is melting and pulling into strings. Now tip everything into a buttered ovenproof dish, sprinkle the top with another handful of grated pecorino and some breadcrumbs, then dot generously with butter. To finish, bake the pasta at 180C/350F/gas 4 for 20 minutes, turning on the grill for the last five minutes so the top browns. This is a gentle dish, so it needs contrast: serve alongside a crisp, green salad with a sharp vinegar dressing, maybe, and a cold bottle of wine.