When I was at the club, racial abuse was happening on the training ground regularly. I thought that it was something which must have been happening for a number of years because Gwyn Williams seemed so comfortable with it, like he didn’t give it a second’s thought. I can remember as a 16-year-old thinking it wasn’t right and “what’s going on here?” both when I was subjected to the abuse and seeing others subjected to it. But there was no way of challenging it at the time. We were young players chasing professional contracts and I felt I couldn’t speak out. Williams would often say stuff such as “if you weren’t here you’d be mugging people” or that we’d be holding people up with guns, just because we were black, as well as the racist comments like “lazy black cunts”. I think if something like that had been said to me by other youth-team players I would have retaliated, but this was an adult doing it to a kid. It was also the man who was making the decisions on your career – and a man, you knew, whose say would impact on your future in the game. We were chasing the pot of gold so you felt you had to keep quiet. If you spoke out you’d be dismissed as having a chip on your shoulder. Graham Rix was different in how he made you feel. He’d bully psychologically. He’d play you out of position for his own fun and to see you struggle. He’d chip away at a player’s self-confidence every day. The way he did it was more powerful than words. He made you feel completely uneasy and uncomfortable. The pair of them made it plainly clear in how they behaved to lots of black players that they didn’t stand a chance of progressing – no matter how good they were. It created a lot of tension in the squad and some division between the black players and white players, sadly. I used to get very angry and I would get into arguments. Many times I felt like punching both Williams and Rix. Chelsea was seen as a great place but it was a horrible environment. It was a bad place, and not a place you wanted to be, and despite all my ambition to be a footballer I just stopped turning up a few months into the second year of my apprenticeship. I went on play professional football at a club in Division Three, as it was then, but it took me a number of years to get that offer. For a long time afterwards, clubs wouldn’t touch me. I was told a few times that they’d had reports I was “trouble” and a “problem”. I had dropped a number of leagues, but it was a different world. No racism, just a nice place to play football with better characters and personnel. It was a much better club environment. The writer, who asked to remain anonymous, is a former Chelsea youth player