A passionate, mysterious love story in postwar Poland between a musician and a young singer recruited as part of a communist-approved folk music troupe. Debra Granik, who directed Winter’s Bone, comes to Directors’ Fortnight with this fascinating, subtle wilderness story of a man (Ben Foster) who takes his 13-year-old daughter to live with him in secret in a public park. A Spanish-language thriller from the Iranian director Asghar Farhadi. Penélope Cruz plays a woman who returns to her hometown with her husband (Ricardo Darín), only to be confronted by secrets from her past. Javier Bardem also stars. This looks intriguing – and features that excellent actor Sergi López. A time-travel story, according to what little the director has told us. Golshifteh Farahani plays a Kurdish fighter leading an all-female battalion called Girls of the Sun; Emmanuelle Bercot plays the French journalist who meets her there. The remarkable true-life story of the black 70s police offer Ron Stallworth, who masterminded the infiltration of the Ku Klux Klan, talking to Klansmen on the phone and sending in white officers when face-to-face meetings were needed. Lee is one of Cannes’s most respected directors and he returns with this adaptation of a short story by Haruki Murakami about a writer who meets a mysterious individual claiming to be an arsonist. Uh-oh. Lars von Trier has succeeded in reversing his “persona non grata” ban – by which bureaucratic procedures we know not – and is out-of-competition with what promises to be a headbangingly hardcore horror-thriller. Jack (Matt Dillon) is a serial killer whose grisly career we track over 12 years. Yikes. A drama set in Lebanon, reportedly using a non-professional cast, about a boy who rebels against the life imposed on him by others, and launches a lawsuit. It wouldn’t be Cannes without Marion Cotillard and she has a juicy role in this movie from Vanessa Filho, showing in the Un Certain Regard sidebar, about a woman who abandons her eight-year-old child for a man she’s only just met.