Keylor Navas 7/10 Lucky not to be punished by Van Dijk when he missed a corner but one his safer goalkeeping displays. Made a solid and important save from Alexander-Arnold. Dani Carvajal 5/10 Left distraught after being forced out of a second successive final by injury. Had only just returned from a hamstring problem and made a careless start. Raphaël Varane 7/10 Vulnerable to Liverpool’s press when in possession, and not the most physical, although made several well-timed interventions inside his penalty area to thwart Klopp’s side’s attacks. Sergio Ramos 8/10 The villain as far as Liverpool are concerned. Knew what he was doing when he dragged down Mohamed Salah but, as a defender, the captain was completely dominant. Marcelo 8/10 Made a convincing start to his duel with Salah before that headache departed. Was given more licence to attack and prospered but slow to react for Mané’s equaliser. Luka Modric 7/10 Given little time and space to dictate play due to the industry of Milner and Henderson. Tidy as always but only got into harmful areas when the game opened up. Casemiro 7/10 The unheralded but key part of this Real Madrid team performed effectively and diligently as usual, helping to curb Firmino’s influence on the Liverpool display. Toni Kroos 6/10 Operated too deep throughout the final and that left Ronaldo and Benzema isolated too often as a consequence. His passing was below its usual standard, too. Isco 6/10 Always searched for openings but could not get involved enough. Wasted a great chance to put that right when he hit the bar with only Karius to beat. Karim Benzema 8/10 May have been fortunate for the opener but, like any good striker, was alert to the possibility when Karius erred. Fared well in his physical battle with Van Dijk. Cristiano Ronaldo 7/10 A rarity in that this was a major final that the world player of the year did not bend to his will. May have done better with one header that Karius saved well. Substitutes: Nacho 7/10 (for Carvajal 37): A strong and positive replacement for the injured Carvajal Gareth Bale 9/10 (for Isco 61): What an impact. Off the bench to win the final with a world-class goal Marco Asensio 5/10 (for Benzema 89): Brought on in the dying seconds as Zidane sought fresh legs Loris Karius 3/10 Two absolute howlers on the biggest stage of all. An appalling performance from which it will be difficult to resurrect a Liverpool career. Trent Alexander-Arnold 7/10 Again seen as a potential weak link and again responded manfully to keep Ronaldo relatively quiet. More of a problem when Marcelo advanced, though. Dejan Lovren 7/10 Set the tone for another impressive European display when he snapped into Ronaldo at the first opportunity. Won the header for Mané’s goal. Virgil van Dijk 7/10 May feel he should have done better with the header from Milner’s corner that Navas missed but fought well against Benzema and made timely interceptions. Andy Robertson 8/10 Good in the air and, as usual, his positive runs down the left posed a frequent problem to the Real defence. Superb tackle on Ronaldo stopped a certain goal. Georginio Wijnaldum 6/10 The most inventive of Liverpool’s midfield trio but could not get on the ball often enough truly to hurt his opponents. Drove the team forward to the end. Jordan Henderson 6/10 Neat and careful on the ball and worked hard defensively to prevent Isco having an influence on the final but unable to stamp his authority on the game. James Milner 7/10 His set-piece deliveries were Liverpool’s most potent weapon once Salah had gone. Also pressed ferociously from the start to help swarm the Real midfield. Mohamed Salah 5/10 Not how his phenomenal season was supposed to end. Left the pitch in tears and in agony after Sergio Ramos caused a shoulder injury that damaged Liverpool. Cruel. Roberto Firmino 6/10 So close to connecting with one header, threaded a brilliant ball into Mané and worked tirelessly but could not influence this European game as he has so many others. Sadio Mané 8/10 Stepped up after Salah’s injury and was Liverpool’s liveliest forward. Showed quick reactions to draw Klopp’s team level and unlucky to strike a post, too. Substitutes: Adam Lallana 5/10 (for Salah 30): Plunged into the game early due to Salah’s injury and not at his sharpest after injury Emre Can 6/10 (for Milner 83): Brought on for a late rescue mission but to no avail in the end