On his way to speak to the annual meeting of the National Rifle Association on Friday, Donald Trump called the NRA a “great organization that loves this country”. More than 70,000 NRA members were expected to attend the convention in Dallas. But the event the president would address was also drawing protests, including by Manuel Oliver, the father of one of the 17 people shot dead at a high school in Parkland, Florida in February. Before Trump’s speech – as the president told reporters on Air Force One he had attracted a “record crowd” to the convention – NRA leaders expressed fear of such post-Parkland activism. “What they really want is for you to be afraid to publicly associate with this organization,” Chris Cox, the NRA’s chief lobbyist, warned the auditorium early on Friday afternoon. “They don’t want you to go to a Friends of NRA Dinner. They don’t want you wearing an NRA hat or putting an NRA sticker on your car or truck. “In the face of their bitter hatred, there has never been a more critical time for us to stand tall.” It was a strikingly defensive note for a leader of an organization that has played offense for years, railing against Democratic politicians, liberal billionaires and the Hollywood stars who advocate for gun control, even as it has succeeded in blocking any stricter federal gun laws. Trump’s speech came after he briefly suggested in a public meeting that he would support gun control measures, and after he publicly warned lawmakers in early March that they should not be afraid of the NRA. “Some of you people are petrified of the NRA,” Trump said at the time. “You can’t be petrified.” Some gun rights supporters saw the remarks as a betrayal. After a private meeting a day later, Cox tweeted that the president and vice-president Mike Pence did not in fact support gun control. In his address to NRA members on Friday, Pence acknowledged the toll of gun violence. “We live in a time when mass shootings have claimed hundreds of lives … shocking the conscience of our nation,” he said. “We will not rest and we will not relent until we end this evil in our time.” Pence also blamed the media for distorting the gun debate by focusing too much on a “few villains” rather than the “many heroes” who use their guns to prevent violence. “Start telling the whole story to the American people about firearms in this country,” Pence said, to sustained applause. “We should be a nation that recognizes the people who save lives much more that the people who take them.” He reassured NRA members that they were “one of the most potent forces for good in the United States of America”. 