Quite where Danny Cipriani will be playing next season remains unclear, but this was the latest glimpse of his rare talents as he prepares for the next chapter of his career. The enigmatic fly-half, who is leaving Wasps at the end of the campaign and is expected to move to France and possibly Stade Français, orchestrated a victory that secured a third-placed finish for Wasps. That means a trip to Saracens in the play-off semi-finals now awaits on 19 May while Newcastle face the leaders and defending champions Exeter on the same day. Cipriani departed early in the second half with a knock, although it did not appear serious and should not curtail his involvement against Sarries, and by then it was job done. The 30-year-old took centre stage during a one-sided first half, laying on a try for the England wing Elliot Daly with a delightful long pass before showing impressive strength to touch down himself on the stroke of half-time. Three minutes after the interval, Cipriani’s intelligent kick sent Josh Bassett over in the right corner to secure the bonus point before Newcastle roused themselves in a gallant fightback that harvested three tries in nine minutes during the final quarter. There will be a time to properly judge how good these sides are, but it was not today. That test will come in the play-offs and Newcastle, missing a number of key men in Toby Flood, Vereniki Goneva and Sinoti Sinoti, were some way below their best for the first hour. It was a disappointing way for retiring Falcons legends Rob Vickers and Ally Hogg to bow out in their final appearance on home soil, but the fact Newcastle even have a semi-final to look forward to is a massive achievement in itself. The rise of the Falcons under Dean Richards this season has breathed passion and romance into the Premiership and they will head to Sandy Park – a ground where they have known only defeat –with an impressive away record this season. They will have to cut out the errors, though, such as the one that allowed Tom Cruse to charge down Josh Matavesi’s kick to put the visitors in front. Wasps, led impressively by Joe Launchbury, dominated field position and Cipriani’s exquisite pass sent Daly strolling over before he added a third on the stroke of half-time. Then came his assist for Bassett before he succumbed to injury – only for his replacement, the former Newcastle favourite Jimmy Gopperth, to finish off a fine break down the right flank for a fifth Wasps try. Richards has fashioned a side with guts though and Matavesi showed the defence a clean pair of heels to race clear down the left before winger Zach Kibirige grounded a crossfield kick. Evan Olmstead scored a third to cut the gap further, while the visiting flanker Thomas Young was sent to the sin-bin before Willie le Roux scarpered clear from distance for a sixth Wasps try after Gopperth set him free. For both these sides, greater challenges lie ahead.