They did it. they really did it. I’m still having to pinch myself as a reminder that the yes vote actually happened; that Ireland has marked a new beginning for itself as a country that trusts and values women. And lots of us in Northern Ireland, who didn’t have a vote, joined the campaigning, doing all we could to hold the hands of our friends over the border in their pursuit for freedom and equality. The weeks in the run-up to the vote were a complete blur. So many doors knocked on, so many houses leafleted, and so many desperate conversations had. Many women in Northern Ireland were also as anxious about the result as women in Ireland. Because a vote for yes in Ireland, is a vote for hope in Northern Ireland. Hope that it will now be our turn. Hope that those in power at Westminster will see how hypocritical they are to deny Northern Irish women the same rights as every other woman on the island of Ireland and in the rest of the UK. Hope that we will no longer be forgotten and left behind. Because while we celebrate that more than 2 million women in Ireland have just gained control over their own bodies, we have to remember that around 1 million women in Northern Ireland are still subject to some of the most restrictive abortion laws in the world – laws which carry the harshest criminal penalties in the whole of Europe. The law in Northern Ireland dates back to 1861. It’s literally from the Victorian-era. It makes abortion illegal in almost every circumstance – even in cases of rape or fatal foetal abnormalities. It forces hundreds to travel every year to other parts of the UK for vital abortion services, and many others go online to buy abortion pills, risking prosecution for doing so. It’s hypocritical, degrading and insulting that the UK government allows us women in Northern Ireland to travel to receive vital healthcare services, but will not give us this same access at home. With legislation soon to follow Saturday’s result, which will enable access to abortion services in the Republic of Ireland, we may soon see women in Northern Ireland catching trains over the border rather than planes over the sea for this healthcare. But we’ll still be forced on those lonely and difficult journeys. The UK government cannot continue to turn a blind eye to this absurd situation. Westminster has the power and responsibility to bring Northern Ireland abortion law in to line with human rights standards, but is choosing instead to be complicit in our harm and suffering and is continuing to deny us equality. For the past 16 months, Northern Ireland has been without devolved government. But this is no excuse - having a Stormont government in place would not relieve the UK government of its responsibility to ensure that women’s right to abortion is upheld. Devolution is no justification for the denial of women’s rights. A free abortion service in England is a helpful form of remedy, but it’s not the solution. In parallel with this, we must also see a process to bring about long overdue law reform in Northern Ireland. It is important to remember that it’s the most vulnerable and marginalised women who are unable to travel and left most at risk by the current laws. We’re talking about women who have experienced domestic violence, women without confirmed immigration status, young girls who can’t fly without an adult, and those with health complications. The UK’s supreme court is expected to make its ruling on a case considering whether Northern Ireland abortion law breaches women’s rights in the next couple of months. It’s shameful that the courts have been asked to intervene. But if the court rules that the laws do violate women’s rights, then the UK will be forced to do something about it. It’s been exhausting trying to gain our equality and rights. It still is exhausting. One of the trending hashtags for the campaign to repeal the 8th Amendment was #ItsTime. Well now it’s our time. It’s the women of Northern Ireland’s time. It has to be. You can sign Amnesty’s petition and tell the secretary of state for Northern Ireland that abortion is a human rights issue for women here.