A winning photograph in the Wildlife Photographer of the Year 2017 competition has been disqualified because the animal in the picture turned out to be dead. That’s according to the people running the competition. The photographer swears otherwise. This isn’t the overall winner, I should clarify – just the winner of one category. The overall winning photograph is coincidentally also of a dead animal, but in that case it was considered a good thing. In terms of the competition, that is. In general terms, it’s a really bad thing: it’s a picture of a black rhino that’s been killed and had its horn hacked off so that someone evil can sell it to someone ignorant. That’s very bad, but the photo is deemed very good largely because that’s so bad. It’s good to do a picture of something bad, that’s the rationale. It helps, like an x-ray of a tumour. It’s better to know. It highlights the rhinos’ plight and, as we all know, raising plight awareness is a major way of making a real difference. Sometimes I think I should get an OBE for my retweeting alone. Anyway, it’s an absolutely horrible picture, if you ask me. To want to put it on your wall, you’d have to have something wrong with you. But I suppose that’s the point. And perhaps it shows a lot of technical skill. Though I don’t really see why – it must be trickier to catch a hummingbird mid-slurp or some otters chatting. Ask any of those photographers who do big school groups and they’ll tell you: the trick is to get them to stay still. Which, with a slaughtered rhino, is a piece of cake. The poachers have really helped you out there. It doesn’t really misrepresent nature: anteaters do attack termite mounds – he just failed to capture it happening It was taxidermists who allegedly helped out the photographer of the disqualified picture, though they were no more aware of their complicity than the poachers. This photo, entitled Night Raider and formerly declared the winner of the “animals in their environment” category, depicts an anteater apparently stalking a termite mound in a Brazilian nature reserve. But the Natural History Museum (which runs the competition), having consulted five independent scientists, is convinced the anteater is stuffed. In fact, that it’s a stuffed anteater taken from a nearby visitors’ centre. If you examine a picture of this particular item of taxidermy, and then look at Night Raider, you will probably agree. It’s either the same anteater, or the one in Night Raider has elected to strike an uncannily identical pose. Perhaps it was taking the piss out of its deceased colleague, adding insult to being-hollowed-out-then-filled-with-wire-and-wood-shavings. It’s possible, I suppose. Certainly the photographer, Marcio Cabral, continues to assert his innocence and says he’s going to return to the reserve later in the year to prove it. I’d be intrigued to discover how. But, for now, let’s take it as a working hypothesis that the museum is right and Cabral borrowed a stuffed anteater and propped it against a termite mound before taking his temporarily award-winning snap. The competition rules state that “entries must not deceive the viewer or attempt to misrepresent the reality of nature”, and obviously he’s done that to some extent. The viewer has been deceived into inferring that the anteater is alive. Then again, it doesn’t really misrepresent the reality of nature: anteaters do attack termite mounds – he just failed to capture it actually happening. So it’s not like a mock-up of a lion having a salad. I’m not defending what Cabral has allegedly done, but it gives an interesting insight into what we want from eye-catching wildlife photography. Obviously it has to look good (or visually arresting in the case of the mutilated rhino corpse) and it has to show something genuine about the natural world. Night Raider ticks both of these boxes, despite the fakery: it’s a pretty picture and anteaters eat termites (the clue’s not in the name). But it seems we also need to believe these photos depict something that literally happened at the moment they were taken. It’s like with anecdotes: if a person told you they’d once been mugged, you’d be drawn in, even if the sequence of events was fairly mundane. But if it turned out they hadn’t really been mugged, the story would lose all interest. The events they described will undoubtedly have genuinely happened to someone, but not to whomever you’re talking to – so sod it. They’re just lying. Anteaters attack termite mounds, but that’s not what was actually happening in the picture – so sod it. The photographer’s a liar. “Fiction is the lie through which we tell the truth,” wrote Albert Camus. Well, if Night Raider is a lie, and it tells the truth about anteaters, is it fiction? Yes. Crap fiction. It’s not a very interesting truth – only marginally more compelling than if the anteater was pictured approaching an anthill. My imagined mugging anecdotalist could, instead, have written a short story about someone being mugged. But, if it’s billed as fiction, it has to be twice as entertaining and insightful to get half as much attention as simply claiming: “This just happened to me!” This photograph’s level of inventiveness is insufficient for it to pass muster as fiction. It’s a much more competitive field. Suddenly, you’re not just up against a flower with some dew on it, but Star Wars. Hence the need to pass it off as truth – so it’s not storytelling, it’s cheating. It’s not cheating to wait years to get the shot. It’s not cheating to frame out a bin or a power station. It’s probably not really cheating to shout to make some geese take off. But it is cheating for a man to drag a stuffed anteater all the way from a visitors’ centre to a termite mound. But if only a wildlife photographer had got a snap of that happening. What a fascinating and authentic image of eccentric mammalian behaviour that would be.