Before their second-half meltdown at Warrington on Sunday, most fans assumed any new overseas team in the Super League next season will be Toronto Wolfpack. Don’t write them off, but also be prepared for another interloper: Toulouse Olympique have quietly sidled up behind the leaders and could close the gap at the top to a single point if they silence the Wolfpack at St James’s Park on Saturday lunchtime, when their Championship clash opens the Magic Weekend. Well-travelled Toulouse prop Eddy Pettybourne fully expects Olympique boss Sylvain Houles to be coaching in the Super League soon whether that is with TO13 next year or not. Pettybourne has been hugely impressed by Houles, both on and off the training pitch in south-west France. “He is up there as one of the best coaches I’ve ever had,” says USA international Pettybourne. That is some recognition given he played under Michael Maguire at South Sydney, Mick Potter at Wests Tigers, Shaun Wane at Wigan and Neil Henry at Gold Coast Titans. “He’s a great coach: young but smart and so committed. He gets up at three every morning to work on his farm, then drives an hour to Toulouse to training. He spends so much time on the video side of it and has real pride in his analysis. The boys had told me how he is before I arrived. They have big respect for him. I thought: ‘That is someone I’d like to play for.’ They were right. I do want to play for him. We all do.” Toulouse has been Houles’ only managerial position so far but he has now coached them in Elite 1, League 1 and the Championship. Next stop Super League? “You are 100% going to see him going a long way: in Super League or even the NRL one day,” adds Pettybourne, who has also represented Australia Schoolboys, New Zealand and Samoa in a unique international career. “He’s pretty honest. He’ll tell you if you’re slacking off and encourage you to do better. He is always happy and positive. He is a massive influence on our team, the leader.” Toulouse made a similarly impressive start last season but fell away once half-back Johnathon Ford was injured and not replaced. Houles admitted he had been naive in thinking the squad was strong enough for 30 games. He drafted in Stan Robin and Will Barthau to ensure TO had three top Championship-quality half-backs, former Kiwi forward Sam Rapira and Pettybourne bringing experience to the pack. “We’ve not got a big squad but the team is pretty well covered for injuries now,” says the former Wigan forward. “We have talented players: good halves in Jonno, Stan and Will, Mark (Kheirallah) at full-back, and me, Sam Rapira and others are giving our experience to the younger blokes. We’ve got some good youth coming up in the Broncos team in the French comp, too.” While 10-man Toronto were recklessly losing the plot at exhilarating Warrington in the Challenge Cup on Sunday, Toulouse were enjoying a weekend off, having turned down their invitation to enter the Challenge Cup this season to avoid any more draining cross-channel trips. It has also given Pettybourne a chance to recover from injury to face TW. He is relishing his first taste of the Championship – so far. “There are some quality players and teams, like Leigh, Toronto and London, so you have to be prepared. Toronto are leading the way and they’ve bought some good players. The physicality is pretty tough – there’s more contact compared to Super League or the NRL, which is all speed. The Championship is slower. I’d put the standard on a par with the Queensland Cup [in which he played last year for Tweed Heads Seagulls]. The challenging part is the fields: you don’t get anything like the slopes at Batley or Featherstone in the NRL!” Trinity have been in the news. First, head coach Chris Chester was appointed joint coach of Scotland with Featherstone’s John Duffy, both men having been Bravehearts assistant coaches in the past. Then Wakefield put in a dismal performance to go out of the Challenge Cup with a whimper at Huddersfield last Friday. But on Saturday lunchtime, we were treated to a quite magnificent BBC1 documentary about the iconic 1968 final which they somehow lost to Leeds: Watersplash. It’s a beautiful film that can still be caught on iPlayer. After a blistering start, Trinity are struggling but should be too good to be sucked into a relegation scrap. They can gain immediate revenge on the Giants in Newcastle on Sunday afternoon. Win and they could be just two points off a top four spot next week. If you thought Israel and Australia being in Eurovision was a bit bonkers, check out the 2021 World Cup qualification process. The European bit kicks off next month, while two of France, Wales, Scotland and Ireland will qualify in November via the European Championships. That is simple enough. But despite being members of the Asia Pacific federation, Federacion de Rugby Futbol League 13 Chile will face the USA, Canada and Jamaica in the Americas group (good luck predicting the winner of that) and South Africa will represent Middle East-Africa (as Lebanon qualified automatically) in a play-off with the American runners-up and the highest-ranking Asian Pacific nation not already qualified. At present that is the Philippines, who are currently a place above Anthony Gelling’s Cook Islands, closely followed by Chile and South Africa! But with the Philippines only having observer member status, they are not eligible for the World Cup. Very rugby league. Rumours were circulating last week that former St Helens starlet Kyle Eastmond is on his way back to rugby league. The Oldham-born half-back has been released by Wasps after seven mainly successful years in rugby union, having torn up Super League and won four England RL caps as a thrilling youngster. Do not be surprised if Eastmond is followed by another England RU half-back returning to the game of his youth in 2019. And this one will firmly put our game on the back pages. Seeing young forward Chester Butler in action for Halifax recently started a train of thought. Welsh international Butler, whose late maternal grandfather was Dragons legend Colin Dixon, is son of former West Ham and West Brom striker Peter Butler. Butler Senior, who has spent the last 20 years coaching all over Asia and Africa, was a contemporary rival of Ian Ormondroyd, the Peter Crouch of his generation who went close to winning the title with Graham Taylor’s Aston Villa in 1990. Ian’s son Jack Ormondroyd shares his time between employer Leeds Rhinos and dual-reg club Featherstone, who are challenging for a top-four spot with Butler’s Halifax. On that note, let’s finish with a teaser. What do past and present Super League stars Kevin Sinfield, Adrian Morley, Shaun Lunt, Jason Baitieri, Lewis Tierney and Lee Gilmour all have in common? Answers below the line please. Follow No Helmets Required on Twitter and Facebook