Margaret River in the south-west of Western Australia is world-renowned for its spectacular wineries and fine food. Tourists pour into the region for its rugged dense forest, which is only minutes away from some of the most incredible stretches of coastline in Australia. But the sprawling estates with vineyards that spiral down picturesque winding roads are now teeming not with tourists but police and journalists in the wake of one of the worst mass shootings in Australia’s history. Western Australian police confirmed on Saturday morning that Katrina Miles, her four children Taye, Rylan, Ayre and Kadyn Cockman – aged between eight and 13 – and her parents, Cynda and Peter Miles, were found dead on the rural property in Osmington, on the outskirts of Margaret River. Five people – including one woman and four children – were found in what police have described as a “converted shed”. Peter Miles, who owns the property, was found outside. The WA police commissioner, Chris Dawson, said the three weapons found on the farm were licensed to Peter Miles, adding that police were not looking for a suspect and were treating the shooting as a murder-suicide. Osmington’s name will now appear in Wikipedia for all the wrong reasons. The 30-acre hobby farm where the murder-suicide took place is like every other property in the region. Surrounded by sweeping valleys, browning vineyards, fruits trees and a smattering of sheep. It is postcard perfect. Katrina Miles moved her four children to her parents’ farm a few years ago hoping to find a paradise. “Forever Dreaming is our forever farm,” Miles posted on social media in January. But on Saturday hordes of forensic police were combing every inch of the property trying to piece together the worst mass shooting in Australia since the Port Arthur massacre in 1996. The tiny community of Osmington has been rocked by the macabre farm massacre. A number of nearby residents were too shaken to speak to the Guardian as the shock and grief began to grip the region. One farm owner just shook his head through the window. On Friday, neighbour Felicity Haynes told the Guardian the Miles family were “just gorgeous people”. “They were extremely active in the local community,” she said. “Very interested in sustainable farming and permaculture. That sums them up.” The family issued a statement on Saturday afternoon saying they were “devastated” by the shocking event. “We are stunned and still trying to understand how this could happen,” the statement said. “We respectfully ask the community refrain from speculating on the circumstances surrounding this tragic incident. We thank the community for their support and ask that our privacy is respected as we grieve.” In nearby Margaret River, the hustle and bustle of Saturday morning shoppers and tourists disguises the horror that unfolded only a few kilometres away. But the fabric of the local community has been torn apart. Settlers Tavern owner Rob Gough said the community needed time to heal. “It’s an absolute tragedy,” he said, adding that the tight-knit community would rally around the family. “A lot of people in the community are in shock,” he said. “In the coming days, people will come together to support the families and those affected.” A local business owner who didn’t want to be named said the grandfather of the deceased children taught him at school. “It’s devastating,” he said. “It’s simply too much.” Pamela Townshend, Margaret River shire president, told Fairfax Media the shootings had sent a shockwave through the whole community.” “We are all linked in one way or another, every family,” she said. “Cynda was a lovely, open-hearted generous woman; embedded and active in the community, committed to the sustainable movement and very well known. “My mum went to a community workshop with her yesterday.” Melissa D’Atch, owner of the Margaret River Artisan Store, said many people in the community were “sickened” by the shootings. “I felt sick to my stomach,” she said. “I just don’t know what to say. I started getting phone calls from people in Perth because most of us locals didn’t know about. “It’s just shocking … it’s so sad.” Dawson said police had made contact with the deceased children’s father, Aaron Cockman. It was understood he was estranged from his ex-wife, Katrina. “He’s understandably grieving,” Dawson said. “We’re providing him with as much support as we can”.