Doctors in Perth are threatening to stop Australia’s oldest scientist flying to Switzerland to end his life through voluntary euthanasia. Edith Cowan University honorary research associate David Goodall, 104, does not have a terminal illness but his quality of life has deteriorated. Euthanasia campaigner Philip Nitschke said Goodall had attempted suicide about two months ago after suffering a fall, ended up in hospital and his daughter had to fight hard to get him out – only succeeding after arranging an independent psychiatric review. “The doctors started to say ‘he’s talking about ending his life, there’s nothing much wrong with him, so therefore he’s a risk to himself’,” Nitschke said. He said Goodall was keen to leave the country after the hospital experience. “On the basis of that, he said ‘enough is enough – now’s the time to die’,” Nitschke said. And now the doctors who treated him are threatening to prevent him leaving, arguing he’s a danger to himself and not fit to travel, which “the airline would respond to”, according to Nitschke. “I don’t know whether they would be successful or whether it’s just a threat. “It’s worrying the hell out of David and his daughter.” Nitschke urged the doctors to “back off”. Marshall Perron, the former Northern Territory chief minister who introduced Australia’s first voluntary euthanasia legislation, said it was tragic Goodall could not have his wishes met at home. “I understand his plight and fully support what he’s trying to do,” Perron said. “Philip is very keen to push for those people who are not terminally ill to have access to die – the rest of us are a bit more cautious than that. “However ... the average person who gets to be 100-plus ought to be able to have the right to say when they believe they’ve lived their life to the full and would rather not continue.” Perron said he gave credit to the premier of Western Australia, Mark McGowan, for wanting to introduce assisted dying legislation but his plans did not go far enough. Only terminally ill Victorian residents over the age of 18 and are living with "intolerable suffering".  They must have a life expectancy of less than six months, or 12 months if the patient is suffering a neurodegenerative illness such as motor neurone disease. Mental illness or disability will not be considered alone as a reason. Anyone wanting access has to make three requests to a medical practitioner, including one in writing. The patient's eligibility would then be determined by two experienced doctors, of whom one must be a specialist. There are 68 separate safeguards in the legislation. These range from strict eligibility requirements to severe penalties for those abusing the scheme, including life in prison for any doctor found to have coerced or encouraged a patient to consider voluntary assisted dying. Doctors are prohibited from raising the subject with patients – a patient must ask. The Victorian scheme was modelled on laws in the US state of Oregon. Based on data from that scheme, it is expected about 150 people a year will end their lives – about 0.005% of all deaths in the state. However, the Victorian scheme is more conservative than the Oregon laws. In contrast, under a much more liberal model introduced in the Netherlands in 2002, demand has grown to 7,000 in the past year and now accounts for 4.5% of all deaths. Patients will be prescribed a lethal dose of drugs that can be self-administered at a time of their choosing. The drugs would need to be kept in a locked box. If a patient is unable to take the drug themselves, lethal injection can be administered by a doctor. The drug to be used is not specified in the legislation. An implementation taskforce will work with a university pharmacy department to research available medications and appropriate formulations. Pentobarbital, better known under the brand name Nembutal, is used elsewhere as a euthanasia drug, but is prohibited in Australia under federal legislation. The law comes into operation in June 2019. While McGowan has said he feels deeply for Goodall, he only supports voluntary euthanasia for terminally ill people. “It’s all very well for politicians to say ‘I have sympathy’ but they are actually in a position to be able to do things,” Perron said. “The time to act is while you have the reins of government. “Let’s hope that he does the right thing at the end of the day.” A WA parliamentary inquiry into end-of-life choices is due to submit its recommendations to parliament in August.