Catalan politicians have cleared the way for a pro-independence candidate to be elected regional president and end the emergency direct rule imposed by Madrid during last year’s political crisis. The far-left pro-independence Popular Unity Candidacy (CUP) party said it would abstain from an investiture vote in the regional parliament on Monday. The absence of its votes will leave pro-independence candidate Quim Torra with the simple majority needed to be elected regional president. “The CUP will not block the formation of a new government,” a statement by the party said. The formation of a new regional government is required for Spain to lift the state of direct rule. The Catalan regional assembly failed to elect Torra in an initial vote on Saturday, but at the second round scheduled for Monday, only a simple majority will be required, so he is expected to win. He was handpicked as a candidate by deposed Catalan leader Carles Puigdemont, currently in exile in Germany and facing jail on rebellion charges for last year’s secession bid if he returns to Spain. Torra, 55, gave a combative speech during Saturday’s debate. He told parliament he was “working tirelessly for the Catalan republic” and signalled that the secession crisis is far from over, even if Catalonia does finally get a government. Separatist leaders declared Catalonia independent last October after an outlawed independence referendum. That prompted Madrid to impose direct rule and led to months of political limbo. Torra lambasted European institutions for their “unacceptable silence” over the Catalan crisis. He added he was ready to talk “without conditions” with the government of Spanish prime minister Mariano Rajoy. Both the Spanish government and the courts have declared the secession illegal and vowed to block it. Rajoy said that constitutional direct rule “could be used again if necessary,” if the next regional leadership did not respect the law. Catalonia is Spain’s richest and most populous region. It has its own distinct language and cultural traditions. Calls have increased in recent years for it to have more control over its finances, with some demanding outright independence. Last year’s secession attempt plunged Spain into its biggest political crisis in decades. Spain’s constitutional court strikes down parts of a 2006 charter on Catalan autonomy that had originally increased the region’s fiscal and judicial powers and described it as a “nation”. The court rules that using the word “nation” has no legal value and also rejects the “preferential” use of Catalan over Spanish in municipal services. Almost two weeks later, hundreds of thousands protest on the streets of Barcelona, chanting “We are a nation! We decide!” At the height of Spain’s economic crisis, more than a million people protest in Barcelona on Catalonia’s national day, demanding independence in what will become a peaceful, annual show of strength. The pro-independence government of Artur Mas defies the Madrid government and Spain’s constitutional court by holding a symbolic vote on independence. Turnout is just 37%, but more than 80% of those who voted - 1.8 million people - vote in favour of Catalan sovereignty. Carles Puigdemont, who has replaced Mas as regional president, announces an independence referendum will be held on 1 October. Spain’s central government says it will block the referendum using all the legal and political means at its disposal. The Catalan parliament approves referendum legislation after a heated, 11-hour session that sees 52 opposition MPs walk out of the chamber in Barcelona in protest at the move. Spain’s constitutional court suspends the legislation the following day, but the Catalan government vows to press ahead with the vote. Police arrest 14 Catalan government officials suspected of organising the referendum and announce they have seized nearly 10 million ballots destined for the vote. Some 40,000 people protest against the police crackdown in Barcelona and Puigdemont accuses the Spanish government of effectively suspending regional autonomy and declaring a de facto state of emergency. Close to 900 people are injured as police attempt to stop the referendum from taking place. The Catalan government says 90% voted for independence on a turnout of 43%. Spanish government takes control of Catalonia and dissolves its parliament after secessionist Catalan MPs voted to establish an independent republic. Spanish prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, fires regional president, Carles Puigdemont, and orders regional elections to be held on 21 December. Regional elections were held in December, which separatist parties won, but every leadership candidate picked by the separatist camp since has fallen flat. Torra faces divisions within the separatist camp, composed of the CUP, the Catalan Republican Left (ERC) party and Puigdemont’s Together for Catalonia grouping, according to Antonio Barroso, deputy research director at Teneo Intelligence. Barroso says the ERC wants a moderate approach to avoid a Madrid clampdown and prefers a longer independence game. “In contrast, Puigdemont’s strategy is to continue using every opportunity... to continue challenging the Spanish authorities and keep the secessionist momentum alive.” 