Pro-Europeans shouldn’t get too excited that the House of Lords voted for us to stay in the single market on Tuesday night. Quitting Europe’s vast market, as Theresa May plans, would be bad for jobs and bad for the NHS because we would have less money to pay for it. But staying in the single market would turn us from being a rule-maker into a rule-taker. That would be bad for our power and bad for our pride. The only way to protect jobs and public services while remaining one of Europe’s most powerful nations is to stay in the EU. And the best way of achieving that is to get a people’s vote on the Brexit deal. Campaigning to stay in the single market could distract from that goal – and, at worst, undermine it. We will need to attack the Brexit deal on the basis that we are losing, not taking back control That, of course, isn’t the way peers who voted for Tuesday’s amendment see things. Some think it could be the thin end of the wedge. Get MPs to agree that we should to stay in the single market and it is only a matter of time before they realise that we should cancel Brexit. After all, what’s the point in being bound by all the single market’s rules if you no longer have a vote on them? Maybe things will play out this way. But it doesn’t seem very likely. The amendment to the EU withdrawal bill agreed in the House of Lords will become law only if it is backed by the House of Commons. And, for that to happen, the Labour party and at least 10 Tory rebels would need to support it. A customs union is an agreement by a group of countries, such as the EU, to all apply the same tariffs on imported goods from the rest of the world and, typically, eliminate them entirely for trade within the group. By doing this, they can help avoid the need for costly and time-consuming customs checks during trade between members of the union. Asian shipping containers arriving at Felixstowe or Rotterdam, for example, need only pass through customs once before their contents head to markets all over Europe. Lorries passing between Dover and Calais avoid delay entirely. Customs are not the only checks that count – imports are also scrutinised for conformity with trading standards regulations, security and immigration purposes – but they do play an important role in determining how much friction there is at the border. A strict customs regime at Dover or between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland would lead to delays which will be costly for business and disruptive for travellers. Just-in-time supply chains in industries such as carmaking could suffer. An Irish peace process built around the principle of entirely unfettered travel between north and south could be jeopardised. Although many ordinary Labour members would like us to stay in the single market, Jeremy Corbyn is opposed to us doing so. His main beef is that it would require us to allow free movement of people, and many voters would see backing that as a betrayal of the referendum. Without the Labour leadership’s support, the amendment cannot survive in the Commons. It’s also doubtful how many Tory rebels will be willing to stick their heads above the parapet. Although some would like to stay in the single market, they pick their battles – only rebelling when they think they can win. What’s the point in becoming cannon fodder if there’s no victory in sight? But the main problem with pushing single-market membership isn’t the slim chance of success. It is that, in doing so, campaigners could undermine the case for staying in the EU. This is because the Brexit deal the prime minister eventually negotiates – if she can ever get her cabinet to agree on anything – is likely to require us to follow many EU rules without a vote on them. We will need to attack it on the basis that we are losing control, not taking it back – exactly the opposite of what Boris Johnson and his clique promised two years ago. The snag is, if campaigners push for single-market membership now, they will be vulnerable to the charge of hypocrisy if they attack the final Brexit deal for turning us into rule-takers. The obvious riposte will be that only a few months before, they were recommending that we should follow the whole suite of single-market rules without a vote on them. What’s more, if we did, against expectations, manage to secure single-market membership, that wouldn’t be the end of the matter. The British people are a proud nation. They wouldn’t put up with a situation where, year after year, our parliament would have to rubber-stamp legislation coming down from Brussels. Johnson’s charge that we were being turned into a “vassal state” could start to ring true. Optimistic pro-Europeans will say Rome wasn’t built in a day. After a few years in the single market, we could decide to rejoin the EU as full members with our voting rights restored. Maybe. But, again, that’s not the most likely scenario. After all, if we ask to go back into the EU after quitting the bloc, we would lose our budget rebate and might even be forced to give up the pound and join the single currency. It would be hard to persuade the British people to do that. In such circumstances, Nigel Farage would probably be back with a vengeance, demanding that we have a proper Brexit that restores our freedom – and he might be unstoppable. We’d then be out of the single market and into the hardest and most damaging Brexit imaginable. Pro-Europeans should be careful what they wish for. They shouldn’t be distracted by the campaign to stay in the single market. They should keep their eyes on the main prize – securing a people’s vote on the Brexit deal and then persuading the public that they are better off staying in the EU after all. • Hugo Dixon is chairman and editor-in-chief of InFacts, a founding member of the People’s Vote campaign