We fought lots as children and happily caused chaos for Mum and Dad. As we got older, we became mates, thick as thieves. As adults, you were the one I would ring if I had a problem, or needed advice or just a chat. Later, I introduced my husband to our family and you got on so well that sometimes it felt as if it was you and him who were siblings. When you first introduced us to your new girlfriend, I expected our future would be filled with happy family holidays and adventures, all of us getting along so well. I can’t remember when it started to feel like that imagined family future was never going to happen. A million little things have brought us to where we are now. And where we are now is estranged from each other. I’ve tried to be open-minded about your relationship, I’ve tried to see you as happy. But from where we are now, it’s hard to continue to be that way. Your wife has always kept us at a distance. Excuses, declined invitations, lies, sulks and snide remarks. Then you drifted away. We never challenged it, we bit our tongues, embarrassed for you, grateful for whatever you could offer us, for whatever she would allow. I wish I’d said more. I regret not being honest about how I felt that you had been changed so much by your relationship with her. Barely in touch with lifelong friends, falling out with family, and so many arguments and feuds, seemingly on her behalf. You have bent so much to accommodate her. You can only bend so much before you break. I don’t want you to break. I hope one day we can talk again. The brother I knew would not have kept his distance when he was needed the most. You must have your reasons. Is she the reason? Only you know. I am sure if the genders were reversed, we would be talking about domestic abuse, planning interventions and supporting you, whether or not you wanted us to. Controlling behaviour is domestic abuse, regardless of gender. For the sake of not wanting to damage the one remaining connection you have with our family, I say nothing. I wait. I don’t know how long I can continue to wait, though. I hope you find the strength to break free from the control. I will be waiting, I will always be here, I will always be your sister.