A knifeman killed one person and injured four others, one of them critically, before being shot dead by police in Paris. The attacker struck in one of the most popular areas of the city, near the celebrated opera house and theatres. Pierre Gaudin, a spokesman for the police prefecture, said the man attacked shortly before 9pm. “One person has died of their injuries,” Gaudin said, adding that two others had been seriously injured and taken to hospital. The knifeman, dressed entirely in black, lunged at people at random crying “Allahu Akbar”, according to witnesses. This was confirmed by public prosecutor François Molins. He was carrying no identity papers, making it harder for police to identify him. Yvan Assiona, a spokesman for the police union Alliance described the attacker as “bearded, with long hair”. An investigation has been opened into a suspected terrorist attack and Molins is expected to give more details at a press conference on Sunday. The suspected knifeman was said to be in his 20s and of “north African appearance”. Isis has reportedly claimed responsibility for the attack. In a series of tweets, the French president, Emmanuel Macron, said his thoughts were with the victims of the attack and praised the “courage” of police who “neutralised the terrorist”. “France is paying in blood once again, but it will not give one inch to the enemies of freedom,” he wrote. The interior minister, Gérard Collomb, hailed the “sangfroid” and quick response of police who shot the attacker. “My first thoughts are with the victims of this odious act,” he tweeted. A waiter on duty near the opera house, named only as Jonathan, described the attack, which happened in front of his restaurant. “The attacker was walking in the street, armed with a knife. He had a lot of blood on his hands. He was walking in the road and stopping at all the shops. He was threatening everyone who crossed his path.” He added: “He threatened a woman and her companion came to defend her and was threatened as well. Then he moved on to the next restaurant and attacked it. I wasn’t particularly worried, I was under the impression he was mad or drugged up.”