Modigliani is no Leonardo da Vinci. He isn’t even a De Kooning, a Cézanne or a Gauguin. All those artists have had paintings sell at auction for more than $200m. Leonardo’s Salvator Mundi looks set to hold its $450.3m world record for a good while to come, after Modigliani’s Nu Couché (Sur le Côté Gauche) achieved a “mere” $157.2m (£116m) at Sotheby’s in New York last night. Still a nice bit of cash, but far from the astronomical, record-beating sums that were being imagined. I am not surprised. Even in the unreal world of art sales there has to be some relationship between hype and fact. Modigliani’s painting was being sold as something it is not, which some bidders were bound to notice. It was being praised not for its own merits but for a supposed place in cultural and social history that can’t actually be seen on the canvas. Taking their cue from the idealistic catalogue of Tate Modern’s recent Modigliani exhibition – which included this painting – and with an eye to today’s gender politics, Sotheby’s talked up this luxuriant nude as an iconoclastic, radical artwork. “This is a nude of a very self-possessed, sexually self-confident woman” who is “absolutely meeting our gaze”, said Sotheby’s co-head of worldwide impressionist and modern art, Simon Shaw. Painted in 1917 when the first world war was changing the social power of women, Nu Couché purportedly reflects that revolutionary moment as a woman lying with her back to us turns her head to look boldly out of the painting. You can see why this description of the painting suits Sotheby’s. Any male buyer who might feel embarrassed about purchasing a sensationally carnal picture of a naked woman to slaver over can rest assured that she’s a strong, self-possessed woman. Unfortunately, this is a fairytale. Even if Modigliani was the most feminist man of his age in his lucid periods between bouts of booze and drugs, that has nothing to do with this painting. To see it as radical at all – either politically or aesthetically – depends on a massive ignorance of art history. Modigliani was a natural conservative under the lightest modern veneer. Nu Couché demonstrates that beautifully, for it is based on Ingres’ Grande Odalisque, painted in 1814. This painting could be seen in 1917 in the Louvre just as it can today. Yet today, it is widely castigated as the very definition of male, not to mention imperial, power. Set in a fantasy Orient, it portrays a concubine lying in luxury, turning languidly to face the beholder. The Guerrilla Girls chose Ingres’ Odalisque as the embodiment of the oppressive nude in their poster asking: “Do women have to be naked to get into the Met Museum?” So what makes that painting the quintessence of patriarchy, while Modigliani’s 1917 restaging is said to somehow subvert gender roles? There’s nothing new in the way Modigliani’s model looks out of the painting, either. Her gaze is nothing like as confrontational as that of Manet’s Olympia, painted in 1863. Nudes have been looking directly out of paintings, capturing the beholder’s eye, holding the gaze, for centuries. Titian’s Venus of Urbino did it back in the 1530s. Not many people would claim Titian as a feminist – but his nude is not a dreamy classical statue either. She looks at you directly because she’s offering sex. That, surely, is what Modigliani’s nude is also doing. Both are fantasy women proposing fantasy love. What’s so wrong with that? It would have been much more honest and perhaps better-selling if Sotheby’s had simply said Modigliani’s nude is an unabashed, hedonistic, erotic nude. For that is what it is. Instead they’ve tried to pretend this is one of the great revolutionary moments of modern art. In reality, the semi-abstracted red flesh of Nu Couché is a trite pastiche of truly radical masterpieces painted several years earlier. The glaring eyes and jagged bodies of Picasso’s 1907 Les Demoiselles d’Avignon and the glowing savagery of Matisse’s 1910 Dance have a freedom, power and energy that exposes Modigliani as the sedate decorator he is. Modigliani is easy to look at and think about, so his art will aways be popular. Yet it will never quite be in the highest league. Last night’s non-world record proves that.