The word from Barcelona is that the club will make space for Antoine Griezmann this summer by selling Luis Suárez. Brendan Rodgers and Steven Gerrard are believed to be preparing their pitches right now, each texting the Uruguayan striker photos of their Luis Suárez tattoos and promising him that he won’t miss the Barcelona-Real Madrid derbies once he experiences the joys of El Glasigo. Sadly, Suárez in an Old Firm clash is a treat we are never likely to witness because Paris Saint-German can offer both him and Barça more lolly. But that doesn’t mean Rodgers and Gerrard can’t keep arguing over who Suárez loves most. Celtic left-back Kieran Tierney is enjoying that spectacle so much that he is said to have no interest in leaving for Bournemouth, who will put that theory to the test by submitting a £20m offer. Meanwhile, if Suárez does move to Paris, then he could hook up with his compatriot Edinson Cavani, who insists he is staying in the French capital despite claims he was intent on leaving this summer for Chelsea or anywhere else. “My future is here, of course,” said Cavani, fuelling speculation that Neymar is off to Real Madrid. Atlético Madrid, meanwhile, are focusing on luring Sergio Agüero back from Manchester City. And City sense they are close to striking a deal for Napoli’s Jorginho. By contrast, and contrary to reports this week in France, Nabil Fekir’s father has said no deal has been done between his son and Liverpool. Other reports in France, meanwhile, claim Liverpool have their hearts set on Bordeaux’s Brazilian forward Malcom, who is also being wooed by Manchester United and Tottenham. Juventus want to take Álvaro Morata away from Chelsea on a season-long loan. Everton are planning to rejuvenate their defence by prising Jamaal Lascelles away from Newcastle, a move that could push Rafael Benítez to the end of his tether. Having seen the state of the Premier League, Wolves are preparing for a European campaign in 2019-20. They plan to bolster their squad by bringing in striker André Silva from Milan and the goalkeeper Rui Patricio from Sporting Lisbon and are willing to outbid Napoli for the latter. If they fail in that they may move for PSG goalkeeper Kevin Trapp. Hurrahs in Italy suggest that Internazionale have beaten Liverpool, Spurs and everyone else to the signature of Stefan de Vrij, the centre-back whose contract with Lazio expires in a month. Gareth Southgate is planning to include two uncapped youngsters in his England World Cup squad: Liverpool’s Trent Alexander-Arnold and Dortmund’s 18-year-old winger Jadon Sancho. Finally, Fulham, Aston Villa and Sheffield Wednesday all hope to find the sweet spot of Sunderland’s George Honeyman.