One man stoops to the ground to pick up his change, while a nearby pigeon pecks at the coins. Another, wearing a trilby, is slightly lost, looking for something (perhaps mirroring the film title displayed behind him). A woman in a hijab seems to float above the kerb in the distance. Artist Chris Dorley-Brown, who has lived in east London for almost 40 years, has immortalised the area’s street corners in a new book. But rather than normal photographs, taken in one-sixtieth of a second, his are multiple exposures brought together: a simultaneous snapshot of events that happened over an hour. “I’m interested in challenging the dictum of Henri Cartier-Bresson, who defined documentary photography as being about a decisive moment,” he says. “I wanted to put several decisive moments into a photograph.” Roughly 100 photographs for each set-up are narrowed down to a handful of people and weaved together in Photoshop. It is a sort of staged scenario, yet true to life: “I’m trying to present a new way of looking at familiar territory. It’s a bit like making a painting, even though I regard them as documentary photographs: I don’t add anything that wasn’t there or take anything away.” Street corners are a fitting place for Dorley-Brown to capture the multicultural area’s diverse demographics and constant state of flux. The fabric shop is now an estate agent. The Rio, a Grade II‑listed art deco building, is one of Hackney’s last independent cinemas. Behind the photographer is a mosque; to the right, about a dozen Turkish restaurants and cafes. “East London for me has always retained some kind of edge: there’s a polarity there, opposing forces which make daily life interesting. Maybe they’re represented on street corners because there’s this intersection of cultural ideas – people are reorientating themselves, never really knowing what’s around the corner.” • The Corners by Chris Dorley-Brown is published by Hoxton Mini Press (£30). To order a copy for £25 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99