Arsène Wenger faces a decision between whether to continue as a manager after departure from Arsenal or accept an executive position at a club, with Paris Saint-Germain considering him for a general manager role. Wenger said that, if he listened to his heart, he would remain in management, which has been his stance since it was confirmed he would leave Arsenal at the end of the season, 12 months before his contract finishes. But he was sufficiently vague about the notion of becoming a director to suggest something had changed. The 68-year-old has long been linked to PSG, partly because of his friendship with the club’s president, Nasser al-Khelaifi. The French champions are expected to replace their manager, Unai Emery, with Thomas Tuchel but they would have the scope to accommodate Wenger within their structure. “A general manager role? That’s what I have to decide,” Wenger said. “I have not made the decision [about whether to continue as a manager]. At the moment, spontaneously, I would say: ‘Yes.’ But maybe with a distance, I will think: ‘No. Maybe it’s a time to change a little bit of direction.’ Honestly, I can’t give you an answer. I don’t know.” Wenger has worked as a pundit for Khelaifi’s beIN Sports network, previously al-Jazeera Sport, for more than 10 years. “My relationship with Nasser is more based on media,” Wenger said. “When he was a young boy and he started in his job, I was his first contract, his first signing, so that’s why we have a good relationship. I was always with beIN. But that doesn’t influence any decisions.” Wenger said he had received various job offers – “more than I expected” – and he added the pull of the training ground remained strong. “I like green grass and I like to walk on it every morning,” he said. “I don’t know if I’ll continue that. It’s possible. I enjoy going out there every day. You know I didn’t miss a training session in 22 years, I never stayed in my office. Every day, I was out there. That is something I will miss.” Wenger described Laurent Koscielny as “devastated” after the defender had surgery to repair his ruptured achilles tendon, which will keep him out for six months. The manager said Mesut Özil would most likely miss the final two matches of the season – at Leicester on Wednesday night and Huddersfield on Sunday – with a back problem. He sought to defend the midfielder against the criticism he picks and chooses his games. “Football players are not like that,” he said. “When he’s injured, he’s injured.” Wenger suggested there had been progress on contract talks with Jack Wilshere, whose deal expires next month. “The latest conversation I had with Jack looks positive for the club,” the manager said. “I’m convinced, like I always was, that his future is here. I think it will happen, yes.”