First we came for fabric softener (what does it do?). Then doorbells (we’ll just text when we’re outside). The list of things we “millennials are killing” keeps getting longer, and the latest casualty is the living room. We don’t need them, says Patrik Schumacher, one of those architects dubbed “controversial” – and not for his outlandish designs. In a paper published by the Adam Smith Institute last week he argues that housing for young people – if not now, in “the liberalised future” – should be centrally located but smaller, to make it more affordable. Plus he proposes a way to achieve it: more capitalism. Hmm, sounds unlikely – but at this point, surely, we’ll try anything. Home ownership has plummeted among millennials over the past 35 years as a result of higher prices and lower earnings, with almost two-fifths now renting privately at age 30 and spending nearly a quarter of their net income on housing. Schumacher blames restrictions on land use and supply for keeping inner cities low density and house prices high, and proposes removing them to let the free market do its thing. He singles out the current minimum requirement for new-build studio flats of 38 sq m, in particular, as excluding a lower-income group from the market. Remove it, and non-essential spaces such as those simply for sitting in are the first to go. But no matter, says Schumacher: they are superfluous to millennials’ needs anyway. “For many young professionals who are out and about networking 24/7,” he writes authoritatively, “a small, clean, private hotel-room sized central patch serves their needs perfectly well.” Ah. As they say: there’s no place like a private central patch. Of course I don’t need a living room, that conceit of western architecture, also called a lounge or a sitting room, used for relaxing and socialising. How could I, if I just had to look up what it is on Wikipedia? I had to look up “relaxing”, too, what with the 24/7 networking. Schumacher seems to be wrapping up the causes of the housing crisis and presenting them to us as a solution. (Explicitly, in fact: his thinkpiece is titled “Only capitalism can solve the housing crisis”.) If millennials really are spending all our time “attending early morning meetings, after work networking events, weekend conferences, and professional lectures” – or, as Schumacher terms it, “enhancing our productive lives”– it is because we are attempting to cut through in a competitive job market where underemployment is rife, and even insecure work is nice if you can get it. And if we’ve grown used to life without living rooms, it’s because they don’t make landlords money. Many houses are being rented out with one more bedroom than their makers intended, and Generation Rent accepts it because more flatmates mean a lower share of rents and bills. Each person living in the private rented sector now has on average 8 sq m less space than they did in 1996, and just under one in 10 households headed by millennials in their late 20s are now considered overcrowded. It’s not that these small spaces suit our busy lifestyles, as Schumacher seems to suggest; they’re all that we can afford, or access. In 10 years of spending about 30% of my net income on rent, I have made significant tradeoffs and even imaginative leaps to bring that proportion down, including eight months in a mezzanine attic room with no natural light source and no door. It wasn’t even cheap. A few years later, I went to view a room that could only be accessed by climbing a long ladder, rung by rung, hand over hand. The fact my reaction was not to dismiss it at once but to think “Great! It’s furnished!” – of course it is: there’s no getting that bed out of there – may be indicative of millennials’ skewed perception of the norm for housing, and the low standards we have been forced to accept. Removing the minimum size requirement for flats may, as Schumacher argues, let those people who are convinced by the merits of so-called “microapartments” trade size for centrality. (And to be clear, the current minimum of 38 sq m is only a few square metres shy of that definition – hardly luxurious.) But it will also lead to the creation of even smaller apartments for renters to be forced into – look at the so-called “coffin cubicles” of Hong Kong, where people have less living space than prisoners in high-security jails. When we are prepared to give up doors and windows, if the price is right, is it any wonder that we are content to live without a living room? It is an unaffordable luxury that you enjoy at your parents’ house, like Dorset Muesli – that’s not to say you wouldn’t like to enjoy it every day yourself. It is hard enough as it is to foster a sense of home in someone else’s house, often shared with strangers. Without communal spaces, rent becomes the price you pay for a room to sleep in, and your flatmates are either in their rooms or out: a lonely, disjointed environment that you pay through the nose to be part of. Who knows – maybe you would rather network dawn to dusk than go home to that.