The R&B singer Chris Brown is being sued by a woman who alleges she was imprisoned in his home and raped by his friend. The woman, who is anonymized as Jane Doe in court documents, alleged that she was imprisoned and repeatedly sexually assaulted as part of a conspiracy led by Brown and two of his associates to use drugs, alcohol, threats and the presence of guns to coerce women to perform sexual acts. She also alleged that the men conspired to imprison women in a bedroom in Brown’s home, barricade the door and separate them from their cellphones. Doe is being represented by attorney Gloria Allred, who said on Thursday: “This is one of the most horrific cases involving alleged sexual assaults that I have ever seen, and our client, Jane Doe, has been severely traumatized by what she was forced to suffer.” An attorney for Brown, Mark Geragos, told TMZ the allegations are not true. “In another era, we might have called this a shakedown,” Geragos said “None of these allegations are true. Nobody has done anything with this … there’s no case here. Chris is a target.” Doe said in the lawsuit that she met Brown’s friend at 1 Oak club in Los Angeles in February 2017 and he invited her and a friend to an after party at a recording studio. She alleged that Brown’s friend, Lowell Grissom Jr, a rapper known as Young Lo, took their phones before entering the studio and would not give them back. Then, Doe said she was forced to go to Brown’s home, which she did not think she could leave because of the gate that surrounded the property. She also said in the suit that she was intimidated by Brown and Grissom, who were in possession of “multiple guns”. Doe said she was lured to a bedroom in Brown’s home, where Grissom and an unnamed woman, who was menstruating, held Doe down, forced her to perform oral sex and molested her. Doe said in the lawsuit that she was raped again after being given access to her phone, which she used to access a ridesharing app. She then went to a rape treatment center and to the police. The suit asks for the case to be tried before a jury. “She filed this lawsuit because she wants justice for herself, but she also wants to warn other young women about the potential danger to themselves if they have their phone taken away and if they go to Chris Brown’s house,” said Allred. Brown pleaded guilty in 2009 to assaulting his then girlfriend Rihanna. In August 2016, he was arrested on suspicion of assault with a deadly weapon after an hours-long standoff with police, who were responding to a woman calling them from his home for assistance. The outcome of that case remains unknown.