The leaders of the Five Star Movement and the far-right League are to announce their nominee to be prime minister of Italy’s first populist government at a meeting with the president. Italian press reports suggest Giuseppe Conte, 54, a lawyer and M5S member, is to take the job after Matteo Salvini, the leader of the League, and the M5S leader Luigi Di Maio, ruled themselves out. The parties will also present their cabinet lineup and government programme to the president, Sergio Mattarella. Speaking on Sunday, Salvini said: “We have agreed on the head and ministers and hope that nobody will veto a choice that represents the will of the majority of Italians.” He had reiterated a day earlier that the prime minister would be neither Di Maio nor himself, but “a professional who contributed to the drafting of the contract”. Conte, relatively unknown in the political world, is a law professor at the University of Florence. He is Di Maio’s personal lawyer and the mastermind behind the anti-establishment party’s pledge to abolish more than 400 “useless laws” that it claims will cut bureaucracy and free up the economy. He also said during the election campaign that Italy’s anti-corruption laws needed to be tightened and major school changes introduced. The professor, originally from the southern region of Puglia, was previously aligned to the left before joining M5S. Meanwhile, Salvini is tipped to be named Italy’s next interior minister and Di Maio minister of labour. The government programme, which includes plans for a flat rate of income tax and universal basic income, as well as a raft of hardline policies against illegal immigrants, was backed by 94% of M5S members in an online poll on Friday, with 91% of League voters also in support. Mattarella will need to ratify the choice of prime minister, the proposed programme of policies and cabinet lineup before a government can be sworn in. It will then face a vote of confidence in both houses of parliament. Between them, M5S and the League won more than 50% of the vote in an election in March. Support for the League has grown from 17% to 25% since then, according to the most recent opinion polls, while support for M5S is steady at 32%.