Toni Kroos says that Real Madrid will face “11 animals” in the Champions League final on Saturday and insists that Liverpool will be “tough,” “aggressive” opponents, prepared to press for 90 minutes but that Madrid will have “opportunities” to win a match he described as “50-50”. The Germany midfielder said it was a “great achievement” for Liverpool to have reached Kiev but denied that their motivation would be any greater than Madrid’s as he prepares to face a familiar opponent in the shape of the former Borussia Dortmund manager Jürgen Klopp. Kroos, who played Klopp’s sides often while at Bayern Munich, including in the 2013 Champions League final at Wembley, said: “Whenever we faced his teams it was difficult; at Bayern, we always had a lot of problems against Dortmund. Always. That is what I expect on Saturday. His teams are always aggressive, they press you a lot – for 90 minutes. They are highly motivated. I expect a very tough game for us but with opportunities to win. “My feeling is that [Klopp] is happy there,” Kroos added. “It is a great achievement for Liverpool to reach a final and to have a chance to win the Champions League. In my experience, it is always tough to play his teams, they always have more or less the same style. “So, I know for sure that it will be a very difficult game for us on Saturday. I know how he is able to motivate his teams, he gives them good tactics and I am sure it will be difficult, but I am also sure it is going to be difficult for Liverpool. They’ll be 11 animals, all really up for it, we’ll be better on the ball but they’re going to put us under pressure for 90 minutes and will be at 100% or even more. We’re expecting an aggressive Liverpool, who have a really quick forward line, but we can stop them,” he said. “They’re different to us and maybe don’t touch the ball as much, but they’re really rough, competitive, aggressive and really strong at the back. For them it’s an opportunity, they’ve not been in the final for more than 10 years and I don’t think they were expecting to get here so for that I think they’re going to give their all. “Both teams are hungry; I don’t see a favourite [and] I don’t see Liverpool having more hunger or anything,” Kroos added. “To reach a Champions League final you can’t be a bad team. I don’t see a favourite, Liverpool beat Manchester City, one of the big favourites. We can be a favourite as well. If you reach three Champions League finals in a row it shows you must be top in terms of motivation. If not, you don’t beat Paris, Juventus and Bayern in a row. Reaching three consecutive finals gives confidence but it does no mean we are any less motivated.”