As you enter the Corderie, the magnificent Renaissance ropeworks that is one of the venues of the Venice architecture biennale, you push (appropriately enough) through a screen of suspended ropes, installed for this year’s edition. In front of you is an unimpeded vista down the building’s impressive length, which is marked by a giant ruler beneath your feet, in metres (300) and Venetian feet. Natural light enters wherever possible through the old building’s windows. It is all an expression of the beliefs of the curators of this year’s biennale, Shelley McNamara and Yvonne Farrell of Dublin-based Grafton Architects, that architecture should be experienced by both body and mind, by hands and touch as well as eyes and sight, and that what is above and below you is as important as whatever is straight ahead. Their installation also expresses their view that the job of the architect is not always to create something wholly new, but to draw attention to what is already there. Only as you penetrate the Corderie do you start to see the displays, on either side of the central axis, that are the primary purpose of the world’s greatest exhibition of architecture. Here other architects, selected by McNamara and Farrell, interpret the curators’ guidance in their own way, under the open-ended title of “Freespace”. The Catalan Carme Pinós, for example, shows a model and photographs of a tower in Mexico that is conceived as a series of bodily, three-dimensional experiences, not as a singular object of contemplation. Alison Brooks, Canadian-born and British-based, has built a composite of elements of several of her housing projects – a vaulted threshold, a canted roof space, a cloister – in plywood and mirrors, in order to show how an architect can “frame everyday life” with memorable spaces. The Japanese practice Tezuka Architects present a charming model of its Fuji kindergarten, in which animated projections of children run noisily about what is a two-level oval structure. Ricardo Flores and Eva Prats recreate a fragment of their Sala Beckett theatre in Barcelona, excavated with considerable invention out of the ruins of a former social club, plus a bit of the fecund and cluttered studio from which their buildings come. The exhibits are mostly three-dimensional, sometimes habitable, between models and installation, all of which is welcome. The Venice biennale can be hard slog, a soul-sapping hack through dense thickets of images and words. There are years when this celebration of architecture ends up producing some of the least architecturally enjoyable spaces in the entire city of Venice, but not this time. One of Grafton’s contributions is to provide places to sit down and enjoy the environment around you. More than that, it has created something affirmative, a physical reminder that architecture should be a joy both to experience and to make. The biennale has two main centres – the Arsenale, of which the Corderie is part, and its gardens, which include a central pavilion also directed by McNamara and Farrell, and several national pavilions, which follow their theme more or less faithfully. In the central pavilion, as in the Arsenale, they have made the building itself part of the show, removing obstructions, letting in light and letting it breathe. They have also discovered and uncovered a long-forgotten window by the great Venetian architect Carlo Scarpa. While its tracery of interlocking circles is delightful in itself, it also connects the interior nicely with the water and sky outside. The central pavilion is entered through a grand octagon that the architectural collective Assemble has paved with tiles from the Granby workshops, the business they helped set up as part of their regeneration project in Liverpool. A little irregular and patchy, they make you aware of the ground beneath your feet. Wall mirrors, tilted a little downwards, remind you of your presence in the room. Ahead is a small town of models, abstracted from great buildings of the past by the likes of Eileen Gray and Frederick Law Olmsted, the creator of Central Park in New York. Up and beyond, on a big blue-walled balcony, are the models of the Swiss Peter Zumthor, almost alchemical in their pursuit of the different material qualities. The point here is that the body-and-mind nature of architecture is in its creation as well as its use. In another room there are walls of drawings, recent and historic. “Be careful of computers,” says Grafton: “the hand-eye relationship is very important. There’s something primal about getting dirty with paper and pencil.” The whole is intended as a “treasure trove” that shows how “marvellous” architecture can be. It brings together some unexpected bedfellows, in particular the brick churches of the subtle dead Swede Sigurd Lewerentz with the grand urban speculations of the unsubtle living Dane Bjarke Ingels. The latter’s proposal is to ring Manhattan with a series of barrier parks to protect it from flooding – as Grafton likes to say, the span of architecture runs from keeping the ocean out to the tactility of a brick or tile. In all this the definition of “freespace” is fluid. It has something to do with generosity and openness, with making unscripted places where the unknown can happen, and with both inventing and finding qualities to which no price is attached. The effective motto of the biennale, quoted by Farrell and McNamara, is the statement of a Spanish architect, Alejandro de la Sota, that architects should “make as much nothing as possible”. The plainest expression of the “Freespace” theme comes with the British pavilion, by the architects Caruso St John and the artist Marcus Taylor, a spatial musing on the nature of island life in which the galleries of the neoclassical building are left empty, while a new platform is created on scaffolding above it. Here, among the treetops, with new views of Venice laid out before you, and with the roof of the old pavilion poking through like the survivor of a flood, you can enjoy a lot of De la Sota’s nothing. From time to time you can attend performances and events, some of them in collaboration with other countries’ pavilions. The installation embraces, say its creators, “themes including abandonment and reconstruction, sanctuary and isolation”. It is a thing apart but also connected, welcoming if not easy of access. An accompanying book expands the ideas, with texts by Shakespeare and (with unpredicted relevance) writers of the Windrush generation. If you suspected a Brexit connection in the theme you’d be right, and you can also guess the curators’ sympathies on the subject, but it is non-judgmental, neither hand-wringing nor Pollyanna-ish, nor Panglossian. The Victoria and Albert Museum is also in Venice (it’s not too insular to cite another British project) with a display of Robin Hood Gardens, the brutalist council estate in east London that was recently demolished. A section of its concrete structure has been shipped to an Arsenale quayside, and an exquisite film by the Korean Do Ho Suh, using techniques reminiscent of both architectural cross-sections and the stripping away of the demolition process, records the outer form and inner spaces of the estate on the point of its disappearance. The tragedy of Robin Hood Gardens was that the considerable seriousness and virtuosity of its architects, Peter and Alison Smithson, never integrated with its purpose of providing social housing. Any honest assessment has to recognise that there was alienation between their theories of community and its realities in practice. The message of the biennale as a whole, however, is more positive: you come away with the feeling that there are many architects out there doing delightful and thoughtful work that serves wide publics who might even appreciate what the architects are offering them. • The Venice architecture biennale runs until 25 November