Investigators have said the missile that shot down flight MH17 in 2014 over eastern Ukraine came from Russia. Specifically, it originated with the 53rd anti-aircraft brigade based in the western city of Kursk. The evidence supporting this conclusion was “legally convincing” and would stand up in court, they said. The Buk missile launcher was part of a Russian military convoy that set off from Kursk in June 2014. At the time, Moscow-backed separatists, and undercover Russian troops, were fighting against Ukrainian government forces in eastern Ukraine. The launcher was seen on numerous occasions between 23-25 June, as the convoy made its way south. The Buk was smuggled across the border into Ukraine and transported on a red low-loader with a white Volvo cabin. It was spotted in rebel-held territory. On 17 July it fired a Buk 9M38 series missile from a farm near the village of Pervomaisk, investigators said. The missile struck the Malaysia Airlines Boeing 777, en route from Amsterdam to Kuala Lumpur, killing all 298 people on board. Afterwards, the Buk launcher crossed back into Russia. The findings presented on Thursday confirm research published almost three years ago by the open source investigative website Bellingcat. The investigators’ conclusions were reached independently, and form part of an exhaustive and ongoing criminal inquiry. An international team has been sifting and compiling evidence for almost four years. It includes dozens of detectives, public prosecutors and experts. They have carried out an extensive comparative investigation, looking at different Buk launchers belonging to Russia and Ukraine. The joint investigation team (JIT) found that the Buk missile system that shot down the civilian plane had a “fingerprint”. It identified seven distinctive features, such as vehicle number, transport marking and a white spot. The Buk’s second running wheel was missing spokes – a highly unusual feature. Dozens of curious motorists shot video footage of the convoy as it travelled through western Russia. Investigators were able to match specific locations with features from Google Earth, plotting its progress. They were further helped by testimony from witnesses and intercepted phone calls made at the time by separatist leaders in eastern Ukraine. The JIT previously said it had identified about 100 people involved in the downing of MH17. On Thursday, Wilbert Paulissen, head of the Dutch national police crime squad, said that number had come down to several dozen, but he declined to name them. They could be named in court during a potential future criminal prosecution. The JIT is still investigating whether Russian soldiers actually fired the missile. It is seeking further details on who was responsible for the military deployment, which Russian soldiers were part of the third battalion Buk team, what instructions were given to them and by whom. They have offered witnesses anonymity and – if necessary – protection. The Kremlin has always denied responsibility, with Vladimir Putin pointing the finger at Ukraine. State media in Moscow has floated dozens of conspiracy theories, among them: a Ukrainian jet shot down MH17; the plane was already full of dead bodies and deliberately crashed; a Buk missile downed the plane, but it wasn’t Russia’s. On Wednesday relatives of the 298 people killed published an open letter to the Russian people, ahead of this summer’s World Cup, hosted by Moscow. It described Russia’s “shocking, disturbing and contradictory stories” as “distressing” and said they were part of an attempt to “create an alternative reality in which all truth is relative and no information can be trusted”. They added: “We appeal again for the Russian government to cooperate fully with the international investigation into MH17. It will not bring our families back, but the truth does matter, the truth does exist and we want those responsible for MH17 to be identified and held accountable.”