The new Windows 10 April 2018 update is causing apps such as Google’s Chrome browser and even Microsoft’s own Cortana virtual assistant to freeze and lock up computers. The bug within the latest version of Windows 10, which rolled out to the general public on Monday, has caused hundreds of users to take to Reddit as well as Chrome and Microsoft’s support forums to complain of seemingly random incidents where machines lock up. “Everything freezes, keys don’t work, Ctrl Alt Delete doesn’t work,” one exasperated user on Reddit called TheCuteCat said. “The ONLY way to gain back control is to make the computer sleep by pressing the power button on my laptop, then reawakening.” The Guardian can confirm that the bug affects some but not all Windows 10 machines updated to the April 2018 update, and appears to impact newer computers with Intel’s integrated graphics chips. Microsoft acknowledged the problem and said that it was working on a fix, planned to be released on 8 May. “Some devices may hang or freeze when using certain apps, such as Hey Cortana or Chrome, after installing the Windows 10 April 2018 Update,” said a Microsoft agent on the company’s support forums. They suggested suspending the affected computer, either by closing the lid and opening it again on a laptop, or by pressing the volume up and volume down buttons simultaneously three times within two seconds on a Windows tablet to refresh the screen. They also suggested trying the following key command: Windows key + Ctrl + Shift + B The bug, which can happen at any time when launching certain apps, such as Chrome, or using certain features within those apps, also impacts Microsoft’s own Surface machines, according to reports. Given that Chrome is one of the most popular apps on Windows, claiming 66.1% of global desktop browsing market share in April, according to data from StatCounter, how this bug wasn’t fixed before release is unknown. Reports were filed about the bug by Microsoft’s Windows Insider public testers a month ago. Microsoft was also forced to delay the release of the April 2018 update right at the last minute when a serious bug was found that caused machine crashes.