The clock, since you asked, kept on ticking. As the curtain fell on Hamburger SV’s unbroken presence in top flight since the Bundesliga’s formation in 1963, it was alone in maintaining steady hands (give or take it being digital). With the home side’s winning position futile, as Wolfsburg completed an eventually emphatic victory over Köln 170km to the south, any façade of holding it together began to crack. Pyrotechnics rained down from the ultras in the Nordtribüne and a heavy police presence took over the pitch in lines, with horses and dogs for company. Some of those waiting to see if the famous timepiece – adding every extra second to HSV’s ever-present tenure – would stop must have struggled to see it through thick plumes of black smoke. “It could,” wrote a seething Hamburger Morgenpost, “have been a very dignified descent from the Bundesliga. HSV wanted to leave the main stage of German football with their heads held high, but then the arsonists in Volkspark took over the command and destroyed this beautiful scene.” The newspaper’s ire had been shared by many of the other fans in the Volkspark, who whistled and chanted “Wir sind Hamburger und ihr nicht” at the ultras. On the pitch the players waited 15 minutes for the field to be cleared of objects, stewards, police and animals, desperate to complete the final few seconds of stoppage time. Tatsuya Ito, who had been one of HSV’s beacons of hope in the game, couldn’t hold back the tears any longer. Borussia Mönchengladbach, knowing their chance of snatching a European place had gone, could have done without their quarter-hour of purgatory too. It’s the hope, as they say, that kills you, and by this point all hope had been and gone. They had been ready for relegation for a couple of months, as we said in this column a few weeks back, clearing the decks in getting rid of chairman Heribert Bruchhagen and sporting director Jens Todt, and promoting reserve coach Christian Titz to seemingly do a glorified relegation stocktake. Titz actually inspired a thrilling run that was just too little, too late. The paradox of the club hitting a record low just as they completed a fourth Bundesliga win in six was not lost on people. “Right now,” Titz told Sky after the dust settled, “I feel a lot of disappointment, because I believed until the very end that us winning could be enough.” To channel this sort of response from a limited group of players – quite how limited was underlined by Bobby Wood’s thoroughly avoidable, yet almost laudable second-half red card for a second booking – was really something. With captain Gotoku Sakai emotionally pledging to stay at full-time, both automatically relegated clubs – extraordinarily - have a positive energy to them. The pair are representative of an unusual, and not always satisfying, Bundesliga season. There has been plenty of entertainment,the 36 goals rattled in on the final day showing that. Yet on a Saturday when even champions Bayern Munich, led in their title celebrations by Manuel Neuer (who’s still yet to play since September) and finished 21 points clear , managed to put a dampener on their own party by losing 4-1 at home to Stuttgart, acknowledging that there have been better seasons in the competition’s recent history quality-wise was inescapable. That was equally apparent in one of the day’s most meaningful fixtures, between Hoffenheim and Borussia Dortmund. Julian Nagelsmann and his players deserve enormous credit for surpassing even last season’s excellence, after their 3-1 win assured third place and Champions League qualification. The enormity of their achievements visibly hit the players, with Nadiem Amiri and Kevin Akpoguma among those collapsing in tears at full-time at an emotional Rhein-Neckar Arena. It was plain, however, that they got there at least partly through the shortcomings of others. One only had to look at their opponents. Dortmund squeezed into the top four too, by a whisker, having been left sweating by a defensive horror show. It was, as goalscorer Marco Reus told the cameras after the game, “symbolic of our whole season”. The restructure is already under way, with Matthias Sammer and Sebastian Kehl included and Lucien Favre expected to join from Nice. Departing coach Peter Stöger – unlike goalkeeper Roman Weidenfeller, who made a brief pre-retirement cameo in stoppage time to a big reception – may not be remembered as a Dortmund great, but there appears to be a degree of appreciation for him among supporters, with respect for his working manner, if not always for the quality of football his team produced. The Austrian inherited a team in eighth place and delivered them into the top four. That wasn’t a given. He is set to receive a €2m bonus for reaching the Champions League at the end of his 154 days in charge. So poor Leverkusen, having come so far under Heiko Herrlich and developed into one of the best teams to watch in the league, fell agonisingly short on goal difference after ending up level on points with Hoffenheim and Dortmund. The retiring Stefan Kießling saw a penalty, which he spotted up, rescinded by VAR when they were three up against Hannover, which could have made it even tighter, and Die Werkself subsequently let in a pair of late goals. In reality, losses to Dortmund and Stuttgart then a failure to win in Bremen leading up to this cost them, rather than the final day. With national debate about German clubs’ perceived underachievement in European competitions, many supporters and commentators hope 2018-19 sees an improvement in standards – a banquet of some substance, rather than a fast food fix. • Hats off to Stuttgart, then, who will qualify for the Europa League if Bayern win the DfB Pokal final against future coach Niko Kovac’s Eintracht Frankfurt on Saturday. Coach Tayfun Korkut said he would enjoy the final “with a glass of red wine”, and without tension, as he well deserves. After his appointment in place of the popular Hannes Wolf was widely criticised, Stuttgart took more points in the Rückrunde than any other team apart from Bayern. • The suspicion before the final day that HSV might have a chance was largely informed by the potential for Wolfsburg combusting at the moment of truth. Instead, Bruno Labbadia’s side stepped up from the moment Josuha Guilavogui’s fine strike gave them the lead 40 seconds in. They also recovered well from Jonas Hector’s equaliser to win 4-1, setting them up for Thursday’s play-off first leg against Holstein Kiel, who were in the third tier this time last year. • Leipzig also got off to a flier, with Dayot Upamecano giving them a lead inside 90 seconds at a Hertha Berlin who seemed dazzled by the visit of Ryan Reynolds. The real star of the show as the side qualified for Europe was Ademola Lookman, who scored and set up two more in a 6-2 victory. Bayer Leverkusen 3-2 Hannover, Bayern Munich 1-4 Stuttgart, Hamburg 2-1 Borussia Mönchengladbach, Hertha Berlin 2-6 RB Leipzig, Hoffenheim 3-1 Borussia Dortmund, Mainz 1-2 Werder Bremen, Freiburg 2-0 Augsburg, Schalke 1-0 Eintracht Frankfurt, Wolfsburg 4-1 Cologne