A Utah man and his wife who were held in Venezuela without trial for two years were on their way to the US on Saturday, family members, Senator Orrin Hatch and Donald Trump said. In a tweet, Trump referred to Joshua Holt as a “hostage” and said he would welcome him to the White House later on Saturday. In fact, Holt and his wife, Thamara, were held by the Venezuelan government on weapons charges US officials dismissed as trumped up. Holt travelled to Venezuela in 2016 to marry Thamara, who he met on the internet while he was looking for Spanish-speaking Mormons to help him improve his Spanish. The couple were arrested soon after, accused of stockpiling weapons. Last week, Holt posted video to Facebook in which he said he feared for his life in jail in Caracas and said: “I’ve been begging my government for two years. They say they’re doing things but I’m still here.” Hatch, the senior Utah senator, announced Holt’s release. The Republican said in a statement he had “worked with two presidential administrations, countless diplomatic contacts, ambassadors from all over the world, a network of contacts in Venezuela and President [Nicolás] Maduro himself” to achieve the release. He added: “I could not be more honoured to reunite Josh with his sweet, long-suffering family in Riverton.” Hatch thanked Bob Corker of Tennessee, chair of the Senate foreign relations committee, who met Maduro on Friday. Corker’s office told reporters he was accompanying the couple back to the US. Relations between the US and Venezuela have been strained, particularly over the election which last week returned Maduro to power. On Tuesday, Venezuela ejected the top US diplomat in the country. Speaking at a news conference in Caracas, communications minister Jorge Rodriguez said the Holts were freed as part of efforts by Maduro’s government to maintain “respectful diplomatic relations” with Washington. “This type of gesture,” he said “… allows us to consolidate what has always been our standpoint: dialogue, agreement, respect for our independence, respect for our sovereignty.” Holt and his wife had been charged with espionage, violence and spreading activities against Venezuela’s constitutional order, Rodriguez said. “Good news about the release of the American hostage from Venezuela,” Trump tweeted. “Should be landing in DC this evening and be in the White House, with his family, at about 7pm. The great people of Utah will be very happy!” Later, as he left the White House apparently to play golf, Trump tweeted: “Looking forward to seeing Joshua Holt this evening in the White House. The great people of Utah are Celebrating!” Requests for more details were not immediately answered by the White House. Marco Rubio, the Florida senator who advocates a hardline policy on Venezuela, echoed Trump when he tweeted that Holt “was an innocent America hostage in Venezuela & his UNCONDITIONAL release was long overdue”. Holt’s family said they were “grateful to all who participated in this miracle”. The family expressed its gratitude for all who worked for the couple’s release and asked to be allowed to meet Holt and his wife before making any public statements.