Mitch Hurwitz’s decision to ‘remix’ the fourth series of Arrested Development is one of the most interesting things to happen in TV for years. The results will either be a curate’s egg of colossal proportions or a bold new way forward for all imperfect shows. If you saw it, you’ll know that the most recent series of Arrested Development was a bit of a mess. Almost without exception, the cast had become hugely successful in the years since the show went off air, and piecing together a Netflix revival looked like a brain-breakingly difficult nightmare of logistics and scheduling. As a result, Hurwitz essentially had to abandon the form altogether. For two great years, and then a slightly dodgy third, Arrested Development had been a traditional ensemble full of awful characters driven to their worst impulses by their close proximity to one other. But because the fourth series had to be taped together atom by atom – including plenty of infuriatingly conspicuous greenscreen inserts – Hurwitz was forced to adopt a Rashomon structure, with each episode focused on a different main character. And it was draining to watch. Without the whole gang all in the same place at the same time, Arrested Development suddenly became lumpen and belaboured. Scenes that would have once been tight and bulletproof dissolved into directionless mush. For anyone who loved Arrested Development – and anyone who loved Arrested Development loved Arrested Development – the disappointment was palpable. But Hurwitz has been quietly re-editing the series. On Friday, Netflix will debut something called Arrested Development Season 4 Remix: Fateful Consequences. All the footage from series four’s 15 episodes has been painstakingly reordered into 22 new episodes. Better yet, rather than focus on one character per story, every Bluth will now appear in every episode. It’s going to be chronological and interwoven. In short, it’s going to be more like the Arrested Development you remember. I’m fascinated by this. Not only is the remix’s existence a rare admission of error by a showrunner, but I’m eager to see if it will actually improve the viewing experience. After all, the scenes are still the same. The characters are still the same. The jokes are all still the same. Hurwitz is still working with the same raw material that he always had, but the difference could be night and day. If it works – if he pulls a lost classic from the ruined fuselage of what we’ve already seen – it could change television. It might prompt other showrunners to go back and tinker with their own unsatisfactory blips. Matthew Weiner could go back to alter the second series of Mad Men so that it didn’t sag under the weight of Peggy’s boring family. The weird first series of Parks and Recreation could be rejigged to make the characters as likeable as they would eventually become. Lost could erase, like, half the episodes from series three. A little work here or there would improve these shows immeasurably. Then again, it’s worth pointing out that this rarely works. Creators have retroactively buggered about with their work before, but all the notable examples are from film and music. George Lucas going back and slathering the original Star Wars trilogy in godawful CGI was little short of a crime against culture. Francis Ford Coppola’s Apocalypse Now Redux is an objectively worse film than the original, a masterpiece of botched structure and abandoned vision. Let It Be is nothing like the best Beatles album, but Let It Be Naked is woeful. And when Kanye West refused to stop tinkering with The Life of Pablo long after its release, he was effectively taking a hammer to songs that people already loved. There is an argument – a strong and clear argument – to leave things alone once they’re done, however well they turned out. But this might still work. The Arrested Development remix might be the comedy equivalent of the Blade Runner Director’s Cut; the moment when a flawed piece of work suddenly clicks into place. And, if it isn’t, there’s always series five to look forward to. And if that’s still a mess, we always have series two. For the love of God, nobody mess around with series two.