Manchester United players past and present have offered support for “father figure” Sir Alex Ferguson as the football world waited for news on his recovery from a brain haemorrhage. The 76-year-old former Manchester United manager remains in intensive care at Salford Royal hospital after he underwent emergency surgery on Saturday. Neither the hospital nor the club were able to issue an update on Ferguson’s condition on Monday as messages of support continued to flood in. United previously said his operation had “gone very well” but that he needed a period of intensive care. Phil Jones, an England international who was signed by Ferguson from Blackburn in 2011, was among many current and former players to offer public messages of support for him on Monday. “He is such a legend in my eyes. He is the one who brought me to the club and gave me that opportunity to play for one of the biggest clubs in the world,” said Jones, who has made 190 appearances for United. “He’s taken me under his wing like a father and it was shocking, it’s sad, but I know his character. I know he has that fight in him. Hopefully he’ll recover well. He has got all his family and friends around him, the support from all the players and staff at Man United and football around the world. “When something like that does happen, it’s nice that the football world comes together and shows support and we are all rooting for him. I’m sure he will be fine.” The Football Association, Premier League, Fifa, Uefa and individual clubs from Britain and around the world all tweeted their best wishes. The Wales manager, Ryan Giggs, who was given his United debut by Ferguson in 1991 aged 17, told BBC Wales: “Now is the time to pray and hope he can make a full recovery. He has been the biggest influence in my career, both on and off the pitch. I know the operation has been a success – but he is a fighter and that is what makes me think that he will be able to make a recovery.” United midfielder Juan Mata said the team would channel Ferguson’s spirit in their final three games of the season, culminating in the FA Cup final against Chelsea on Saturday 19 May. The Spaniard wrote in a blogpost: “This Saturday, all of us were overwhelmed by the news about Sir Alex Ferguson’s health condition. This circumstance has had a huge impact on Manchester United, as you can imagine. “All of us are united right now, wishing Sir Alex a speedy recovery. He has been a unique and fundamental figure in the football world over the last few decades. “I’ve never been coached by him, unfortunately, yet I know well his incomparable legacy on this club, that winning mentality and fighting [gene] that we must honour in the last three games of the season, especially in the FA Cup final. To achieve that, we are going to work hard while we eagerly await good news about Sir Alex’s recovery.” Ferguson has been at Salford Royal, just three miles from United’s Old Trafford stadium, since Saturday where he arrived under a police escort after first being taken to Macclesfield district hospital near his home in Cheshire. His family – including his wife, Cathy, and his son, Darren, the manager of Doncaster Rovers – were understood to be at his bedside.