Griefcast Podcast In a recent episode of her death-themed podcast, comedian Cariad Lloyd spoke about how awful her late father had been at talking about death, and the irony of her own capacity for the subject. Indeed, the second run of Griefcast – in which she interviews fellow comics about their losses – is as emotive and probing as the first. Recent guests include Guilty Feminist host Deborah Frances-White and Peep Show co-creator Sam Bain, with the tone nestled between standup show and therapy session. HJD Sandra Podcast Gimlet Media’s new pod thriller is available to binge in its entirety and it’s a star-studded affair. Kristen Wiig gives her voice to virtual assistant Sandra, an Alexa/Siri type powered by real people rather than technology. Arrested Development’s Alia Shawkat is Helen, a new recruit to a team of operators paid to listen in on customers. What with being assigned to answer queries about birds, going through a divorce and trying to please her demanding boss (Ethan Hawke), she’s got one hell of a job on her hands. HV Terrible, thanks for asking Nora McInerny provides a front-row seat to intimate conversations about painful circumstances that are sometimes unique, but always relatable. Unexpectedly losing my 36-year-old brother to a drug overdose was devastating. Episode 12’s guests are the sister and mother of comedic genius Harris Wittels; whose life and death resembled my brother’s. Listening was cathartic and therapeutic for me, and if you need a good cry, this podcast is the perfect catalyst. Be prepared, though. You could end up sobbing in the school pick-up line without a tissue in sight. Recommended by Amy Riley Comedian’s Surgery Ed Patrick’s Comedian’s Surgery is a perfect mix of medical insights and hilarious anecdotes. Ed’s a medical doctor and has an approachable style that means his guests open up with unique stories and I always end up learning something new about my favourite comedians, even if I’ve heard them speak many times before. Episodes with Alice Marshall, Joe Lycett and James Acaster are highlights so far. There is humour and insight about topics such as mental health and chronic illness, and I really enjoy the games and quick fire questions that give the show a great pace. Recommended by Mark Goddard Sun, sand and thousands of refugees: the Lesbos volunteer Ayesha Keller was horrified by the treatment of refugees in Europe and wanted to try to make a difference. She left her job and headed for the Greek island of Lesbos, where she found the beaches strewn with discarded lifejackets, and the formal refugee settlement overflowing. Thousands of people who were unable to get into the camp were huddled in freezing fields, with no facilities, food or shelter. Keller banded together with other volunteers who had gone to Greece in response to the tragedy. During her year-long stay, she helped crowdfund, establish and run a transit camp in a local farmer’s olive groves. It’s another episode of Small Changes, our series which interviews with people who’ve seen a problem in the world and set out to change it - often in small and unexpected ways. RS