Before I had kids, in the late 1990s, I was a far more ambitious cook than I am now. A MasterChef semi-finalist, I thought nothing of spending hours making shellfish stock from crab shells or hand-rolling tortelloni simply for a “garnish”. But I had a secret. I couldn’t cook rice. My idea of rice cookery was boiling it hard in a surplus of salty water, as if it were pasta. I was only rescued from my fear of cooking rice when a kind friend urged me to read The Rice Book by Sri Owen, which had been published a few years earlier, in 1993. At last, here was someone who could talk me through the mysteries of the “absorption method” and make it sound simple. Owen, an Indonesian food writer, tells us that she “grew up among rice fields” and she writes with such an infectious passion for rice that suddenly my fears seemed absurd. I will never forget the first time I cooked basmati using Owen’s recipe, simmering 450g rice in 570ml water and then steaming it further tightly covered with a lid and a tea towel. When I lifted the tea towel and saw a pan of perfectly fluffy white grains, my heart surged with pride. For a moment I was disappointed to see a crust at the bottom of the pan until I read the section in the book where Owen writes that in many cultures this rice-crust is considered the best part. Indonesians, she writes, deep fry this “intip” and nibble it as a snack. One of the many things to enjoy about The Rice Book is Owen’s opinionated voice. In the early 2000s, I got to know Sri and her husband Roger through the Oxford Food Symposium and was delighted to find that she was just the same in person as she is on the page: warm, deeply knowledgeable and unafraid to lay down the law. Owen says of her recipes that “I have tested them and they all work” – no false modesty here. She is scathing about boil-in-the-bag rice (“a very tiny advantage to pay good money for”). More controversially, she is no fan of brown rice, insisting that it is “quite unnecessary if you are eating a normal well-balanced diet”. But she can also strike a generous note of forgiveness. “If you’re miles from anywhere and all you can find is an old packet of pudding rice, use that,” she remarks, kindly. She helpfully notes that an electric rice cooker is perfectly fine for plain steamed rice. Re-reading The Rice Book now, I am struck by how modern it feels, with recipes for sumptuous vegan dishes and sushi. She was ahead of the game in her love of Korean food, giving recipes for bibimbap and bulgogi, although she assumes her British readers won’t be able to obtain kimchi and suggests gherkins as an alternative. This is much more than a recipe book. The early sections cover everything from rice mythology and irrigation and history to the economics of the global rice trade. “All rice statistics are suspect,” Owen reveals. She travels to Japan, a country that holds sticky short-grained rice in “mystical esteem”. On an express train from Kyoto she eats a bento box of sushi, tempura, rice and pickles so beautiful she feels she must photograph it. Owen wrote several other excellent cookbooks including Sri Owen’s Indonesian Food, a guide to the food of her homeland. But I love The Rice Book best. Reading it, you stop seeing this grain as a starchy backdrop to other foods and start seeing it as something essential, a kind of universal food grown in more than a hundred countries and eaten in many more. “The cultivation of rice,” she writes, “is one of humanity’s best claims to possess some kind of collective wisdom.” Gado-gado is an Indonesian cooked vegetable salad with peanut sauce, usually eaten as a one-dish lunch and almost always accompanied by compressed rice. Both dishes are served at room temperature. However, there is no reason why they shouldn’t be heated. Arrange the gado-gado on a serving platter or individual plates, dress it with the peanut sauce, put the cut-up rice around the edge, and pop the lot into the microwave on full power for about 1-2 minutes for individual servings or 2-3 minutes for the whole platter. Scatter the garnish over the warm gado-gado. It is possible to use aluminium foil instead of banana leaf to make the compressed rice (or lontong), but much the easiest way of cooking it is to use a bag made of muslin (or heatproof perforated paper, if you can get it). For 4-6 peopleFor the gado-gado vegetablescabbage or spring greens; shredded French beans, cut into 1cm lengths; carrot, peeled and sliced thinly; cauliflower florets; bean sprouts, washed 112g of eachpeanut sauce 285ml (see below) For the peanut sauce (makes about 285ml)raw peanuts 225g vegetable oil 112 ml garlic 2 cloves, choppedshallots 4, choppedshrimp paste a thin slice (optional)salt to tastechilli powder ½ tsp brown sugar ½ tsp dark soy sauce 1 tbsp water 450ml tamarind water 1 tbsp (see note at end of recipe) or juice of ½ lemon For the compressed ricelong grain rice 225g, preferably basmati or Thai fragrant, washed and drainedbags 2, made from muslin or heatproof perforated paper, about 15cm squarehot water 1.7 litres, and more later salt a pinch For the garnishlettuce leaves and watercresshard-boiled eggs 1 or 2, quarteredcompressed rice (see above)cucumber ¼, sliced thinlycrisp-fried onions 1 tbsp (see nasi goreng recipe) To make the peanut sauce, stir-fry the peanuts for 4 minutes in the oil. Remove with a slotted spoon to drain in a colander, and leave to cool. Then pound or grind the nuts into a fine powder, using a blender, coffee grinder, or pestle and mortar. Discard the oil, except for 1 tablespoonful. Crush the garlic, shallots and shrimp paste in a mortar with a little salt, and fry in the remaining oil for 1 minute. Add the chilli powder, sugar, soy sauce and water. Bring this to the boil, then add the ground peanuts. Simmer, stirring occasionally, until the sauce becomes thick; this should take 8-10 minutes. Add the tamarind water or lemon juice and more salt if needed. When cool, keep in a jar in the fridge. Reheat as required for use with satay or as a dip for crudités or savoury snacks. The sauce will keep in the fridge for up to 1 week. To make the compressed rice, fill each bag one-third full with rice. Sew up the opening. Boil the water with the pinch of salt. When it’s boiling, put in the bags of rice and let the water bubble gently for 75 minutes. Add more boiling water as required during cooking; the bags of rice must always be submerged. When finished, take out the bags, which are now like plump, rather hard cushions, and drain them in a colander. When they are cold, keep them in the fridge until they are to be eaten. To serve, just cut the “cushions” into chunks or slices about 3cm or a little more on a side. Use a large, sharp knife wetted with water. Discard the bags. For the gado-gado, boil each vegetable separately in slightly salted water for 3-4 minutes, except the bean sprouts, which need only 2 minutes. Drain each separately in a colander. Serve as described in the introduction. Even if the gado-gado is to be eaten cold, the peanut sauce should be heated in a saucepan for a minute or two before it is poured over the vegetables; if the sauce is very thick, stir in a little warm water. NOTE: TAMARIND AND TAMARIND WATERThe name is Arabic and means “Indian date”, though the tamarind fruits in their pods are nothing like dates. Early Arab traders probably shipped the dried pulp, which was valued for its sourness. This is still the easiest way to buy tamarind today; blocks of the pulp are sold in most Asian shops. Recipes usually call for tamarind water rather than the solid pulp. To make tamarind water, break off a piece of the pulp and put it in a little warm water (as a rough guide, 1 part by weight of pulp to 10 parts water). Squeeze and knead it so that the juice and flavour are expressed into the water; the more pulp you use, and the harder you squeeze it, the darker the water will become. Discard the solids. The water will keep in the fridge for up to a week. It doesn’t look very nice, but it helps to make the food taste good. The rice should be cooked about 2-3 hours before it is to be fried, so that it has time to get cold. Freshly cooked, still-hot rice will go soggy and oily if you fry it. The cold rice must be mixed in with the other ingredients when they are already cooked and still hot. From then on, the mixing and stir-frying must be done on a low heat and continue until the rice is hot but not burnt. If you are going to use seafood or meat, it is best to stir-fry this separately. You can use the same spice mixture as is given here for the fried rice, if you wish. Then mix the meat or seafood into the rice in the final 2 minutes before serving; or simply spread it on top of the rice on the serving dish. For 4-6 peoplelong grain rice 340g, cooked and allowed to cool (see below)vegetable oil 2 tbsp butter 1 tbsp shallots 3, or 1 small onion, sliced finelygarlic 2 cloves, sliced finely (optional)red chillies 2, deseeded and chopped finely, or ½ tsp chilli powderlight soy sauce 1 tbsp paprika 1 tsp tomato puree or ketchup 2 tsp button mushrooms 112g, wiped and thinly slicedcarrots 3 medium-size, diced very smallsalt to tastecrisp-fried onions to serve (see below) For the ricelong grain rice 450g, white or brownwater 560ml For the crisp-fried onions (makes about 500g)shallots 1kg , thinly slicedsunflower oil 285ml You can buy ready-made fried onions in most supermarkets, and Thai shops make them from the little red onions found in many Asian countries. To make crisp-fried onions from shallots, proceed as follows. It is easier to make these fried onions in a wok, but a frying pan will do. Heat the oil until a sliver of onion dropped into it sizzles immediately. Fry the shallots in 3 or 4 batches, stirring all the time, for 3-4 minutes each time or until they are crisp and lightly browned. Remove with a slotted spoon to drain in a colander lined with absorbent paper. Let them cool; they will keep crisp and fresh in an airtight container for about a week. To make the rice, put the rice and water in a saucepan on a moderate heat and bring to the boil. Stir once with a wooden spoon. Let the rice simmer, uncovered, until all the water has been absorbed. This will take about 10 minutes (brown rice, perhaps 15 minutes). The traditional Oriental way to finish the rice is to keep it in the saucepan and put the lid on as tightly as possible. If the lid isn’t tight-fitting, put a layer of tin foil between the lid and the pan. A tea towel is better still – it stops steam condensing inside the lid and dripping back into the rice. Turn down the heat as low as possible, and leave the rice to cook undisturbed for 10 or 12 minutes. (The time for brown rice is the same as for white.) Don’t take off the lid. Take the pan off the heat and set it on a wet tea-towel on your draining board. Leave the rice to rest for 5 minutes, still with the lid on. (The wet cloth will stop the bottom layer of the rice sticking to the pan.) Then uncover the pan and put the rice in a serving bowl. For the nasi goreng, heat the oil and butter in a wok or large frying pan. Stir-fry the shallots and garlic for about 1 minute, then add the other ingredients, except the rice, and stir-fry for 5-6 minutes or until the vegetables are cooked. Add the rice, and mix it thoroughly with the vegetables so it becomes hot and takes on the reddish tinge of the paprika and tomato. Serve hot, garnished with the crisp-fried onions, and sliced cucumber and tomatoes; or topped with seafood or meat as described earlier. For people who live in rice-growing countries, and especially for those who eat rice three times a day by choice, the best rice of all is plain boiled rice. If you proceed to cook it further in the oven, as you will do if you are influenced by foreign recipes, then for these purists you are overcooking it. The recipe that follows is worthy in its own right of inclusion here, but it is respectfully dedicated to the purists, for here the boiled rice is served in a separate bowl and everyone can help themselves and mix it with their chicken adobo, or adobong manok, as they call it in the Philippines. I suggest you boil the rice while the chicken dish is cooking. For 4-6 peoplewhole chicken 1.1-1.4kg, cut into serving pieces, the fat and skin discardedgarlic 6-8 cloves, finely choppedwhite vinegar or rice vinegar 112ml water 1.1 litres kaffir lime leaves or bay leaves 1 or 2 coarsely ground black pepper or chopped chillies ½-1 tspsalt 1 tsp peanut oil 2 tbsp ground turmeric ½ tsp paprika ½ tsp very thick coconut milk 140ml fish sauce or light soy sauce 2 tbsplong grain rice 450g, plain boiled Put the chicken pieces into a large saucepan, add the garlic, vinegar, water, kaffir lime or bay leaves, pepper or chilli, and salt. Bring to the boil, cover the pan, reduce the heat, and simmer for 20 minutes. With a slotted spoon, transfer the chicken pieces to a colander. Turn the heat up under the saucepan and boil the stock until it has reduced to half its original quantity. This will take about 20-25 minutes. Heat the oil in another saucepan and add the turmeric and paprika. Stir, and add about 6 tablespoons of the coconut milk. Stir once, and put in the chicken pieces. Stir these until every piece is coated in the orange-coloured sauce. Pour in the reduced stock and the rest of the coconut milk. Bring the liquid to the boil and let it bubble gently, stirring often, for 10-15 minutes. Add the fish sauce or soy sauce. Adjust the seasoning, and serve hot, with the plain boiled rice. Any lightly cooked or stir-fried vegetable will make a suitable accompaniment. This classic dish from West Sumatra may be said to represent Indonesian cooking at its best and most original. In Western countries, rendang is sometimes described, quite wrongly, as a curry. When it is cooked, the meat should be dark brown, almost black, chunky and dry with the dryness of meat that has absorbed the medium it was cooked in over a period of several hours. At home, I would use more chilli, and all the spices would of course be fresh. For 6-8 peopleshallots 6 red chillies 6, deseeded, or 3 tsp chilli powderginger root 3cm piece, peeledcoconut milk 2.3 litres buffalo meat or beef 1.35kg, preferably brisket, otherwise topside or silverside, cut into cubes about 2cm square garlic 4 cloves turmeric powder 1 tsp galangal powder ½ tsp bay leaf 1 fresh turmeric leaf 1 (optional)salt 2 tsp Peel and slice the shallots finely, and roughly chop the chillies and ginger. Put them in a blender with 4 tablespoons of the coconut milk, and blend until smooth. Put all the ingredients, with the coconut milk, into a large wok or saucepan. (It is more convenient to start in a pan, and transfer to a wok later.) Put the meat into the pan, with enough coconut milk to cover it. Stir the contents of the pan, and start cooking, on a medium heat, uncovered. Let the pan bubble gently for 1½ hours, stirring from time to time. The coconut milk will by then be quite thick, and of course much reduced. If you started in a large saucepan, transfer everything to a wok and continue cooking in the same way for another 30 minutes, stirring occasionally. By now, the coconut milk is beginning to reduce to oil, and the meat, which has so far been boiling, will soon be frying. From now on, the rendang needs to be stirred frequently. Taste, and add salt if necessary. When the coconut oil becomes thick and brown, stir continuously for about 15 minutes, until the oil has been more or less completely absorbed by the meat. Serve hot with lots of rice. This is my top favourite among biryanis. Unfortunately I can’t afford to cook it too often. But for a special occasion this makes an excellent first-course dish, to be followed (I suggest) by grilled meat or fish and salad. It is just as good as a main course, but in that case I think it should be the finale to the main course. In fact, as a complete meal in itself it is perhaps best of all and it seems less extravagant that way. Choose large morels so that you can get more stuffing into each one. Before you start, soak the rice in cold water for 30 minutes or a bit longer. If you use fresh morels, rinse them thoroughly to get rid of dirt and sand in their little crevices, and cut off their stems. The same applies to dried morels, which you then soak in hot water for 40-45 minutes. Keep the stems and soaking water to use in stock. For 2 people as a one-dish meal, otherwise for 4For the ricebasmati, or other good long grain rice 225g salt ¼ tsp water 1.4 litres For the mushrooms and stuffingfresh or dried morels 12-16 large hard cheese 112-170g, grated, or paneer, ricotta or other soft creamy cheesegreen chillies 2, deseeded and finely choppedcoriander 2 tbsp, finely chopped, or chopped chivesground cumin ½ tsp salt a pinch sugar ½ tsp (optional) For the sauceground coriander 1 tsp ground cumin ½-1 tsp ground almonds 2 tbsp ground cinnamon ¼ tsp yellow or red chilli powder ¼-½ tsp saffron powder or turmeric ¼ tsp ghee or olive oil 2 tbsp shallots 2, finely slicedgarlic 2 cloves, finely slicedginger 1 tsp, chopped cloves 2 green cardamoms 2 water 170ml salt and pepperplain yogurt 8 tbsp (not levelled) Drain the morels if they have been soaked, and pat them dry with kitchen paper. Mix well all the ingredients for the stuffing and stuff the morels. There may be some stuffing leftover; if so, sprinkle this on top of the sauce during the final cooking. Boil the water for the rice with ¼ teaspoon of salt. When it is boiling, put in the drained rice, bring back to the boil, and boil for 6 minutes. Drain the rice in a colander. Preheat the oven to 180C/gas mark 4. Assemble all the ground ingredients for the sauce together in a bowl. Heat the ghee or olive oil in a saucepan. Fry the shallots, garlic and ginger in this for 1 minute, then add the cloves and cardamom. Stir once and put in all the ground ingredients. Stir again and pour in the water. Bring it to the boil and simmer for 4 minutes. Add the salt and pepper, then the yogurt, a tablespoonful at a time, and keep stirring constantly. Then put the stuffed morels carefully into the pan, cover and simmer for 3-4 minutes. Adjust the seasoning. Transfer everything from the pan to an ovenproof dish with a lid. Sprinkle the leftovers of the cheese stuffing, if any, on top of the sauce. Spread the rice on top. Cover the dish very tightly, and cook in the preheated for 30-35 minutes, or longer if necessary, but not longer than 1 hour. Turn the oven down to 20C/gas mark ½ after 35 minutes. Serve hot. This is an adaptation of an old family recipe for rice porridge which we used to eat at breakfast and teatime. Black rice porridge and sorbet are in fact deep purple, as striking in colour as they are in flavour. This version, with coconut milk, is a creamy ice that contains no animal products and is therefore acceptable to vegans. For 6 peoplecoconut milk 1.7 litresblack glutinous rice 84g, soaked in cold water for 4-8 hours or overnight, then drainedsalt ½ tsp cinnamon 1 small stick brown sugar 3 tbsp glucose 2 tbsp Put the coconut milk and the drained rice in a saucepan with the salt and cinnamon stick and bring it to the boil. Simmer gently for 10 minutes and add the sugar. Continue simmering, stirring often until the porridge becomes thick (this will take 50-60 minutes). Take out and discard the cinnamon stick and pour the porridge into a liquidiser. Leave it to cool for 10 minutes, add the glucose, and liquidise until the mixture is smooth. Put it in to a sorbetière or an ice-cream maker and churn according to the instructions for your machine. If you don’t have a machine, transfer the liquidised porridge, when cold, to a plastic box. Put it in the freezer for 1 hour; it should then be slushy but not quite frozen. Liquidise it again, return it to the plastic box and put it back in the freezer for another hour. Repeat the cycle once more – so you do 3 liquidisings and freezings altogether. Freeze the sorbet until it’s needed. Before serving, let it stand in the fridge for at least 1 hour to soften. The Rice Book by Sri Owen is available secondhand; sriowen.squarespace.com/the-rice-book