Chelsea have joined the list of clubs monitoring Anthony Martial’s situation at Manchester United and would move for the France international if the striker agitates for a transfer from Old Trafford this summer. Martial has endured a frustrating third campaign in English football, flitting from team to bench and limited to 17 Premier League starts, and suitors – who already included Juventus and Tottenham Hotspur – have been granted enough encouragement that he could seek a fresh start at the end of the season. The Frenchman is contracted to 2019 with an option for a further year, and would therefore command a considerable fee. Juve are understood to have indicated they would be prepared to pay around £45m for his services. Chelsea, braced for Real Madrid to firm up their long-standing interest in Eden Hazard, would consider the 22-year-old a player of considerable potential, but also one with the quality already to feature anywhere across their front line. United’s instinct will be to retain the forward, who they secured from Monaco for an initial £36m in 2015, but, if Martial pushes for a move, they may not be averse to selling, even to a divisional rival. The clubs negotiated Nemanja Matic’s move to Old Trafford last summer, and José Mourinho retains an interest in the Chelsea forward, Willian. Roman Abramovich is still hopeful Hazard will sign a new contract but is eager to instigate other changes to the playing staff at Stamford Bridge this summer, when Antonio Conte is expected to depart. Despite the uncertainty over the identity of the Italian’s successor, the club’s recruitment department – still operating without a technical director – have already begun exploring the market for potential additions, though Chelsea would have to generate funds through sales. A failure to qualify for the Champions League – they are fifth, now five points behind Tottenham with three games to play – would result in a shortfall of up to £70m in revenues and, in order to satisfy Financial Fair Play rules, fringe players may be moved on. Borussia Dortmund may seek to make Michy Batshuayi’s loan move a permanent deal after the Belgian impressed in the Bundesliga with seven goals in nine starts prior to an ankle injury. Kurt Zouma and Kenedy, currently on loan at Stoke and Newcastle respectively, could also move on, while Tomas Kalas and Lucas Piazon could join Fulham permanently if Slavisa Jokanovic’s side are promoted to the top flight. The England internationals Ruben Loftus-Cheek, who is expected to be in Gareth Southgate’s squad for the summer’s World Cup finals, and Tammy Abraham will not be sold, but the likes of Marco van Ginkel and even Danny Drinkwater, who has endured a frustrating first season at the club since arriving from Leicester for £35m, could also depart. David Luiz, under-used all season, may consider the changes in the dugout before confronting his own future at the club. Chelsea boast a net outlay of around £119m since 2014 with their business model having shifted markedly from the lavish spending of the early Abramovich era. The oligarch remains as committed as ever, with the club committed to redeveloping Stamford Bridge, but will continue to comply with FFP, meaning they will not boast the leeway enjoyed by Manchester City and United in the market. Abramovich is to be honoured by the Federation of Jewish communities of Russia, whose board of trustees he chairs, for investing in excess of £360m into Jewish communities in Russia, Israel and other countries around the world. “Much of the work we do has been made possible thanks to Mr Abramovich, and we are deeply thankful for his continued support,” said the FJCR president, Rabbi Alexander Boroda. “We have more than 160 communities in all of Russia and Roman supports them all. He never talks about it, but I want to because people don’t understand who is the source of it is – and it is him.” Chelsea have run a prominent ‘Say No to Antisemitism’ campaign, personally initiated by the owner, since February.