Pre-season prediction 6th; Current position: 6th Having papered over the cracks with cup wins in recent seasons, there was no bridging the chasm between first and sixth this time. Grim away showings illustrated Arsène Wenger’s fading motivational capacity. But at least – after the hopes of a fairytale ending were quashed by Diego Simeone – we had a final bit of Wengerball against Burnley, giving Le Gaffer a fitting send-off at the Grove. All in all, though, 5/10 is about right. Stars/flops There were a few tantalising hints that Aubameyang might deliver. Otherwise the only positives were unexpected goals and assists from Monreal and the fresh blood: Reiss Nelson, Ainsley Maitland-Niles and Konstantinos Mavropanos. The rest went through the motions, while Hector Bellerín and Alex Iwobi went backwards. Summer targets We need a manager who’ll focus on building from the back. One who’ll hopefully prioritise a world-class, dominant presence between the posts, a replacement for Laurent Koscielny (if we haven’t already found one in Mavropanos – Sven Mislintat’s first discovery?) and a dedicated defensive midfielder whose only ambition is to protect and serve. Best and worst away fans The invasion of 20,000 Cologne fans certainly made an impression. Credit also to Burnley for their chorus of “Only one Arsène Wenger” (after chiding us with “You’re only here for the T-shirts”). Moment that made you smile For all the emotion of Arsène’s leaving do, there was huge relief at having been put out of his and our misery. For the first time in two decades, we’re going in to a summer feeling eager anticipation, without a scooby of what it might bring. – Bernard Azulay goonersdiary.co.uk; @GoonerN5 Pre-season prediction 10th; Current position: 12th It’s been a struggle – it feels like some of this squad may have had their last season here. But while it hasn’t been a comfortable ride, Eddie Howe did well to pull the team out of the bottom three, and there were great wins against Arsenal and Chelsea. One of the club’s biggest problems now, though, is keeping up with fans’ expectations. Just staying up is no longer seen as making progress. 6/10 Stars/flops Nathan Aké and Lewis Cook are the two players that really excelled, but Asmir Begovic and Ryan Fraser have had decent seasons, too. As for flops – Jermain Defoe never found his form. Apart for a brief flash against Crystal Palace, he hasn’t looked like he fits in yet with the team. Summer targets There have been lots of rumours about a £12m move for Bristol City striker Bobby Reid – but Howe also has to find some young defenders, even though our own Jack Simpson is ready to step up. In midfield, Chelsea’s Kenedy and Fulham’s Tom Cairney would be on my list. Best and worst away fans The worst were Stoke – they never have anything good to say about any other team, and they really won’t be missed. The best were Liverpool, who do show respect and are keen to talk football. Moment that made you smile Those interview analogies from Carlos Carvalhal were amusing – an improvement on the standard press conference lines. Shame he’s not sticking around. – Peter Bell afcbchimes.blogspot.co.uk; @CherryChimes.co.uk Pre-season prediction 10th; Current position: 14th A fantastic season. The brilliant group of players that got us promoted gelled with some superb new signings and they all worked their socks off under Chris Hughton, who must be manager of the year. Securing our Premier League status by beating Manchester United in our last home game was a dream come true. 9/10 Stars/flops So many stars … new boys Pascal Gross, Maty Ryan, Davy Pröpper, José Izquierdo and Ezequiel Schelotto. But then our oldies – Bruno, Gaëtan Bong and Glenn Murray – were outstanding, too, as were Lewis Dunk, Shane Duffy and Dale Stephens. Anthony Knockaert, meanwhile, saved it for the last game – he was on fire against United and should take that outstanding display into next season, when hopefully we will see more of Jürgen Locadia. Summer targets We could strengthen, but given the shrewd way the club is run and the success of our under 23s, we have probably got it all covered. And our 22-year-old goalkeeper Christian Walton, on loan at Wigan, won the League One golden glove. Best and worst away fans Everyone loves coming to the Amex. Manchester City fans were the happiest. Crystal Palace were the worst, again. Moment that made you smile We were 2-0 down at Huddersfield, it was snowing, and everyone sang: “If you hate Palace, take off your shoes,” and waved them in the air. – Steph Fincham Observer reader Pre-season prediction 14th; Current position: 7th It’s been absolutely brilliant – way beyond anything we could have dared hope for. Back in August I was just looking for us to avoid relegation worries, but it went way past that, and now we find ourselves in Europe. Sean Dyche continues to prove himself a tremendous manager for us. His decision in January to sign a new deal was the best news possible. 10/10 Stars/flops It’s always difficult to pick out stars here because it’s all based on team performance. But it would be wrong not to single out Nick Pope and James Tarkowski, who earned deserved England calls. The only possible flops are last summer’s signings Jon Walters and Nahki Wells – but both, particularly Walters, have been held back by injuries. Summer targets I’m sure we’ll have a central defender on the list, and we’ll probably also need another striker. It’s just about adding layers to build up the squad. Best and worst away fans Many have filled the away end and some added to the atmosphere. Manchester United were probably the noisiest. The worst were Swansea – they just didn’t turn up. Moment that made you smile Half-time on the opening day of the season at Chelsea, staring at the big screen showing the scoreline CHELSEA 0 BURNLEY 3. Even then, we couldn’t have known at the time just how good the season was going to be. – Tony Scholes UpTheClarets.com; @UTCdotcom Pre-season prediction 2nd; Current position: 5th A frustrating nine months. Relationships have broken down between manager and board, manager and players and, to a degree, manager and fans. Antonio Conte has gone from charming to brooding, stubborn and scowling: it’s all rather familiar. The FA Cup is still up for grabs but, as we know only too well, José Mourinho has a habit of winning cups. Conte sadly doesn’t. 5/10 Stars/flops N’Golo Kanté once again shone, and Olivier Giroud made a difference. Eden Hazard has been inconsistent, though we’d be lost without him, while Álvaro Morata is our outstanding flop. Boy did he flop – dramatically, on to his backside mostly. Sometimes, you just know that the fit isn’t right. Summer targets As good as Giroud has been, we still need a striker – possibly even two. Players who have a firm grip on gravity, ideally. We also need some quality to replace Victor Moses (Davide Zappacosta is not the answer), a younger Cesc Fàbregas and some more steel: as a team we are too lightweight. We need players who are happy to mix it up when necessary – John Terry, Didier Drogba, Diego Costa, Michael Ballack, even Frank Lampard were never bullied. Best and worst away fans Roma were loud and energetic, showing how much grounds in this country have been sterilised. Arsenal were like tourists. Moment that made you smile Giroud’s FA Cup goal against Southampton – like an action scene from Platoon, the Saints players falling in his wake as our new favourite hipster took them out. And David Luiz’s fancy‑dress birthday party also guaranteed a snigger or two. Special mention to Pedro for going as Harley Quinn. Fully admire his “go big or go home” attitude. – Trizia Fiorellino ChelseaSupportersGroup.net Pre-season prediction 12th; Current position: 11th As everyone knows by now, in mid-October we were on zero wins, seven defeats and zero goals. So to be going into the final day with a chance of a top-half finish is just astonishing. And it’s all happened despite the most crippling injury list ever seen at Palace, our only striker forgetting how to score, and a dire transfer window. What a job Roy Hodgson has done. 8/10 Stars/flops Wilfried Zaha has been the shining light: we didn’t win a game without him. Luka Milivojevic led by example, James Tomkins was a stalwart, and academy product Aaron Wan-Bissaka made a great start. As for flops: three goals from Christian Benteke all season is simply not acceptable, and surely means his departure. And if anyone knows why we signed Erdal Rakip from Benfica on loan in January, I’d love to hear it. Summer targets We’ve already lined up a very good keeper in Vicente Guaita, who joins in July. But strikers, more than one, are an absolute priority. Another winger wouldn’t go amiss either – someone like Michail Antonio or Ademola Lookman. The dream signing would be to bring in Ruben Loftus-Cheek on a permanent transfer. It’s been a pleasure to see him develop into a player who looks destined to board the plane to Russia. Best and worst away fans Huddersfield sang their hearts out, loving the 3-0 massacring they inflicted on us. But Man City gave their side no backing when they were under the cosh. Moment that made you smile Milivojevic giving Benteke the ball to take a late penalty in April when we were 4-0 up against Leicester. It almost brought a tear to the eye. – Chris Waters PalaceTrust.org.uk; @Clapham_Grand Pre-season prediction 6th; Current position: 8th Back in August there was real optimism. With Ronald Koeman in charge from the start and plenty of new signings in, I was confident we’d consolidate this season, make it into the top six and do well in the Europa League. It didn’t quite work out that way. Two months later we were at the wrong end of the league, embarrassed in Europe, and looking for a new manager. David Unsworth came in as caretaker for a few games before the board picked Sam Allardyce – who is comfortably worse than both of them. 2/10 Stars/flops Jordan Pickford has been outstanding in goal, and should, without doubt, be England’s No 1 this summer. New signing Cenk Tosun has done well too, when he’s had some service. Allardyce has to be our top flop – he’s all “me, me, me” and just doesn’t get Everton. Yannick Bolasie, meanwhile, is a circus act. Summer targets Just one: a new manager. Anyone in place of Allardyce. Best and worst away fans The best were Huddersfield, who never stopped singing. Hajduk Split fans were awful. Moment that made you smile Seeing Séamus Coleman return to the side in January after his horrific broken leg. His last-minute sprint when he outpaced two players to get a cross in was wonderful. A marvellous Evertonian. – Steve Jones @BlueKippercom Pre-season prediction 16th; Current position: 16th Shutting out the champions then drawing at Stamford Bridge was quite some way to stay up. It’s the latest in a series of remarkable achievements over the last two years from a club that’s always being written off. David Wagner has given us this brilliant ability to come up with the goods when the chips are down. He’s not only the reason we survived, but he is why we’re here in the first place. Get that man a statue! 10/10 Stars/flops Last year’s play-off hero and demigod Christopher Schindler has been an absolute rock at the back and is one of the most underrated players in the Premier League. It didn’t work out for Scott Malone, though. He tore us apart last season when playing for Fulham, but has looked a long, long way off the level we’re at now. Summer targets If we could get Terence Kongolo on a permanent deal it’d be an absolute coup and solve our left-back problem. We also need serious pace up top and on the wings. Steve Mounié and Laurent Depoitre have been great but both are target men, so our play can get one dimensional. Best and worst away fans Liverpool were very disappointing considering their reputation. West Ham enjoyed thrashing us. “We’re West Ham United, we clap with our hands” in reference to our ‘clappers’ made me chuckle. Moment that made you smile Our FA Cup tie against Manchester United when the VAR system produced wobbly lines for an offside decision … Keep VAR out of our beautiful game. – Alex Taylor @AlexJT27 Huddersfield can count themselves unfortunate on that second Lukaku goal. Would've been ruled out with VAR. pic.twitter.com/4S1gzHFusQ Pre-season prediction 7th; Current position: 9th On the surface it looks like a relative success, but our league position belies our quality. I predicted that if we abandoned our style we’d struggle, and Claude Puel’s unpopular revolution has proven that to be true. It’s incredible that, given the dirge we’ve endured this season, we’ve been so comfortable in the table. The bottom half must be truly diabolical … I’ll give it 6/10 for the season; 3/10 for the manager. Stars/flops Jamie Vardy was robbed of the official player of the year award, won by Harry Maguire. Without Vardy’s goals who knows where we’d be now. As for flops: he’ll for ever be our greatest ever captain but Wes Morgan has well and truly entered the twilight of his career. Kasper Schmeichel has also seen a remarkable dip in form. Summer targets Recruitment is crucial for us this year, with Riyad Mahrez surely on his way. The unrelenting push for a new brand of football and an ageing squad means we could do with reinforcing every position on the pitch. Best and worst away fans Newcastle were best, but they played us off the park and Sunderland had just gone down, so they had every reason to be chipper. Southampton were disappointing. Moment that made you smile When the visiting Spurs fans were goading Vardy with crude chants about his wife’s appearance on I’m a Celebrity, only for him to rifle home a beautiful volley. It shut them up mid-sentence. – Chris Whiting TheChrisWhitingShow.wordpress.com; @ChrisRWhiting Pre-season prediction 1st; Current position: 4th We’ve had worse. We didn’t quite make the top spot and we need a point today to guarantee a top-four finish – though of course if we do it right in Kiev that won’t matter. This really is Jürgen Klopp’s team now, with all the rollercoaster rides that brings. He has made us a united force, and he gave City a masterclass in tactics away in the Champions League. After today, Kiev here we come! 9/10 Stars/flops No real flops: we’ve improved massively as a unit. Trent Alexander-Arnold has learned fast, Andy Robertson has been phenomenal, Virgil van Dijk looks like he’s played at the back for us for ever and James Milner is revitalised. Sadio Mané is back to his best at just the right time, and I can’t heap high enough praise on Bobby Firmino. Oh, and then there’s Mo Salah. Summer targets I was keen on Roma keeper Alisson until we put seven past him. It’d be great to have another defender on Van Dijk’s level – Toby Alderweireld? And we need more in midfield. Naby Keita is coming but it’d be great if Nice’s Jean Seri joined him. Best and worst away fans The best were all those who don’t whine about our lack of “famous atmosphere”. As ever, usual suspects for worst, but a special mention to Stoke and their fiver-waving antics. Moment that made you smile Hearing the ref’s whistle after what seemed like the hundred and ninety‑eighth minute away to Roma. – Steph Jones Observer reader • Part 2: Manchester City to West Ham