Hatred of the nanny state is not only found among Conservatives raised by nannies. The left can be as libertarian as the right and as repelled by a culture dominated by prigs and killjoys. Left libertarianism powers the modern feminist approval of prostitution and its damning of traditional campaigners against the sale of women’s bodies as “whorephobes” and “swerfs” (sex worker exclusionary radical feminists, in the clunky jargon). As Scotland becomes the first country in the world to try to price drinkers out of alcoholism with minimum booze charges, the same resistance to the paternalist state is evident. The modern left is an overwhelmingly bourgeois movement and liberal guilt can always be exploited. In Scotland, four cans of beer or a bottle of wine cannot cost less than £4.50, a three-litre bottle of cider £11.25 and a bottle of vodka £13.13. Wealthy drinkers buy craft beers and fine wines and won’t be affected. Minimum pricing looks like class war from above: the prosperous telling the lower orders to “do what I say, not what I do”. From Orwell on, a strain of left-wing writing holds it natural for the overworked and exhausted to want the hit of fatty food and cheap booze. “We walked through the door at midnight at the end of a shift,” said James Bloodworth of his time in an Amazon warehouse, “kicked off our boots and collapsed on to our beds with a bag of McDonald’s and a can of beer.” As far as he and his colleagues were concerned, foodies telling them to eat a healthy diet “could go to hell”. Bloodworth, like Orwell before him, doesn’t believe a high-calorie, high alcohol diet does anything but harm. But their subtleties are lost in the general fear of seeming a snob. I’m all for liberal guilt. If liberals have a fault, it is that they are not guilty enough. But left libertarianism fails in theory and in practice. Only those who do not know what alcoholism is, or how the poor live, could entertain it. Most on low incomes don’t drink as much as the middle classes. (They can’t afford to.) Minimum pricing does not target moderate drinkers but the 5% of, generally, but not exclusively, poor people, lost in addiction. It is a truth universally unacknowledged that, like drugs cartels, the drink industry makes most of its money from addicts. It thrives on hooked customers, who put boosting the brewers’ profits before their and their families’ health and happiness. Sixty per cent of alcohol sales – worth £27bn a year in England – are to “increasing risk” drinkers taking more than 21 units of alcohol a week, in the case of men (about 10 pints or two bottles of wine), and “harmful” drinkers taking more than 50. Twenty one units (14 for women) does not sound much in my world of journalism, but it is a sign of people who cannot go a day without a shot of their drug, which is as good a definition of an addiction as any. Even at that rate, the afflicted bring on the risk of cancer, stroke, brain damage and liver failure. By the time you are topping more than 50 units (35 if you are a woman) you are at risk of full degeneration. Don’t think I’m talking only about old men on park benches. In a vain attempt to persuade Westminster to introduce minimum pricing, researchers at Sheffield University said it would limit the 63,000 alcohol-related deaths in the next five years in England and Wales. Before they go, the afflicted will have reached the stage where they can only feel well when they drink. They will sweat, vomit, succumb to an alcoholic dementia that destroys their co-ordination and memories and see their liver fail and stomach distend. As Ken Kesey succinctly described the process in One Flew Over the Cuckoo’s Nest: “He was blind and diseased from drinking. And every time he put the bottle to his mouth, he didn’t suck out of it, it sucked out of him.” When you clear away the old snobbery about fine wines and the new snobberies about single-estate gins and craft beers, you are left with a clear view of a drinks business whose main source of revenue is sucking the life out of its customers. And out of anyone unlucky enough to know them. John Stuart Mill’s principle that adults should be free to harm themselves as long as they don’t harm others does not help the alcohol conglomerates. Unlike the trade in illegal drugs, the sale of alcohol is not conducted with violence. Instead, it provokes violence. So much violence that the British Crime Survey estimated half of all violent crime was alcohol related. The partners and children of alcoholics take the hardest hits, a fact we seem to have forgotten. The original feminist movement was well aware of the relationship between booze, rape and abuse. Cristabel Pankhurst wrote against “the great scourge” of men driven by “foul thinking and alcohol” to infect their wives with syphilis, which was incurable in the early 20th century. Josephine Butler, who led the campaign in the 1860s against the forcible genital examination of women, but not men, to see if they were carrying sexually transmitted diseases, was also a temperance campaigner. Their successors do not want prohibition today. Just prudent public health measures: minimum pricing, mandatory health warnings on bottles and an advertising ban. They do not receive the support they deserve because the old knowledge that alcohol is a feminist and socialist issue has all but died. Few want to seem an uncool prude or risk the accusation of being the world’s first Derf (drink exclusionary radical feminist, if I may coin a phrase). Fewer still understand that coolness can kill and the only way to stop the killing is to become a killjoy. • Nick Cohen is an Observer columnist