Jason Day has won the Wells Fargo Championship at Quail Hollow to claim a second win on the PGA Tour in 2018. The former world No1 almost aced the 17th hole on the way to a final round two-under 69 and a two-stroke victory. After squandering a three-shot lead on the back nine, Day made amends with back-to-back- birdies late on Sunday to clinch his 12th PGA Tour victory in style. The Australian made a 10ft putt to birdie the 16th and then took aim at the par-3 17th hole with a 7-iron from 230 yards. His ball landed some 40 feet short of the pin, took a huge first bounce and finally clattered against the bottom of the flag stick on the fifth bounce. Day was unlucky not to make a hole-in-one but the stick also saved his ball from rolling off the back of the green. He made the ensuing three-foot putt to take a two-shot lead, becoming the only player to birdie the hole in the closing round. He got up and down from the right-hand rough on the last for par to finish at 12 under for the week. American duo Aaron Wise (68) and Nick Watney (69) tied for second at 10 under. Phil Mickelson had a final round 69 to be alone in fifth at seven under, a short behind Bryson DeChambeau (70). Tiger Woods was a non-factor, shooting 74 to finish 14 shots behind Day as he failed to make a birdie in the final round of a tournament for the first time since 2014. Australian veteran Greg Chalmers carded an even-par 71 to finish at two under in a tie for 21st. Day rated the victory one of the best of his career, not because of the quality of his play but more due to his ability to get the job done without his best game. “I had no idea where the ball was going today, especially off the tee,” he said in an interview on the 18th green. “I missed a lot of fairways, missed a lot of greens. My short game stood the test, which is nice. “This is probably one of the best wins I’ve ever had, just because of how hard everything was today.” It is only two years since Day was dominating the game before a spell of inconsistency. However, a win at Torrey Pines in January showed that he was back in business, and his latest victory is projected to elevate him to seventh in the world rankings before the spotlight turns to the the Players Championship, which he won in 2016.