Meghan Markle’s father will walk her down the aisle and her mother will accompany her in the bridal car, Kensington Palace has announced ahead of the royal wedding. The parents of the American former actor, who is marrying Prince Harry at St George’s chapel at Windsor Castle on 19 May, are scheduled to fly to Britain in the week of the wedding. In the days before the ceremony, Thomas Markle, 73, a retired TV lighting director who lives in Mexico, and his former wife, Doria Ragland, 61, a social worker and yoga teacher who lives in Los Angeles, will meet members of the royal family privately. The couple divorced when Meghan was six. There will be no maid of honour, as Meghan has declined to choose favourites from her network of close friends – thought to include her university friend the author Lindsay Roth, and Jessica Mulroney, a Canadian stylist. They will support her before the service, which is to be televised around the world, but will have no formal role on the day. Her bridesmaids, flowergirls and pageboys will all be children, though their identities have not yet been released. The couple, who live at Nottingham Cottage at Kensington Palace, will spend the night before the wedding apart, as is traditional. They do not intend to go on honeymoon immediately. A Kensington Palace spokesman said: “Prince Harry and Ms Markle are very much looking forward to welcoming Ms Markle’s parents to Windsor for the wedding. Mr Thomas Markle and Ms Doria Ragland will be arriving in the UK in the week of the wedding, allowing time for Prince Harry’s family, including the Queen, the Duke of Edinburgh, the Prince of Wales, the Duchess of Cornwall, and the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge to spend time with them before the big day. “Both of the bride’s parents will have important roles in the wedding. On the morning of the wedding, Ms Ragland will travel with Ms Markle by car to Windsor Castle. Mr Markle will walk his daughter down the aisle of St George’s chapel. Ms Markle is delighted to have her parents by her side on this important and happy occasion.” There was no comment from palace officials about Meghan’s other relatives – in particular her half-brother and half-sister, Thomas Markle Jr, 51, and Samantha Grant, 53. Both had told US media they have not received invitations, with Markle Jr recently claiming that even their father had not received one. Harry has also involved the family of his late mother, Princess Diana, on the day. All three of Diana’s siblings – Earl Spencer, Lady Sarah McCorquodale and Lady Jane Fellowes – have been invited. The latter will also give a reading during the service. “Prince Harry and Ms Markle both feel honoured that Lady Jane will be representing her family and helping to celebrate the memory of the late Princess on the wedding day,” the palace said. Prince William, who is best man, will forgo the FA Cup final which, as president of the Football Association, he had been scheduled to attend. Six hundred guests have been invited to the chapel, and will begin arriving from 9.30am. They will travel to Windsor Castle by private coach. Harry has met Ragland on several occasions, and it was her permission he sought before proposing to Meghan. He has not yet met her father. “This wedding will be guided by tradition, allowing everyone to celebrate what makes royal weddings so special, but also one which reflects the personalities of Prince Harry and Ms Markle,” said Kensington Palace.