It is a week when all good things come to an end for Arsenal and this was in keeping with that theme as Arsène Wenger suffered his first defeat against Leicester City in 23 games, leaving his team without a point away from home this year and enduring their worst run of form on the road since 1966. In many ways the evening felt like a microcosm of Arsenal’s season as they pressed the self-destruct button not once but twice. Konstantinos Mavropanos was sent off after only 15 minutes for hauling down Kelechi Iheanacho, who had just punished some poor Arsenal defending to put Leicester ahead, and although Pierre‑Emerick Aubameyang equalised early in the second half, Wenger’s side handed the initiative to the home team again when Henrikh Mkhitaryan brought down Demarai Gray. Jamie Vardy, who turned down the chance to sign for Wenger two years ago, dispatched the penalty kick for his 21st goal of the season and Riyad Mahrez applied the coup de grace for Leicester with a superb third in the 90th minute, leaving Wenger to reflect on another disappointing night that he blamed on the officials. “It’s a frustration because I believe we played a great game and with 10 against 11 we have shown quality in our game and spirit,” he said. “Overall it is very sad because the decision went against us and we are upset that we lost a game that we should not have lost. It does not have big consequences but it’s just a continuity of what we have faced all season.” Wenger was talking initially about the straight red card that Mavropanos received for tugging at the shorts of Iheanacho, who had forced the young Greek defender into a mistake by closing him down as he tried to play the ball out from the back. Graham Scott, the referee, was well positioned to make the call. “I disagree with the red card because [Rob] Holding would have caught this ball, because he was not the last man,” Wenger said. That was a dubious interpretation of the incident given that it was highly questionable whether Holding would have been able to get across and stop Iheanacho in his tracks. As for the penalty kick, Mkhitaryan appeared to be playing with fire when he challenged Gray from behind, after Shkodran Mustafi abjectly passed the ball straight to the Leicester winger, although Wenger was convinced that Scott got that badly wrong. “The penalty is a very creative, imaginative aspect from the referee,” Wenger said. “We’ve watched it again, it’s a nice dive and it’s not a penalty. Mkhitaryan plays the ball.” The evening finished with Wenger acknowledging the Leicester supporters as they sang his name, yet it was tempting to wonder whether the home crowd would have been quite so generous if they were losing, rather than winning. It was an important victory for Claude Puel, who had registered only four wins from Leicester’s previous 19 league matches, and opens the door to the possibility of his side pipping Everton to eighth place on the final day. Iheanacho’s goal set Leicester on their way, the Nigerian thumping a bouncing ball inside the near post, after Fousseni Diabaté nodded down Christian Fuch’s cross, and only a string of fine saves from Petr Cech prevented the home team from adding to their lead before the interval as Arsenal struggled to cope with their numerical disadvantage. The visitors were brighter early in the second half, however when Aubameyang turned the ball in from six yards after Eldin Jakupovic had repelled his first attempt. Leicester, though, were back in front 14 minutes from time, when Vardy sent Cech the wrong way from the spot, and Mahrez then turned Holding inside out to score a lovely third and put a smile on Puel’s face. “It was a good feeling to win our last home game,” Leicester’s manager said.