The times they are a-changing. It may now be possible to write a nostalgic piece about T20 cricket. Perhaps we should alert Radio 4’s Sue MacGregor to the notion of reliving the creation of T20 back at the start of the century on The Reunion. On the evening of Friday 13 June, 2003, the competition was launched around the counties. I was at Taunton along with more than five thousand others to watch Somerset play Warwickshire (cue soundtrack of Mary Hopkin in full flow remembering how we laughed away the hours and dreamed of all the great things we would do). When Somerset were batting, chasing 189 for victory, I went down to the Warwickshire dugout to chat to their coach, John Inverarity. He is the Australian who padded up to the last ball of the 1968 Oval Test match at about the same time as Mary Hopkin was adorning Top of the Pops. Inverarity was, and still is, one of the great thinkers about the game, the nearest equivalent to Mike Brearley among Australian cricketers, and I was intrigued to discover what he thought about this new format. Of course I never found out there and then. There was no time for such discussion. Inverarity is the most civilised of men, a former head teacher and stimulating company, but he had other things on his mind. There was a game of cricket to be won and that was what he was concentrating on. He winced; he even swore when a catch went down or a misfield was committed and this most decorous of Aussies may even have punched the air when a wicket fell. This was not “hit and giggle” which was how David Lloyd always used to describe T20. It was a proper contest, albeit an unusually short one. This was when it became apparent to me that this brash new format might work. Even more important than the coaches desperately wanting to win was the fact the players did as well. They did not want to be ridiculed by all those packed into the stands and they understandably relished playing in front of a proper crowd. It was not the face painting or the DJs that made T20 work; it was the cricket and the contest. On that evening in Taunton Warwickshire, shrewdly led by Nick Knight, won by 19 runs with Collins Obuya from Kenya taking three for 16, an early sign that wrist-spinners, against all expectation, might actually prosper in this format. Inverarity was delighted. Back in 2002 there had, of course, been much debate about the wisdom of this new-fangled competition. The counties voted – and on this occasion it was a “free” vote since I have no recall of a guaranteed £1.3m per annum for those ready to agree with the ECB – and the margin in favour of T20 was slim, 11-7 with Middlesex, Sussex, Yorkshire, Warwickshire, Somerset, Glamorgan and Northamptonshire voting against. No expense had been spared and very few details overlooked by the England and Wales Cricket Board in their efforts to sell this new idea. The press were taken off to Spain for a two-day seminar about several aspects of the game but the crunch for the ECB was selling T20. This was all superbly organised and minutely planned. There was even an opportunity to play golf at Valderrama, of which Lord MacLaurin, then chairman of the board, was a member. That beautiful course had never before witnessed so many ugly hacks (I refer solely to the golf shots attempted) in a single afternoon. All of which was quite a contrast to the announcement of the latest format of the game to be hatched by the ECB, which was delivered almost a fortnight ago via a surprise media release followed by a hastily arranged conference call. We knew what the plans were back in 2002. This time we know that the scoreboard is going to be simplified, apparently so that women and children can understand what is going on, but we have no idea how the tournament will be accommodated into the fixture list. What will happen to the unfortunates who are not required by the eight new teams? They could be playing 50-over cricket, T20 among the counties, Championship cricket in two divisions or in a conference system. A working party under Wasim Khan has just been set up to ponder all this. All we know is that the new tournament must happen because the ECB has sold those rights to the broadcasters. In response to all the ridicule of the new format the ECB has reeled out some of its senior employees from Joe Root and Eoin Morgan downwards and there is the tacit suggestion that any opposition to the scheme stems from the sort of stick-in-the-mud attitude that was prevalent back in 2002, even though the majority of today’s players (but not the ones employed centrally) have their doubts. “What are they doing at the ECB? It’s actually embarrassing” was the unprovoked response of one senior county cricketer and he is not alone. The parallel with 2002 does not work, by the way. Whether you liked it or not, the idea of T20 cricket in 2002 was a genuinely radical change to the game, which was to have global consequences. By contrast the changes that have been outlined this April are mostly cosmetic, designed to keep the counties and the broadcasters happier: a reduction of 20 balls, a gimmicky 10-ball over: a new scoreboard. There is also the suggestion of getting rid of lbws, which would actually make a huge difference to the way players bat and which would become another blow to bowlers – but the lbw dismissal is apparently too complicated and all we want is more sixes. How about getting rid of the stumps as well? Call me an old traditionalist but I prefer the good old T20 that works so well all around the world, as we kept hearing from Morgan and co – until last week. I actually prefer just one of those tournaments in a domestic summer, as is also the case everywhere else. But I may have mentioned that before. • This is an extract taken from the Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe just visit this page and follow the instructions.