Jeremy Corbyn will commit a “serious evasion of duty” if he does not change course and back the UK retaining key aspects of the single market after Brexit, the former Labour leader Neil Kinnock has said. In a strongly worded attack, the peer signalled that Labour MPs should defy Corbyn if he repeats instructions to abstain in parliamentary votes on Britain staying in the European Economic Area (EEA). A customs union is an agreement by a group of countries, such as the EU, to all apply the same tariffs on imported goods from the rest of the world and, typically, eliminate them entirely for trade within the group. By doing this, they can help avoid the need for costly and time-consuming customs checks during trade between members of the union. Asian shipping containers arriving at Felixstowe or Rotterdam, for example, need only pass through customs once before their contents head to markets all over Europe. Lorries passing between Dover and Calais avoid delay entirely. Customs are not the only checks that count – imports are also scrutinised for conformity with trading standards regulations and security and immigration purposes – but they do play an important role in determining how much friction there is at the border. A strict customs regime at Dover or between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland would lead to delays that will be costly for business and disruptive for travellers. Just-in-time supply chains in industries such as car making could suffer. An Irish peace process built around the principle of entirely unfettered travel between north and south could be jeopardised. Lord Kinnock was one of 83 Labour peers who rebelled against Corbyn and backed an amendment to Brexit legislation in the upper house for the UK to remain in the EEA – a grouping that allows for the free movement of persons, goods, services and capital within the European single market. In a thinly veiled swipe at Corbyn, Kinnock said objections to EEA membership were based on “infantile leftist illusion”. He said that if Corbyn did not alter his stance he would condemn the working people Labour was supposed to support to the “rockslide” of hard Brexit. With the pro-EEA amendment to the EU withdrawal bill set to return to the Commons, Kinnock wrote in The Independent: “It would be a serious evasion of duty if Labour did not seize this chance to protect our country from the rockslide of ‘hard’ Brexit. “By supporting continued EEA participation we can end the prime minister’s deference to the cliff-edge kamikaze squad and force her, or her successor, into the pragmatic patriotism of putting country before party.” Kinnock defended his refusal to abstain in the EEA vote, as Corbyn had wanted, saying: “I do not break the whip lightly. I respect our Labour leadership in the Lords and I value loyalty. But I have also said that the virtue, in excess, fills graveyards. “In this case, not continuing in the EEA would mean endangering, sacrificing, thousands of skilled and decently paid jobs and, with them, the life chances of countless families and communities.” Kinnock, who led Labour between 1983 and 1992, added: “The objections to supporting EEA membership from some in the upper reaches of the Labour party seem to centre on claims that it would either restrict a Labour government’s freedom of socialist action or that it would mean ignoring our supporters who voted to leave the EU, or both. “The first of these claims is based on falsehood. The EEA is open to member states of the EU or the European Free Trade Association. “Neither the EEA nor the EU are part of the socialist superstate of neocon delusion or of the global capitalist adventure playground of infantile leftist illusion.”