Thirteen months ago when the United States launched a joint bid to host the World Cup with Mexico and Canada at a news conference on the 102nd floor of One World Trade Center, the outcome felt like little more than a formality. There was a compelling proof of concept in USA 94, which set a World Cup attendance record that still stands with nearly 3.6m spectators (for only 52 matches), auguring record-smashing profits for the expanded 48-team, 80-match tournament in 2026. There was a nod toward the fiscally responsible, infrastructure-ready leanings of the moment: the US is one of the few countries on the planet with enough world-class stadiums and airports to host the World Cup tomorrow if it needed to. Perhaps most crucially there was the weakened field of potential hosts, with Europe and Asia sidelined under Fifa’s continental rotation system and no other major player in the race and none on the horizon. There were even preemptive measures seemingly designed to temper concerns over the incendiary politics of the recently inaugurated Donald Trump, whose calls for a wall on the Mexican border had heightened tensions in the region. The fine print made it clear this was an American bid dressed up as a joint enterprise: the United States would host 60 games, including every match from the quarter-finals onwards, with Mexico and Canada splitting the remaining 20 fixtures equally. But the enlisting of the United States’ neighbors as junior partners, when a single-country bid would have been easily achievable, lent overtones of inclusion to the enterprise. “We have the full support of the United States government in this project,” then-US Soccer president Sunil Gulati said. “The president of the United States is fully supportive and encouraged us to have this joint bid. He is especially pleased that Mexico is part of this bid.” Apparently not even the divisive America First bluster of Trump could get in the way. Even when Morocco announced a bid only hours before the August deadline to deny the United States an unopposed victory, the North American bid felt like a stone-cold lock. But with less than six weeks until the host country is decided at the 68th Fifa Congress in Moscow, a constellation of factors have narrowed the race and left the North American bid looking as vulnerable as ever – with no shortage of blame at the foot of Trump. At things stand 206 of Fifa’s member nations are eligible to vote in the one-country, one-vote contest and Trump has managed to complicate America’s path to victory significantly. There are the administration’s foreign policies, which include the controversial travel ban against mostly Arab nations. There was the global shock prompted by Trump’s rhetoric in describing poorer countries, including the “shithole countries” in Africa who incidentally account for 54 votes, more than half of the 104 necessary to win. And that was before this week and Trump’s thinly veiled quid pro quo appeals to foreign nations to support the bid, which appear to run afoul of Fifa guidelines barring the use of political influence during the bidding process. Trump’s Twitter threat last week warning nations mulling a vote against the North American bid prompted the gentlest of admonishment from the worldwide governing body. And then came Monday’s joint White House press conference with Nigerian president Muhammadu Buhari, where Trump doubled down. “I hope all African countries and countries throughout the world, that we also will be supporting you and that they will likewise support us in our bid, along with Canada and Mexico, for the 2026 World Cup,” he said. “We will be watching very closely, and any help they can give us in that bid we would appreciate.” Trump appeared to tie the issue to trade, saying the United States hopes “to be the economic partner of choice for nations across the continent and all around the world”. “You see what’s happening with respect to trade and the United States. We are being respected again,” he added. The mafia undertones were unmistakable: We’ve got a nice deal here. It would be a shame if something were to happen to it. Throw in lingering resentment over the US department of justice investigation into Fifa corruption and it’s no surprise the race, where for the first time balloting will be made public, has gotten hairy. Morocco for its part has put together a compelling underdog bid, casting perceived weaknesses as strengths. The proposal offers a more compact experience relative to North America’s sprawling three-country plan. And a time zone closer to Western Europe and Africa will be of no small consequence. As the bid literature reads: “Morocco’s sweet spot location will allow the majority of fans to watch (World Cup) games in prime time, driving Fifa’s TV revenues.” And the North African country is also a compelling bridesmaid, having fallen short in four previous bids (1994, 1998, 2006 and 2010). Three years ago, the Telegraph reported that Morocco had, in fact, won the vote to host the 2010 competition – even though Fifa awarded the tournament to South Africa. There’s no question anything but a North American win in June would be a major surprise, the magnitude of upset that requires a constellation of factors to align correctly. Yet, one by one those tumblers appear to be falling in place. Which means the United States, less than a year after suffering the most stunning humiliation in the history of the national team, could face an even bigger shocker off the pitch.