Prep 20 minCook 1 hr 30 minServes 6-8 6 tbsp olive oil3 red onions, peeled and finely chopped5 garlic cloves, peeled and finely chopped3 carrots, roughly chopped2 heads celery, outer branches removed, hearts roughly chopped1 bunch parsley leaves, roughly chopped5 tbsp tinned chopped tomatoes1 bunch cavolo nero, chopped500g cooked borlotti beans, cooking liquor reserved¾ loaf stale white bread or ciabatta, crust removed, cut into 2.5cm thick wedgesPlenty of good olive oil 600ml boiling waterSalt and black pepper In a large heavy-based pot, fry the onions, garlic, carrots, celery and parsley uncovered in the olive oil for about one hour over a low heat. When these are entirely soft, add the tomatoes and continue to cook for a further 15 minutes. Stir in the cavolo nero and set aside. Pour half the beans with half their cooking liquid into a food processor. Pulse until smooth, then add to the vegetables. Strain the other half of the beans and add them to the soup. Lay the bread gently on top of the soup to form a sort of lid, then cover with plenty of olive oil. Pour the boiling water over the bread and leave the soup to cook very gently for 10 minutes, then leave to sit off the heat for a further 10 minutes. The bread should be completely soft. Gently break up the bread lid and fold it into the rest of the soup. Season if need be, and serve with some more olive oil on top – the soup should be thick enough that you can stand up a spoon in it.From The Kitchen Orchard by Natalia Conroy (Ebury) Prep 15 minCook 50 minServes 6 500ml vegetable stock 1 fresh bay leaf300ml double cream 50g unsalted butter25g flour (wholemeal plain or spelt) ¾ tsp nutmeg, freshly grated 150g gruyère cheese, grated2 egg yolks1kg Swiss or rainbow chard 2 garlic cloves, crushed Heat the oven to 180C/350F/gas 4. Put the stock in a small pan with the bay leaf, and simmer until reduced by a third. Add the cream and keep warm. Melt half the butter in a medium saucepan, stir in the flour and continue to cook for one to two minutes, stirring constantly. Reduce the heat to low. Slowly add the cream mixture, whisking all the time with a balloon whisk, until smooth, thickened and silky. Keep simmering gently for five minutes to cook the flour. Take off the heat, stir in the nutmeg and half the cheese, and keep stirring until it has melted. Then whisk in the egg yolks and set aside, covering the surface with clingfilm to prevent a skin forming. Cut the chard leaves off the stems and shred into 1cm-thick ribbons. Cut the stems into 3cm pieces and set both aside separately. Put the garlic and remaining 25g of butter in a large frying pan, put over a low heat and fry very gently for two minutes, until softened but not coloured. Stir in the chard stems, cover with a lid or baking sheet and cook for five minutes until the stems are translucent and soft. Uncover, increase the heat and stir in the leaves, cooking briskly for two more minutes until the leaves wilt and any liquid in the pan has evaporated. Tip into a large gratin dish and cover with the sauce, tossing to combine slightly. Scatter over the remaining cheese and bake for 25 minutes, until golden and bubbling.From The New Vegetarian by Alice Hart (Square Peg) Prep 20 minCook 40 minServes 8 900g assorted fish, such as hake, grouper, dogfish, whiting, john dory or haddock1 large onion, peeled and chopped1 celery stalk, peeled and chopped1 carrot, chopped1 garlic clove, chopped, plus a few peeled whole garlic cloves120ml olive oil150ml dry white wine225g tinned plum tomatoes, with their juice, choppedSalt and black pepperSlices of country-style white bread, such as pugliese3 tbsp fresh parsley leaves, chopped Clean and wash the fish and cut into large chunks. Discard the heads and tails. In a large saucepan, fry all the vegetables and the chopped garlic gently in five tablespoons of the oil for 15 minutes, stirring frequently. Add the fish, mix thoroughly and fry gently for five minutes, turning it over frequently. Pour over the wine and boil rapidly to reduce by half. Pour over two litres of boiling water and add the tomatoes and seasoning. Return the soup to a boil and simmer for 10-15 minutes. Taste and check seasoning. Toast the bread for 10 minutes in a hot oven. Rub with peeled, halved garlic cloves and then put a piece or two of bread in individual soup bowls. Ladle the soup over the bread. Drizzle with the remaining oil, sprinkle over the parsley and serve.From Classic Food of Northern Italy by Anna Del Conte (Pavilion) Prep 10 minCook 35 minServes 6 1 tbsp olive oil, plus extra for drizzling2 onions, peeled and chopped2 carrots, peeled and cubed1 leek, sliced1 celery stalk, chopped4 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed2 large potatoes, peeled and cubed1 litre vegetable stock250g dried green lentils, rinsed1 bay leaf1 tsp ground cumin1 tsp baharat (Lebanese seven-spice seasoning)300g baby spinach leaves, washedJuice of 1 lemonSalt and black pepperLabneh, to serve (optional) Heat the oil in a large saucepan. Add the onions, carrots, leek, and celery, and cook until soft, but not browned. Next, add the garlic and cook for one minute. Add the cubed potatoes, then pour in the stock and bring to a boil. Add the green lentils and bay leaf, and simmer until the potatoes and lentils are tender. Remove the bay leaf, then add the spices and season well with salt and pepper. Add the spinach and cook until wilted – which will take only a few minutes. Finally, add the lemon juice and stir gently to combine. Serve hot, drizzled generously with olive oil and with a spoon of labneh, if desired.From the Middle Eastern Vegetarian Cookbook, by Salma Hage (Phaidon) Prep 10 minCook 3 hr 15 minServes 8–10 as a feast For the pork ribs2 tbsp sunflower oil1kg pork ribs, cut into individual ribs500g potatoes, peeled and quartered lengthways1 large onion, peeled and sliced50ml apple juice or wine750ml–1 litre water1 bay leafSalt and black pepperSour gherkins, to serve For the dumplings250g kefir (yeast starter) or plain yoghurt½ tbsp sunflower oil½ tbsp white wine vinegar½ tbsp sugar½ tsp salt350g plain flour, plus extra for dusting1 even tsp bicarbonate of soda4 tbsp sunflower oil Heat the sunflower oil in a large, heavy-based flameproof casserole. Season the ribs with salt and pepper and brown them really well over a high heat in batches, so they colour nicely. Set aside with any juices. Don’t wipe the pan out. Add the potatoes to the pan and brown well all over. Add the onion, lower the heat and sweat for 10 minutes or until soft. Add the apple juice or wine, and deglaze the pan. Put the meat and juices back in the pan and add enough water to cover. Add the bay leaf, season, and cook over a low heat for two hours, or until the meat falls off the bones. Meanwhile, make the dumpling dough. Put the kefir or yoghurt, sunflower oil, vinegar, sugar and salt in a large bowl, and mix with a fork. Mix the flour with the bicarbonate of soda, then sift into the kefir mixture and mix in to a soft, pillowy dough. If it’s still slightly sticky, heavily flour your work surface and start kneading the dough, incorporating more flour into it. The dough should stop sticking to your hands when it’s ready but also remain soft. Divide the dough into four. Roll out each piece of dough on a floured surface into a 2mm rectangle. Add a tablespoon of the sunflower oil, rub all over with your hand, roll into thick sausages and cut each dough sausage into 5cm discs. You should end up with about 35 dumplings. Now check how much liquid there is in the stew. It should be still wet, but not too much. You want your dumpling bottoms to absorb some of the juices but their tops should steam. Turn up the heat under the stew. My gran used to call this ‘breathing strength’ into it. It should be boiling like crazy. Now swiftly but gently put the dumplings into the stew and cover, securing with a wet tea towel if steam escapes, so put a folded wet tea towel around the rim of the lid if you see steam escaping. Cook on high for 15 minutes, then lower and cook for another 30. Serve with sour gherkins.From Mamushka by Olia Hercules (Octopus) Prep 15 minCook 2 hr 20 minServes 4 400g beef brisket1 onion, peeled and quartered10 garlic cloves, peeled, 6 left whole, 4 crushed1 tbsp vegetable oil150g shiitake mushrooms, sliced1 leek, halved and thinly sliced2 tbsp soy sauce2 tbsp roasted sesame seed oil3 tbsp gochugaru (Korean red pepper powder) 1½ tsp salt10 spring onions, halved lengthways then cut into 6cm long stripsCooked rice, to serve (optional) Put the brisket in a medium pan and cover with three litres of water. Bring to the boil, reduce the heat a little, add the onion and the whole garlic cloves, and simmer for two hours with the lid off; spoon off any froth that rises to the surface. Top up with water while cooking to ensure the meat is submerged. Transfer the brisket to a plate and set aside to cool. Strain the stock through a fine sieve, into a bowl or jug, and discard the flavouring ingredients. When the brisket is cool enough to handle, slice or tear the meat into thin, bite-sized strips, discarding any fat. In the same pan, heat the vegetable oil over a medium heat, add the mushrooms and leek, and saute for five minutes. Add the beef, soy sauce, crushed garlic, sesame seed oil and gochugaru powder. Turn up the heat and fry for one to two minutes until aromatic. Pour 1.3 litres of the strained stock back into the pan (freeze the rest for future use). Add the salt and bring to the boil, then reduce the heat a little and add the spring onions. Simmer for three minutes, until all the flavours have come together and serve in bowls with rice alongside if you like.From Our Korean Kitchen by Jordan Bourke and Rejino Pyo (Orion)