Donald Trump has granted a rare posthumous pardon to boxing’s first black heavyweight champion more than 100 years after what Trump said many feel was a racially motivated injustice. “It’s my honor to do it. It’s about time,” Trump said during an Oval Office ceremony, where he was joined by former heavyweight champion Lennox Lewis, current WBC heavyweight title-holder Deontay Wilder and actor Sylvester Stallone, who has drawn awareness to Johnson’s cause. Johnson, who captured the title in 1908 and defended it with a famed 1910 victory over former champion James J Jeffries in a bout dubbed the Fight of the Century, was regarded as a master of defense and ring generalship. In 1913, Johnson was convicted by an all-white jury of violating the Mann Act for transporting a woman across state lines for “immoral purposes” in a decidedly shaky case. Duly convicted, Johnson said: “They crucified Christ, why not me?” He then skipped bail and went to Europe. In 1920, he returned to the US and served nearly a year in jail. Known as the Galveston Giant, Johnson is a legendary figure in boxing, who crossed over into popular culture decades ago with biographies, dramas and documentaries following the civil rights era. Johnson died in a car crash in North Carolina in 1946, at the age of 68. He has been widely celebrated since, inspiring a seminal jazz rock album by Miles Davis and books and films including a 2004 documentary by Ken Burns, Unforgivable Blackness: the Rise and Fall of Jack Johnson. His great-great niece had been pressing for a posthumous pardon. Senator John McCain and former Senate majority leader Harry Reid had also pushed Johnson’s case for years. “Johnson’s imprisonment forced him into the shadows of bigotry and prejudice, and continues to stand as a stain on our national honor,” McCain has said. Posthumous pardons are rare, but not unprecedented. President Bill Clinton pardoned Henry O Flipper, the first African-American officer to lead the Buffalo Soldiers of the 10th Cavalry Regiment during the Civil War, and Bush pardoned Charles Winters, an American volunteer in the Arab-Israeli War convicted of violating the US Neutrality Acts in 1949. Linda E Haywood, the great-great niece, wanted Barack Obama, the nation’s first black president, to pardon Johnson, but Justice Department policy says “processing posthumous pardon petitions is grounded in the belief that the time of the officials involved in the clemency process is better spent on the pardon and commutation requests of living persons”. The Justice Department makes decisions on potential pardons through an application process and typically makes recommendations to the president. The general DOJ policy is to not accept applications for posthumous pardons for federal convictions, according to the department’s website. But Trump has shown a willingness to work around the DOJ process in the past.