Southampton were denied a huge step towards Premier League survival when Everton denied them a second successive league victory through a last-gasp equaliser from Tom Davies. The visitors must have thought they had dome enough to win, with Nathan Redmond even bringing a late save from Jordan Pickford when Southampton had been reduced to 10 men, but when Ryan Bertrand gave the ball away with just seconds remaining Davies crashed in a shot from Idrissa Gueye’s square ball, deflecting home off Wesley Hoedt. The only consolation for Southampton is that they still managed to move out of the bottom three and above Swansea in the table, ahead of the all-important meeting in South Wales on Tuesday. There was also another reprieve for West Bromwich, who would have been relegated by a Southampton victory, but little respite for Sam Allardyce. Though Everton have been safe for some time their manager’s position is looking increasingly precarious. Allardyce was hoping to use this game to leave Everton fans feeling positive over the summer, and it is doubtful whether Davies’ late rescue act will quite have that effect. Southampton seemed to start out with containment in mind, perhaps not realising at first how tame a performance Everton were going to put up in their last home game of the season. The first half was a surprisingly even contest between a team in eighth and one battling to escape the bottom three, though battling was not exactly the word to describe the visitors. They were languid, like Everton, and without any knowledge of the league table one might have surmised this was a meaningless end of season game between two sides with nothing to play for. Davies showed willing in the opening minutes with a shot from the edge of the penalty area that was not too far off the target, though Everton failed to keep up anything like the same urgency. Cenk Tosun headed over the bar with a difficult chance from a Séamus Coleman cross but that was about it for home attempts on goal in the first half and Allardyce was soon seen in his technical area gesturing furiously for his side to get men further forward. Southampton were the first side to bring a save from a goalkeeper, and a very good one it was too by Pickford, whose reactions did not let him down when Charlie Austin sent in a volley on target with little warning after the ball came his way off Michael Keane. By the half hour Southampton were the side looking most likely to make a breakthrough, and Everton were glad Phil Jagielka was in the right position to make a timely interception when the ball came through to Oriol Romeu in front of goal. To say the game was low on incident and excitement would be a considerable understatement. The home side departed to boos at half time, though that has become par for the course in recent weeks. Even when Everton won at Huddersfield the previous weekend there was still dissatisfaction expressed at the style of football being played under Allardyce. Or perhaps just the continued presence of Allardyce. The school of science, it is being said by some unhappy supporters, is presently in special measures. Allardyce is impervious to that sort of background noise, of course, and as a half-time flourish to mark the end of his first season at Goodison he brought on Ramiro Funes Mori for Yannick Bolasie and switched to a back three. He does not exactly court popularity, though something needed to change and after an anonymous first half the winger could hardly complain. Southampton made a change at the same time, Redmond replacing the ineffective Mario Lemina, and 11 minutes after the restart it was Hughes looking smug on the sideline. Dusan Tadic and Cedric Soares found space on the Everton left behind the now advanced Leighton Baines – always the drawback with wingbacks – and from the latter’s precise cross Redmond arrived in the area to beat Pickford with a firm downward header. Cue joy in the small corner of the Bullens Road Stand that was red and white and more boos from the blue majority. The visitors were forced to see out the last five minutes with 10 men after Maya Yoshida picked up a second yellow for a foul on Oumar Niasse. Baines brought a brilliant fingertip save from Alex McCarthy with a stoppage time free-kick but time was running out when Bertrand made his mistake and invited Everton to claim a point they barely deserved.