Nicaraguan bishops have announced they are abandoning peace talks with the embattled administration of Daniel Ortega after at least 11 people were killed and 79 wounded during the latest mass protest against his rule. Tens of thousands of dissenters poured on to the streets of the capital, Managua, on Wednesday afternoon to mark Nicaragua’s Mother’s Day with a massive demonstration against the president’s 11-year reign. The protest – dubbed “the Mother of All Marches” – was led by the mothers of some of the 83 protesters who have been killed since the uprising began on 18 April. But an initially peaceful procession descended into violence after armed pro-Ortega forces opened fire on protesters, activists said. The Associated Press reported that demonstrators armed with improvised bottle-rocket launchers also opened fire. Carlos Alfredo Portobanco, a 26-year-old student who was among the protesters, said: “We feel oppressed and disrespected by a government that talks about peace but does nothing but promote violence. We don’t want any more dead – our mothers suffer when we leave our homes because they are not sure we will return.” José Miguel Vivanco, Human Rights Watch’s Americas director, tweeted on Thursday that 79 people had been injured and 11 killed, including one man who was shot in the head. The national police said 15 people died across the country, in violence which the force’s second-in-command, Francisco Díaz, blamed on “criminal gangs”. Paulo Abrão, head of the Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, tweeted: “We have received SERIOUS claims of deaths and injuries due to the violence.” The Managua-based opposition newspaper La Prensa accused Ortega of transforming the peaceful demonstration into “a bloodbath”. “Due to the situation of insecurity that reined throughout the night it was difficult to arrive at the exact number of fatal victims,” it said. Eloiza Altamirano Mesa, a student leader who witnessed Wednesday’s violence, vowed protesters would not be cowed. “We will stand firm against these dictators, there are more of us. Only the people can save the people.” Senior members of Nicaragua’s Catholic church began mediating peace talks between Ortega and the student-led protesters on 16 May, with protesters using the dialogue to berate their unpopular president and their first lady, Rosario Murillo, as asesinos (murderers). However, in a statement on Thursday, members of the Episcopal Conference of Nicaragua said those talks could not continue while “inhuman violence which destroys the lives of the innocent” continued. The conference said its members felt “profound pain” at Wednesday’s violence, which it blamed on armed groups with links to the government. “We energetically condemn all such acts of violence,” the bishops added. The latest eruption of violence came just days after Amnesty International released a report accusing Nicaragua’s government of unleashing a deliberate campaign of deadly repression designed to snuff out the revolt. “The Nicaraguan authorities have turned on their own people in a vicious, sustained and frequently lethal assault,” claimed Amnesty’s Americas director, Erika Guevara-Rosas. Guevara-Rosas claimed Ortega’s government had “shamelessly tried to cover up these atrocities” and shown “contempt for those who dare to stand up to them”. “The brave people of Nicaragua have shown that they will not be silenced,” she added. Nicaragua’s richest man, Carlos Pellas, added his voice to a growing chorus of criticism of Ortega this week calling for early presidential elections as a way of finding “an orderly way out” of the crisis. Ortega, once a poster boy for the global left revered for helping overthrow the dictator Anastasio Somoza and his cold war battles with the US, has rejected calls for his exit while reportedly stepping up security around his mansion in Managua. “We want peace for all Nicaraguan families, security for all Nicaraguan families,” Ortega told a counter-rally on Wednesday according to the government-controlled newspaper El 19. El 19, which has blamed the violence on anti-government “vandals”, claimed the crowds responded by showering their Sandinista leader with kisses and hugs and cheers of “Daniel, amigo! El pueblo está contigo!” – Daniel, our friend! The people are with you!”