Harvey Weinstein is well practiced at grand arrivals, having made them annually at the Dolby Theatre in Hollywood, where his movie company dominated Oscar night with almost predictable regularity. On Friday, he made a grand arrival with a difference. Instead of the red carpet in LA, he was led up the austere grey steps of a New York City courthouse; rather than mingling among the stars in suit and bow tie, he emerged from a police station in blazer and blue jersey flanked by detectives, head bowed, hands behind his back in handcuffs. Weinstein carried three large books on his way into the courthouse. Even at this devastating moment, at the rock bottom of his meteoric fall, this master of plot and subplot still had the world guessing: was that biography of Elia Kazan, another famed Hollywood figure who was hauled before Joseph McCarthy’s anti-communist witch-hunt in the 1950s, sending us a message? If so, what message? As Weinstein arrived at the courthouse to face charges of rape and a criminal sex act, it was as if the #MeToo movement had finally had its Hurricane Katrina moment. The levees that for decades had protected rich and powerful men like him from the consequences of their actions had finally collapsed, allowing the wrath of the women they had been accused of abusing to rush in. Just two women were involved directly in the charges, though as many as 75 have come forward with allegations against Weinstein. One of the two accusers was an anonymous woman alleging rape; the other was Lucia Evans, an aspiring actor who alleged Weinstein forced her into oral sex in 2004. She told the New Yorker that she had been called to see the movie mogul for a daytime meeting at the Miramax office in Tribeca – just blocks from the NYPD’s 1st precinct where he was officially arrested and charged on Friday. According to Evans’ account, the producer at first began by enticing her with possible job offers but then he turned ugly. “I said, over and over, ‘I don’t want to do this, stop, don’t’,” she alleged. “He’s a big guy. He overpowered me. I just sort of gave up.” With Weinstein’s arrival at the downtown Manhattan courthouse, the cogs of justice will now crank into gear and his fate will be decided. Two big questions that hang over the legal proceedings may take longer to answer. The first is how a man who in his public life did as much as any individual to define what was progressive and cool in modern culture come to be accused of acts of such alleged brutality behind the scenes? How could the producer whose company was behind best picture Oscar-winning movies like The English Patient and Chicago, who helped mold Britain’s image of itself with films such as Shakespeare in Love and The King’s Speech, and was awarded a CBE in recognition, be capable of such alleged monstrosity? More pointedly, what allowed him to get away with it for so long? How could a man accused by a legion of women, in some cases with complaints dating back to the 1970s, remain free to go about making movies and, should the allegations be proven in court, also remain free to repeat his abusive behavior. Clues to that second crucial question have begun to amass, as one woman after another lined up to add to the pile of their stories. The first cracks in the levees were opened in five extraordinary days last October, when a double blow to Weinstein was dealt by two titans of New York media. The initial strike was made by Jodi Kantor and Megan Twohey in the New York Times, who reported that Weinstein had settled at least eight times with women claiming sexual harassment and unwanted physical contact over almost three decades. Then came Ronan Farrow in the New Yorker, with details of the alleged assault of Evans and 12 others. With the reporting of Kantor, Twohey and Farrow – who shared the Pulitzer prize for public service for their work – combined with the mounting accounts of many other women, a pattern began to emerge. Weinstein had used his formidable wealth and access to legal and other firepower to pummel his accusers into silence. He used a range of carrots and sticks to keep them quiet. The carrot could be money or the promise of future work; the stick would be gagging clauses imposed in legal settlements, stories planted in the tabloids casting aspersions about the women based on anonymous sources; the fear instilled by what Selma Hayek called his “machiavellian rage”; and above all the threat – spoken and unspoken – that they would be shunned in Hollywood. The picture emerged of a veritable sub-industry deployed by Weinstein to ensure his impunity. Lawyers, accountants, personal assistants, PRs, partial journalists – all were enlisted to erect those levees and keep the truth from gushing out. Even law enforcement and government officials were implicated. In 2015, Ambra Battilana, an Italian model then aged 22, reported to police that Weinstein had groped her. Detectives arranged for Battilana to meet the producer again, this time wearing a wire. He came right out with it, admitting on tape his sexual misconduct and implying he was no stranger to it: “I’m used to that … I won’t do it again,” he said. Despite the audio recording, the Manhattan prosecutor Cyrus Vance decided not to press charges. But in the end Harvey Weinstein’s victims could not be contained. There were too many of them, their stories of his misconduct too egregious, for the Weinstein suppression machine to hold them back. After those initial October cracks were opened, more and more women came forward, finding their voices with accounts that were as moving and elegant as his alleged acts had been cold and repugnant. “Though we may have endured powerlessness at the hands of Harvey Weinstein, by speaking up, speaking out and speaking together, we regain that power,” wrote Lupita Nyong’o. Hayek captured the kernel of the #MeToo movement in just two sentences: “Men sexually harassed because they could. Women are talking today because, in this new era, we finally can.”