Milwaukee’s mayor, Tom Barrett, said he is concerned about public backlash that could emerge when a video of police officers tasing Bucks guard Sterling Brown, who did not “appear to be provocative at all” according to local reports, is released to the public this week. “I’m going to let the release of that speak for itself, but yes, I definitely have concerns after watching that video,” Barrett told reporters on Monday, adding that police chief Alfonso Morales felt similarly. In the body-camera video, which could be released as soon as Wednesday, NBA player Brown “doesn’t appear to be provocative at all” before officers use a stun gun on him, a source told the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel. The source added, “this could be bad.” Brown, then 22 and now 23, was arrested on 26 January after police used a taser while Brown was being questioned by officers over a parking violation in a Walgreens pharmacy parking lot. Brown was cited for a parking violation but not charged following his arrest. The officers involved are currently under internal investigation, the status of which is unclear. The video has been shown to a few local officials and Bucks team officials, though the team declined comment to the Journal Sentinel. According to WITI-TV, assistant police chief Michael Brunson Sr referenced the video during a speech at a church on Sunday during the city’s Ceasefire Sabbath. “There’s going to be a video that’s going to come out soon, in the next couple of weeks, involving the department,” he said, “and I’m going to honest with you: We’re going to need your support during the challenges.” The incident will no doubt stir memories of the April 2015 conflict between Atlanta Hawks player Thabo Sefolosha and the New York police department that left Sefolosha with a season-ending leg fracture. Last year Sefolosha was acquitted of criminal charges in the fracas outside the 1 Oak nightclub in Manhattan and received a reported $4m settlement in a counter-suit against New York City. Brown signed with the Bucks last summer out of SMU as part of a deal with the Philadelphia 76ers, who selected him with the 46th overall pick in the 2017 draft. He averaged 4.0 points and 2.6 rebounds this season in 54 games.