Irish voters go to the polls on 25 May to decide whether or not to repeal the eighth amendment to our constitution. Inserted in 1983 this clause gives equal constitutional legal protection to the rights of the unborn child and its mother, and makes it almost impossible to legislate for abortion. Polling suggests the proposed repeal will pass. But the decision is one of the most contentious issues Irish voters have ever faced. As with the many past Irish referendums, the campaign posters for each side – some of them with graphic imagery – went up first. Posters are a strictly regulated part of campaigns under Irish electoral law. TV and radio advertisements are not allowed. Unlike in UK referendums there are no spending limits of any kind. Political parties are obliged by law to disclose their election campaign spending, but this does not apply to referendums. A “third party” – a registered group for either side of the campaigns – is also not legally required to disclose details of donations received or expenses incurred, although they are prohibited from accepting foreign donations. With electoral rules dating from the 1990s, the online space was left ripe for campaigning. It is entirely unregulated. As will now be a familiar pattern to anyone who followed the US 2016 presidential campaign, or indeed the UK’s Brexit referendum, the issue of “dark ads”, and opacity around any digital advertising soon became apparent, as did the problem with the lack of regulation. Facebook pages with no clear ownership or administrator left people wondering who was behind ads on abortion targeting Irish people. Again, nothing illegal. Without a legislative framework governing online electoral ads, there are essentially no barriers to anyone anywhere in the world with an interest in the abortion debate targeting Irish voters, and spending as much or as little as they wish. Abortion as an issue is not unique to Ireland but Ireland has among the most restrictive abortion laws in the world. And so, arguably, the Irish vote is a battleground in a wider global context. Christian anti-abortion groups based in the US or the UK have a keen interest in the no side winning this referendum. Thanks to the work of the Transparency Referendum Initiative – a crowdsourcing effort to share the ads people were seeing on their Facebook feeds to try to get an early snapshot of the type of advertising being seen, and thanks in part to a voluntary decision by Facebook to launch its “view ads” transparency tool early in Ireland, we were able to see what ads were running on any given page. In one particular instance, an anonymous page and its related anonymous website, which claimed to offer unbiased views on the referendum, appeared to trace back to one of the registered anti-abortion campaign groups – Protect the 8th. A possible purpose of setting up the page and website would have been to identify Facebook and Google or YouTube users who, by clicking a link asking if they were undecided (and by doing so would self-select as being undecided), would be tracked via code embedded on the site and added to an audience pool, to be retargeted later by the no side. A Texas-based Catholic digital marketing agency, whose representatives were in Dublin to help the anti-abortion campaign, may have built the site. But again, nothing illegal. Both organisations were contacted for comment but did not respond. In another instance an anti-abortion ad that appeared to feature a picture of a foetus in a lavatory was deleted by Facebook after complaints. At the same time, people began to see a significant spend by the no side in pre-roll YouTube ads. In the space of several hours in the last weekend of April, three videos that were being pushed to Irish YouTube users had racked up several hundred thousand views. No small thing in a country with a voting population of only a few million. Over the following week an increasing number of people were noticing no-side ads throughout their web browsing experience, from display ads on news publications to YouTube pre-roll. And if the no side was outspending the yes side on digital ads there was nothing illegal about that either. Then, on Tuesday 8 May, Facebook – which has its European headquarters in Dublin – announced it would no longer be accepting ads related to the referendum from advertisers based outside of Ireland. “This change will apply to ads we determine to be coming from foreign entities which are attempting to influence the outcome of the vote,” it said. It was clear at this stage that an enormous lack of regulatory oversight had now resulted in a commercial enterprise determining the ads that would or would not be displayed in an Irish referendum. I’m not sure Irish people ever voted for Mark Zuckerberg to make these types of decisions. The following day, after some pressure, Google changed tack: instead of accepting all ads, it banned them, from both sides, on its platforms for the remainder of the campaign. It is unprecedented in any country for Google to act in this way. For its part, Twitter has not accepted any ads relating to the referendum from the outset. When did we decide that Google or Facebook could arbitrarily act like this? We didn’t, of course. And now that Google ads are banned, attention is likely to focus again on Facebook ads being effectively the only place Irish organisations or groups can reach voters online. A lacuna in the law has led to a rather embarrassing situation: the Irish political system has effectively outsourced the regulation of online political ads to private US tech companies. The companies were arguably left in an invidious position: step in and change things, or do nothing. Either can arguably have an affect on the campaigns. Ireland has never debated the merits or otherwise of online campaigns; nor have we debated how we might regulate them so that elections or referendums are free and fair. It is about time we did. We cannot allow private companies to decide what we know or don’t know about our own electoral processes and how they should be run. We cannot allow commercial entities to make arbitrary and, indeed, voluntary decisions without a legal framework existing that has been formulated using the rather old-fashioned system of implementing laws via parliament. We must start from scratch again and ask how election or referendum campaigns should work in the modern era, and what obligations – from transparency to disclosure – we should place on online companies. What does a free and fair election look like in 2018, or 2030, or 2040? Digital platforms will appear and disappear – but the rule of law endures. The question is no longer whether we regulate these online platforms; it is when. • Gavin Sheridan is transparency campaigner and CEO of legal intelligence company Vizlegal