Harry Kane will captain England at the summer’s World Cup finals after Gareth Southgate formalised his appointment and praised his “outstanding personal qualities”. The Tottenham Hotspur forward, who boasts 12 goals from his 23 caps, had emerged as the favourite for a role Southgate has shared among his senior players to date. Kane first captained his country in last summer’s qualifying draw in Scotland, when his stoppage-time equaliser secured a point, and had worn the armband in three games since. He has effectively been preferred to his club-mate Eric Dier and Liverpool’s Jordan Henderson, who leads Jürgen Klopp’s side into Saturday’s Champions League final against Real Madrid. Southgate had promoted the benefits of shared responsibility in qualifying – Gary Cahill and Joe Hart have also captained the team – as he sought to develop a strong dressing-room culture which would benefit England at a major finals. But it had always been his intention to make a permanent appointment before the tournament. “Harry has some outstanding personal qualities,” said Southgate of the 24-year-old. “He is a meticulous professional and one of the most important things for a captain is that they set the standard every day. He has belief and high standards and it is a great message for the team to have a captain who has shown that it is possible to be one of the best in the world over a consistent period of time and that has been his drive. “My feeling is that over the last 18 months in the camps that he’s been with us he has shown that he has got the desire to take that into a team environment and he recognises the importance of bringing others with him. Of course Harry will need the support of the other good leaders that we have got around him. You don’t become a top team by just having a good captain with good values because that has got to spread right throughout the group but I think he is the one who is ready to take that challenge on.” Kane, who had scored 79 seconds into his international debut in 2015 and will be competing at his second major finals, was confirmed as captain in a team meeting at St George’s Park on Monday evening. He will address the media on Tuesday with preparations under way for friendlies against Nigeria and Costa Rica. Asked after the Scotland fixture what it had meant to him to lead out his country, Kane said: “It was probably the most special moment of my career so far. The manager told me just before training and it was quite emotional. There were a lot of emotions: lots of proud feelings. It was something I have always dreamed about, as most kids do. “I have said before I would love to be England captain [on a permanent basis]. We have got leaders in the team and it is just the case that I am wearing the armband. I still play the same way. I still talk, I still shout in the same way.”