Chris Froome says he is “sure” his historic treble of consecutive grand tour victories – sealed with a 46sec victory at the Giro d’Italia – will not be wiped from the record books despite an ongoing legal battle to clear his name following his failed drug test at the Vuelta a España in September. Froome is also confident he will be on the starting line of the Tour de France despite the race director, Christian Prudhomme, admitting he does not want him there unless the long-running investigation into his salbutamol case is resolved. Froome, who denies any wrongdoing, still has to show how more than twice the permitted levels of the asthma drug entered his system. However, he is allowed to continue competing as salbutamol is a specified substance rather than a banned one. When it was put to him that he was riding under a cloud, Froome replied: “I am absolutely certain that when people have the same information as I have, they will understand why I made the decision to continue racing and riding the way I have been. “Throughout my career I have done absolutely everything I can to show people I am doing things the right way. I have gone above and beyond. I have shared more info than other riders. I have been more open than any of my rivals in that regard. I have shared way more data.” Froome now intends to take a short break with his wife Michelle, who is seven months pregnant with their second child, before returning to altitude to prepare for what would be a fifth Tour de France victory – and potentially the first Giro-Tour double since Marco Pantani in 1998. “I have seen riders trying to do a Giro and a Tour and I have seen their shortfalls and their mistakes,” he said. “It is a risk. I have never done this before. The extra week between will be very helpful. That was a big reason in the decision to go for both. I am obviously up for it but let’s see.” The victory on Sunday also means he is only the third cyclist to hold all three grand tour titles at the same time, and Froome admitted it was “immense” to be mentioned in the same light as Eddy Merckx and Bernard Hinault. “There is no bigger goal for a pro cyclist than to go for all three grand tours consecutively,” he said. “When I thought about going for it, it was a big undertaking. I am not regretting it now.” When asked whether he hoped the result would make him fully accepted in the pantheon of cycling greats, he nodded before adding: “I have done everything. I have attacked in descents, in cross-winds, and I have come back from four-minute deficits. It feels I am ticking those boxes.” Froome also expressed his sympathy for fellow Briton Simon Yates, who led the race for a fortnight before a late collapse, and said he believed the 25-year-old would definitely win a grand tour in the future. “I really feel for Simon,” he said. “The first thing he said to me is that it is a three week race – not a two-and-a-half week race. That is brutal but it is.”