What were you hoping for?A fun evening and a good story for my grandma to read in the paper. First impressions?Very pretty. What did you talk about?The pros and cons of living in London (we both miss being able to see the stars), and what else would be in the Weekend gardening special. Any awkward moments?A very drunk guy called Josh made a nuisance of himself once he realised we were on a blind date. Good table manners?Impeccable. She was very good at ensuring our glasses (of both water and wine) were kept topped up. Best thing about Viccy?She was great for conversation and a laugh. Would you introduce her to your friends?I’d be happy to. One of my best friends is a twin and Viccy is a triplet, so they could bond over that. Describe her in three wordsVivacious, attractive, friendly. What do you think she made of you?She might have thought me geeky because I appeared on Countdown, was on my college University Challenge team and love pub quizzes. Did you go on somewhere?To a floating pub barge for a few more glasses of wine. I think we pretty much stayed until closing. And… did you kiss?A peck on the lips. Not a full-on snog yet! If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I’d get rid of Josh. Marks out of 10?9. Would you meet again? We exchanged numbers and are planning to. What were you hoping for?To meet someone fun and engaging. First impressions?Slightly geeky (not a bad thing), friendly and sweet. What did you talk about?How lovely it is being outside and in nature. Any awkward moments?Some drunk guy tried to crash our date. Good table manners?Neither of us was great at navigating fish bones. Best thing about Aidan?He’s interesting and smart and a genuinely nice guy. Would you introduce him to your friends?Yeah, I reckon he’d get on with anyone. Describe him in three wordsSmart, friendly, interesting. What do you think he made of you?Loud and chatty; hopefully, not too drunk and annoying. Did you go on somewhere?To the dock nearby. And… did you kiss?No, I didn’t really get that vibe. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I wouldn’t have had anything to drink beforehand. Marks out of 10?7. Would you meet again?I think so. I’m not certain the chemistry was there, but I had a really nice evening. • Viccy and Aidan ate at the Garden Museum, London SE1 Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com