Sir Cliff Richard is seeking a payment of at least £560,000 from the BBC following the broadcaster’s coverage of a police raid at his home in 2014. The singer was investigated by South Yorkshire police after an accusation of historical sexual assault was made against him, relating to an alleged incident at Sheffield United’s ground in 1985. Richard was never arrested and no charges were ever brought in the case. Justin Rushbrooke QC, representing Richard, told the high court in a closing statement that the 77-year-old had sustained “possibly permanent damage to his self-esteem” as a result of the BBC’s coverage, leaving him with no option but to seek substantial damages. “The psychological damage, as well as not forgetting the reputational damage, was indisputably immense,” he said. The lawyer told the court that Richard would be seeking between £175,000 and £250,000 in damages from the BBC. The singer has previously said he would also claim £278,000 in legal costs, £108,000 for PR fees, and an undisclosed amount in relation to a book deal which collapsed when the accusations were made public. These figures did not take into account legal costs for bringing the case. Richard has previously said that he has spent £3.4m on the case. The singer accused the BBC of invading his privacy by choosing to run the story. The broadcaster decided to fight the case, arguing the story is in the public interest and it is not a breach of privacy rules to factually report the existence of a police investigation. Much of the case has focused on the BBC’s decision to use a helicopter to film Richard’s Berkshire home, which sits in a gated community hidden from the general public. Rushbrooke said without the BBC camera crews and the helicopter it was “quite clear this was an event which could have easily gone unremarked”. Summing up his case, he said his client deserved substantial compensation because of the “excessive” level of worldwide coverage which followed the BBC’s report. “Without exaggeration I would submit that in pretty much every nook and cranny of the English speaking world the fact, the details and the intrusive video footage found their way into the public domain,” he said. Gavin Millar QC, representing the BBC, insisted the broadcaster had acted responsibly. He accepted that the coverage would have had an impact on Richard but said this had to be separated from the “distress” of being under police investigation. “The BBC’s reporting was confined to the most basic facts/visual images concerning the investigation and the search,” he said. “There was nothing in the reporting that was inconsistent with the presumption of innocence.” Millar told the court that Richard could have no “reasonable expectation” that he would not be identified in any reporting of the case. “Sir Cliff might have hoped not to be identified,” he added. “But looked at objectively, he could not really expect to be anonymised.” Richard has already received £400,000 from South Yorkshire police as a result of the coverage. The police now want the BBC to pay part of this sum, arguing it was the broadcaster’s actions which did the most damage.