An evangelical pastor who former presidential candidate Mitt Romney denounced as a “religious bigot” delivered a prayer at the opening of the US embassy in Jerusalem on Monday. Praising Donald Trump’s “determination, resolve, courage” in moving the embassy from Tel Aviv despite warnings that the move would provoke violent protest, Robert Jeffress said God had “has given us a president” who “stands on … the right side of you, oh God, when it comes to Israel”. Concurrently in Gaza, health officials said 41 Palestinians were killed when Israeli forces opened fire at protesters rallying against the embassy opening. Officials who spoke to Reuters said at least 900 were injured, about 450 by live bullets. Romney criticised the choice of a man who has said all Jews will go to hell to deliver a blessing in Israel. Jeffress is the leader of a Dallas-area Baptist church and a spiritual adviser to Trump. He has been criticised for calling Islam and Mormonism “heresy from the pit of hell” and saying Jews “can’t be saved”. As reported by dallasnews.com, he also said Islam is “a religion that promotes paedophilia”. Romney, a Mormon, wrote on Twitter on Sunday: “Robert Jeffress says ‘you can’t be saved by being a Jew’ and ‘Mormonism is a heresy from the pit of hell’. He has said the same about Islam. Such a religious bigot should not be giving the prayer that opens the United States embassy in Jerusalem.” Trump considered Romney to be his first secretary of state. Since then, Romney has been a consistent and strong critic of Trump’s behaviour in office. Jeffress responded to Romney on the same platform, writing: “Historic Christianity has taught for 2,000 years that salvation is through faith in Christ alone. The fact that I, along with tens of millions of evangelical Christians around the world, continue to espouse that belief, is neither bigoted nor newsworthy.” In his prayer on Monday, he said Israel was “a blessing to the entire world, through her innovations in medicine, technology and energy. But most of all Israel has blessed this world by pointing us to you, the one true God, through the message of her prophets, the scriptures and the Messiah.” He added: “We want to thank you, especially today, for the courageous leadership of Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his determination to do whatever it takes to defend his people at all cost. “We want to thank you for the tremendous leadership of our great president, Donald J Trump. Without President Trump’s determination, resolve, courage, we would not be here today. And I believe father that I speak for every single one of us when I say that every day, we thank you that you have given us a president who boldly stands on the right side of history but more importantly stands on the right side of you, oh God, when it comes to Israel.” Trump tweeted about the ceremony on Monday morning. “US embassy opening in Jerusalem will be covered live on [Fox News] & [Fox Business],” he wrote, advertising his favoured TV network. “Lead up to 9am (eastern) event has already begun. A great day for Israel!” The president then addressed the ceremony by video link, saying the US was “a great friend of Israel and a partner in the cause of freedom and peace”. His daughter Ivanka Trump and her husband Jared Kushner, both senior White House aides, were present. Kushner said: “As we have seen from the protest of the last month and even today, those provoking violence are part of the problem and not part of the solution.” In an Instagram post before the ceremony, accompanying a picture taken at the Western Wall, Ivanka Trump wrote: “We will pray for the boundless potential of the future of the US-Israel alliance, and we will pray for peace.” The Israeli Defense Forces said on Monday a jet had bombed five “terrorist targets” in Gaza, “in response to the violent acts of the last few hours being carried out by Hamas along the security fence”. In a video issued on the eve of ceremonies in Jerusalem, the al-Qaida leader, Ayman al-Zawahiri, said negotiations and “appeasement” had failed Palestinians. He urged Muslims carry out jihad against the US. Trump later tweeted: “Big day for Israel. Congratulations!”