It’s unlikely Prince Harry and Meghan Markle will rig cameras on zipwires across the lawns of Windsor Castle for their big day this month. But if they do, they’ll be joining a growing number of couples turning to new tech to capture the moment like never before. Zipwire cameras might sound like props on a sci-fi film but they are one of the quirky new trends for weddings this summer as brides ditch flowing gowns in favour of jumpsuits, and vegan cakes replace the traditional multi-tiered extravaganza. With most marriage ceremonies now involving millennials who are comfortable with adapting traditions to suit their own agenda, weddings are now being planned to take account of social media and concern for the environment, according to the big names in nuptials, from fashion designers to videographers. “The whole make-up of weddings is changing,” said bridalwear designer Charlie Brear, who has dressed model and fashion designer Alexa Chung and actress Sienna Miller. “There’s a lot less formality, and it’s all Pinterest, Instagram and social media-led. Brides want to step out of the norm, and make a statement they can share.” So out go the sweeping, fishtail trains, she said, and in come the all-in-one jumpsuits – talk of the fashion world since bridalwear designer Misha Nonoo, a close friend of Markle, released a spring jumpsuit collection. “They’ll be all the rage this year. The jumpsuit offers something more rock’n’roll, a bit cooler and easier to wear, but still elegant,” Brear said. The bonus is that the jumpsuit is easier to repurpose than a wedding dress, so it can be reworn once the confetti has blown away. And with the average white gown costing more than most people earn in a month (Brear’s range from £1,500 to £5,000), jumpsuits are a lot cheaper too. “If you accessorise it with a black belt, a black high heel and a black jacket you can wear it on any night of the week,” she said. If you’re going to walk the aisle in a jumpsuit, chances are you’ll want something different to eat and drink too. “When I got married, the centrepiece of the reception was a rich fruit cake,” said Rosalind Miller, a cake-maker whose show-stoppers are sold at Harrods. “But nobody wants fruit cake any more. Vegan cakes are now the big new trend.” Miller puts it down to what she calls a “generational thing” – the march of the millennials to ever more conscious decision-making. But cakes free of even the tiniest trace of animal products are tricky to make. “You have to find substitutes for everything – butter, eggs, milk, chocolate ganache,” says Miller. “Even the sugar flower petals have egg whites, so we have to use fresh flowers instead.” There’s also a trend for simpler cakes – what Miller calls “the naked cake” – with none of the traditional sugar paste icing. “More and more couples want their weddings to be natural and stripped back,” she said. There is nothing “natural” about squadrons of tiny cameras zooming across the matrimonial dance floor, though. Yet zipwire cameras are a game-changer in wedding videos, said Andrew Gemmell, a film-maker who has chronicled the weddings and private shindigs of celebrities including Elton John, Poppy Delevingne and David Beckham. “Zipwire cameras are great for shooting the dancing or the speeches. Almost like on a ski lift, they grab on to the wire then propel themselves along, panning side to side above the guests. It gives you angles you’d never dreamt of,” he said. Gemmell says that drones, GoPros and zipwire cameras are now essential gizmos for any videographer worth their salt. “It’s great – you control multiple cameras from your mobile phone, you meld into the wedding like a guest.” But there’s another technologically advanced way to blend in. Gemmell predicts the next big thing will be the “virtual guest” – a sort of Segway-iPad hybrid that will allow people who cannot get to a wedding to live and experience the occasion remotely. “With this thing, you can walk down the aisle, move around the reception, join in conversations – all at head height,” he said. The other attractive feature of the virtual guest, he said, is that if he or she is being annoying “the hosts can just turn the wifi off and shut them down”. For cakes...“No longer square or round, but petal shaped, hexagonal, oblong or teardropped. These shapes can be mixed together.” Natasha Collins, founder of Nevie-Pie Cakes, available at The Wedding Gallery “Vibrant colours of the rainbow, paired with contrasting black or white.” Rosalind Miller, founder of Rosalind Miller Cakes, available at Harrods For bridesmaids...“Brides want each bridesmaid to look their best and one style doesn’t always suit all. The mix-and-match trend is growing in popularity and ensures everyone looks great.” Rosanna Garden,bridesmaid gown designer and founder of www.moteemaids.co.uk For men...“Suits in bright hues – purple, burgundy or ink blue – are massively on-trend. There’s a fine line between cool and not cool when it comes to tweed but you can walk it the right way in 2018.” Dominic Troope, men’s fashion stylist at The Wedding Gallery,www.the-weddinggallery.com For flowers...“Granny as flower girl! I love alternative ways to march up the aisle.” Sandra von Riekhoff, photographer, founder of Divine Day Photography, www.divine-dayphotography.com For the invitation...“Printing on unusual material such as linen, wood and metal. The scope is fantastic.” Louise Richardson of Louise Richardson Bespoke Stationery