Seven people, including four children, have been found dead on a property in Western Australia after an apparent murder suicide. The WA police commissioner, Chris Dawson, confirmed a “significant tragedy” had occurred on a rural property in Osmington, near the holiday town of Margaret River in the state’s south-west. The death toll makes it Australia’s worst mass shooting since Port Arthur in 1996. At a press briefing on Friday, Dawson said police had been called to the outskirts of a rural property at about 5.15am. They found seven people dead on the property, including four children. He did not release the age of any of the victims. Two firearms were found on the property. Dawson confirmed victims had gunshot wounds. “It appears that gunshot wounds are there but I don’t want to go further than that, as two firearms have been located at the scene,” Dawson said. “It is still very early in this investigation but based on what we do know this is clearly a significant tragedy. He said five bodies – the four children and one adult – were found inside a building while two other adults were found outside. As word about the shooting spread through the tiny community on Friday, a neighbour Felicity Haynes described the victims – who the Guardian has not named because police are still contacting family members – as community-minded. “They were just the most gorgeous people,” Haynes said. “They were extremely active in the local community. Very interested in sustainable farming and permaculture. That sums them up.” It’s understood that the family moved to Osmington from Margaret River a few years ago. Police say that they don’t believe there are concerns about wider public safety following the suspected shooting. Specialist units from Perth, including the homicide squad and forensic crime scene unit, have been sent to the scene. Two firearms have been located at the property. Dawson said police were still trying to locate other family members and did not release the identities of any of the deceased. Police have blocked Osmington Rd about 400m from the property @abcsouthwestwa @abcnews @abcperth pic.twitter.com/A4v5irSRJW He called it a “horrific” and “devastating tragedy” which would have a “lasting impact”. “This devastating tragedy will no doubt have a lasting impact on the families concerned, the whole community and in particular the local community in the South West,” he said. “The loss of any life is tragic, but the loss of four children and three adults, this is a significant tragedy.” Osmington - population 135 - is about a 20-minute drive east of the the town of Margaret River. It mostly consists of mostly rural farmland properties and vineyards. The events in our South West are tragic and shocking. My thoughts are with the family and friends of the victims, and also with the first responders and investigators as they piece together this tragic set of circumstances. The Margaret River shire president Pamela Townshend was in a meeting when she received a new alert about the shooting. She said she was still in shock. “This is going to rock our whole community,” she said. “It’s a place where everybody knows everybody. People are all very connected. Osmington is extremely small. It’s just neighbours on rural properties. “It’s not only devastating for people who know the victims but there’s this feeling of fear generated around violence and gun violence.” WA Premier Mark McGowan described the shooting as “tragic and shocking”. “My thoughts are with the family and friends of the victims, and also with the first responders and investigators as they piece together this tragic set of circumstances,” he wrote on Twitter. • In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is on 13 11 14 and the national family violence counselling service is on 1800 737 732. In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 and the domestic violence helpline is on 0808 2000 247. Other international helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org