When the game was as good as lost, England at last started to play as if they could win. They were 110 for six, still 69 runs behind, when Dom Bess joined Jos Buttler in the middle. The two of them batted right through the late afternoon, in the sunny lees of a hot summer day. Buttler is a man of peerless talent but the way Bess, a 20-year-old playing his first Test, made it all look so easy showed up just how poor England had been until he came to the crease. They put on 125 and the hours their partnership lasted were the first since Thursday morning in which England had any measure of control over the match. Good as they were, the lead is only 56 and they will have to be a lot better yet to make anyone forget how bad England could look in the past three days. A lot of dubious thinking goes on at Lord’s on the Saturday of a Test match. Something about it seems to lead people to make the most bizarre decisions. How else does one explain all the preposterous clobber people wear? The blazers with candy-cane stripes, the schoolboy caps, the scarlet slacks, all those men ferreting around in their wardrobes asking: “Darling, have you seen my red trousers? I reckon it’s just the day for them.” At tea none of this felt quite so questionable, though, as the idea that England might have turned their winter form around. At that point they were shaping up to lose by an innings to a team who had scored 363. Anyone who has been watching England for long has seen them be all sorts of awful and every shade of abject over the years. You might think, after all this time, that they had already run through the many ways a team can fail, that they had covered the entire spectrum of calamities and catastrophes. These past three days, though, have been something else, something new. They have played sickly, consumptive, cricket, out-batted, out-bowled, out-fielded, even though they are at home, in conditions that seemed almost tailormade to suit them – and had won the toss too. Given all that, their performance here was so much worse than any other at home, at least in recent memory, that even the old salts were left scratching their heads as they tried to find something similar to compare it to. There was nothing dramatic about it. England were not swept away in a spell of breathtaking bowling; they were not bamboozled by a spinner or blasted out by a quick; there were not any giddy, dizzy, dramatic batting collapses. Oh, Mohammad Amir bowled some wonderful deliveries, like the inswinger that beat Jonny Bairstow, and Mohammad Abbas held his line and length while he wobbled the ball this way and that, just like his mentor, Mohammad Asif, taught him to, back when they were playing for Sialkot a few years back. But it was not exactly like being worked over by Wasim and Waqar. Pakistan’s bowling was not insurmountably good. Bess, who has played all of 16 first-class games, mastered it easily enough. England were not batted out of the match, ground down by the relentless brilliance of the opposition’s best. Pakistan’s batsmen did not make a 70 between them, never mind a century. This is not, by Pakistan’s own standards, a strong or experienced team. In the past two years they have lost every Test they have played against Australia, New Zealand and Sri Lanka – which is why they are ranked seventh in the world. Only two of the side, Azhar Ali and Asad Shafiq, have played as many as 50 Tests. Alastair Cook has played more than their entire top six and so has James Anderson than their entire bowling attack. But Pakistan were pushed harder by the rookie Irish side in the Test at Malahide. Instead there was a listless drift, a slow, steady, slump towards stumps. Until Bess came out England looked, and played like a team lost deep in the doldrums. Whatever directions their head coach, Trevor Bayliss, is giving them, they have not yet led them out again. These were familiar failings. Even Joe Root, the one man in the top six who made it to fifty, fell before he got to his hundred – again. They needed a breath of fresh impetus from somewhere. Buttler had been picked to do exactly that. Bess, though, was no one’s idea of a hero. But he batted quite beautifully once he had settled and was pinging drives and pulls for four both sides of the wicket. One guesses, though, that for England that may be as good as it gets in this match. They will hope the two and a half days beforehand were the worst of it, too.