Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said on Sunday that if North Korea agrees to fully dismantle its nuclear weapons program, the Trump administration will allow the American private sector to invest in the country. His remark jarred with a comment by Donald Trump’s national security adviser, John Bolton. Speaking on CNN’s State of the Union, Bolton said: “I wouldn’t look for economic aid from us.” On Fox News Sunday, Pompeo also hinted that the US might assure Kim Jong-un he can stay in power after any deal. If a deal is reached at or after the summit meeting between Kim and Trump scheduled for Singapore on 12 June, Pompeo said, “private sector Americans” could “help build out the energy grid that needs enormous amounts of electricity in North Korea”. Americans could also help, he said, with investment in North Korean infrastructure and agriculture to help feed its people. Pompeo met Kim last week in North Korea, for the second time, helping set the stage for the summit and securing the release of three Americans who had been held in the country. Asked if the US was in effect telling Kim he could stay in power if he met American demands, Pompeo said: “We will have to provide security assurances, to be sure.” The top US diplomat did not elaborate, but North Korea has sought assurances before. A statement issued during international negotiations in 2005 over its nuclear weapons development said the “United States affirmed that it has no nuclear weapons on the Korean peninsula and has no intention to attack or invade [North Korea] with nuclear or conventional weapons”. The North has said it needs nuclear weapons to counter a US effort to strangle its economy and overthrow the Kim government. “Make no mistake about it, America’s interest here is preventing the risk that North Korea will launch a nuclear weapon into LA or Denver or to the very place we’re sitting here this morning,” Pompeo said, from Washington. “That’s our objective, that’s the end state the president has laid out and that’s the mission that he sent me on this past week, to put us on the trajectory to go achieve that.” Trump hailed progress with North Korea on Twitter on Saturday night, writing: “North Korea has announced that they will dismantle Nuclear Test Site this month, ahead of the big Summit Meeting on June 12th. Thank you, a very smart and gracious gesture!”