Nothing fires up we Scots quite like someone threatening to lengthen our life expectancy. And now, thanks to legislation that puts a floor on the price of alcohol, many of us have a reason to get upset. On Tuesday, Scotland became the first country in the world to introduce a minimum price on alcohol. After six years of public debate (and legal challenges from our benevolent drinks lobby), the new legislation finally came into effect. Unsurprisingly, it has divided opinion. Yet there remains an elusive force at play in the public conversation about alcohol. Namely, the fact that so many of us who drink too much are either unaware of it or are in some form of denial. Being a recovered alcoholic, this tendency towards some form of self-deception – whether rounding down how many glasses of wine you had with dinner or flat-out lying about how much money you blew on a night out – is something I can identify with. We tend to downplay or underestimate both how much we drink and the impact it has on our finances and mental health – which is why facts are useful when creating policies that are designed to tackle the issue. And, like many of the hard drinkers up in arms about minimum pricing, the facts clearly speak for themselves. Scotland is by far the most seriously afflicted country in Britain when it comes to booze. Indeed, alcohol-related deaths in Scotland are over 50% higher than in England and Wales. Minimum pricing puts an end to a culture that says it’s morally acceptable to sell a three-litre bottle of cider for as little as £1.60. Sadly, many critics of the policy are focused on the cost to them personally. But even then, as with the uproar when producers of Irn Bru were mandated to stop putting our body weight in sugar into their drinks, or when smokers were unceremoniously chucked out on the street for a few minutes to smoke their cigarettes, or when a certain teacake manufacturer was boycotted for not being Scottish enough, the impact of minimum pricing has been hysterically overstated. If people drink within the recommended guidelines, then the cost is nothing to worry about. It’s only when you buy large volumes of alcohol that the financial burden begins to accumulate. You’ll hear people claim, with a straight face: “This won’t stop hardcore drinkers, but it will stop me.” Which is to miss the point entirely. Research conducted by the University of Sheffield in 2016 estimated that the minimum price of 50p per unit (what we now have in Scotland) could cut alcohol related deaths by 60 in the first year and 120 by year 20 of the policy. Hospital admissions could fall by 1,300 in the first year and 2,000 by year 20. The financial saving from harm reduction could be as much as £942m per year. Sceptics claim the measure won’t deter many alcoholics, implying that something already exists that is capable of such a feat. As someone who falls squarely into that alcoholic category, I can tell you that the threat of financial ruin – among other things – certainly gave me pause for thought. We don’t throw out the rules of the road because some people choose not to abide by them. This is about policy that influences human behaviour over a long period. This is about looking beyond the horizon line of our current culture of excess, to a society where getting paralytic is no longer regarded as a harmless rite of passage. When a fast car slows down at a crossing, the driver isn’t stopping simply because of the red light. They stop due to a combination of forces. A foot on a brake pedal, the friction of the road on the tyres as well as a speed limit. We also have various cultural factors that exert a certain gravity over a motorist’s thinking and behaviour as well, like the fear of getting points on a licence for using a phone or drink-driving. Of course, these rules will never eliminate dangerous driving, and many safe drivers will inevitably feel put-out, believing such rules should not apply to them, but the cumulative effect of all these factors is safer roads for everyone. Minimum pricing exerts an additional drag-force over a certain type of drinker, making it that bit less easy to misuse alcohol. It’s that simple. It won’t solve every drink-related problem, just as airbags, seatbelts and baby seats don’t save everyone from road accidents, but as part of a combination of measures, minimum pricing will play a significant part in tackling alcohol misuse. If it only leads to some people drinking a little less, the cumulative impact of a moderate reduction, both at the level of the individual and society, could be massive. The only question left for the Scottish government is what they intend to do about the root cause of so much alcoholism: poverty. • Darren McGarvey is author of Poverty Safari