Britain’s overseas territories will have to introduce public ownership registers, after a minister announced the government would support a backbench amendment designed to stem the global flow of “dirty money”. Sir Alan Duncan, the Foreign Office minister, told the Commons that the Conservatives recognised “the majority view in this house” and that the government would not oppose an amendment to the sanctions and anti-money laundering bill put down by the Labour MP Margaret Hodge and the Conservative MP Andrew Mitchell. The retreat came minutes after the Speaker rejected a string of government compromise amendments, which would have watered down the disclosure commitment, because they were tabled so late. The Hodge/Mitchell amendment requires the 14 overseas territories, including the financial centres of the British Virgin Islands and the Cayman Islands, to introduce public ownership registers by the end of 2020 or face having them imposed by the UK government. Duncan told MPs that ministers were reluctant to dictate to the overseas territories, but added: “We have listened to the strength of feeling in this house on this issue and accept that it is without a doubt the majority view of this house that the overseas territories should have public registers.” About half of the companies referred to in the Panama Papers, offshore ownership disclosures revealed by a consortium of investigative journalist organisations including the Guardian, were set up in the British Virgin Islands (BVI), according to Transparency International. The campaign group Global Witness estimates that £68bn flowed out of Russia via the British overseas territories between 2007 and 2016. The Panama Papers are a leak of 11.5m files from the database of the world’s fourth biggest offshore law firm, Mossack Fonseca. The records were obtained from an anonymous source by the German newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung, which shared them with a network of international partners, including the Guardian, in April 2016. The documents show the myriad ways in which the rich exploit secretive offshore tax regimes. Twelve national leaders were among 143 politicians, their families and close associates shown to have been using offshore tax havens. They included the Pakistani prime minister, Nawaz Sharif; the former vice-president of Iraq, Ayad Allawi; the president of Ukraine, Petro Poroshenko; and the prime minister of Iceland, Sigmundur Davíð Gunnlaugsson. An offshore investment fund run by the father of the then British prime minister David Cameron avoided paying tax in Britain by hiring residents of the Bahamas to sign its paperwork. The leak is larger than the US diplomatic cables released by WikiLeaks in 2010, and the secret intelligence documents given to journalists by Edward Snowden in 2013. Hodge said the importance of the issue justified intervention in the affairs of the overseas territories. “The areas on which we have intervened … are moral issues. I can’t think of another issue which is more moral than trying to intervene to prevent the traffic in corrupt money and illicit finance across the world.” Mitchell told MPs that the justification for disclosure was made “elegantly but passively” by the leaking of the Panama and Paradise Papers, which revealed the true owners of thousands of offshore companies. “It is only by openness and scrutiny, by allowing charities, NGOs and the media to join up the dots, that we can expose this dirty money and those people standing behind it. Closed registers do not begin to allow us to do it.” 1) Millions of pounds from the Queen’s private estate has been invested in a Cayman Islands fund – and some of her money went to a retailer accused of exploiting poor families. 2) Prince Charles’s estate made a big profit on a stake in his friend’s offshore firm. 3) Extensive offshore dealings by Donald Trump’s cabinet members, advisers and donors, including substantial payments from a firm co-owned by Vladimir Putin’s son-in-law to the shipping group of the US commerce secretary, Wilbur Ross. 4) Twitter and Facebook received hundreds of millions of dollars in investments that can be traced back to Russian state financial institutions. 5) The tax-avoiding Cayman Islands trust managed by the Canadian prime minister Justin Trudeau’s chief moneyman. 6) The Formula One champion Lewis Hamilton avoided taxes on a £17m jet using an Isle of Man scheme. 7) A previously unknown $450m offshore trust that has sheltered the wealth of Lord Ashcroft. 8) Oxford and Cambridge and top US universities invested offshore, with some of the money going into fossil fuel industries. 9) The man managing Angola’s sovereign wealth fund invested it in projects he stood to profit from. 10) Apple secretly moved parts of its empire to Jersey after a row over its tax affairs. 11) How the sportswear giant Nike stays one step ahead of the taxman. 12) The billions in tax refunds by the Isle of Man and Malta to the owners of private jets and luxury yachts. 13) Offshore cash helped fund Steve Bannon's attacks on Hillary Clinton. 14) The secret loan and alliance used by the London-listed multinational Glencore in its efforts to secure lucrative mining rights in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. 15) The complex offshore webs used by two Russian billionaires to buy stakes in Arsenal and Everton football clubs. 16) Stars of the BBC hit sitcom Mrs Brown's Boys used a web of offshore companies to avoid tax. 17) British celebrities including Gary Lineker used an arrangement that let them avoid tax when selling homes in Barbados. 18) Prominent Brexit campaigners have put money offshore. 19) An ex-minister who defended tax avoidance has a Bahamas trust fund. 20) The Dukes of Westminster pumped millions into secretive offshore firms. 21) A tax haven lobby group boasted of 'superb penetration' at the top of the UK government before a G8 summit that was expected to bring in greater offshore transparency. 22) The law firm at the centre of the Paradise Papers leak was criticised for 'persistent failures' on terrorist financing and money laundering rules. 23) Seven Republican super-donors keep money in tax havens. 24) A top Democratic donor built up a vast $8bn private wealth fund in Bermuda. 25) The schemes used to avoid tax on UK property deals. 26) The celebrities, from Harvey Weinstein to Shakira, with offshore interests. 27) How a private equity firm tried to extract £890m from a struggling care home operator by making it take out a costly loan. 28) Trump’s close ally Robert Kraft, the New England Patriots owner, is the longtime owner of an offshore firm. 29) One of the world’s biggest touts used an offshore firm to avoid tax on profits from reselling Adele and Ed Sheeran tickets. Twenty Tory rebels had been lined up to support the amendment, including former ministers Ken Clarke and Nicky Morgan, which also had the support of Labour, the Scottish National party and the Liberal Democrats. That was enough to defeat the government had the matter been put to a vote. Representatives of the territories had argued that the disclosure requirement would be expensive to implement at a time when countries in the Caribbean were recovering from the impact of Hurricane Irma. A few MPs questioned whether how effective public disclosure would be. Geoffrey Cox, a Conservative backbencher, said the benefit from transparency would be “a one-hit wonder” and argued that “money will go to where it is darkest”, other global territories where there are no public disclosure requirements. The amendment does not apply to the crown dependencies, the Isle of Man and the Channel Islands, because parliament does not have the legal right to impose its will on them. However, Mitchell said that in the light of the success of the amendment parliament would expect the government “to make the point persuasively, that we hope that the crown dependencies embrace the same ethical position and equal transparency”.  