Formula One could come to the streets of downtown Miami as early as next season. The City of Miami commission has announced it will put the sport’s proposal to a vote next Thursday and, if approved, will provide the green light for a grand prix to be staged in 2019. Liberty Media, F1’s American owner, is keen to add further races in the United States beyond the one grand prix already held in Austin, Texas. The timing of the proposed Miami Grand Prix is a matter for more discussion between F1, governing body the FIA and the city authorities. It is, though, hoped the inaugural race would take place in October 2019. F1’s managing director commercial operations Sean Bratches is confident Miami would prove “the perfect destination”. “Earlier today the City of Miami Commission took an important step by adding an item to their upcoming agenda, that if approved, will make way to bring Formula 1 to downtown Miami next season,” Bratches said in a statement released on formula1.com. “We appreciate the community’s interest in hosting a Formula 1 race and look forward to working with local officials and stakeholders to bring this vision to life. “With over half a billion fans worldwide, Formula 1 is the greatest racing spectacle on the planet, and Miami’s status as one of the world’s most iconic and glamorous cities, combined with its robust tourism infrastructure, makes Miami the perfect destination for Formula 1 and its fans.” Miami Dolphins owner Stephen Ross, the US entrepreneur and supporter of the proposed race, feels hosting such an iconic event would only have a positive impact on South Florida. Ross said: “Miami is a first-class global city and Formula 1 is a first-class global brand. “In cooperation with the City of Miami and Miami-Dade County, I am confident we can deliver yet another global event that will be a destination for people from around the world and drive economic value to South Florida. “From football and soccer to tennis and motorsports, Miami deserves only the best in music, food, art, fashion and sports and entertainment, and that is exactly what we plan on delivering with a Formula 1 race.”