A study released by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) has found that the most regular drinkers are those in professional jobs, with 69.5% of professionals reported having drunk in the last week, compared with 51.2% of people in routine or manual occupations. When looking at income, 78.9% of those earning more than £40,000 reported having drunk in the last week, as opposed to 46.5% of those earning less than £10,000. It’s also likely, noted the ONS, that people underestimated their alcohol consumption. The figures are not surprising to Katherine Brown the chief executive of the Institute of Alcohol Studies. “Data has shown for a number of years that people in managerial and professional positions are more likely to drink alcohol, and they’re more likely to drink more heavily than people in routine and manual positions,” she says. Nobody, she adds, has been able to give “concrete answers for why this is, but there are a number of theories”. It may be a hangover from student drinking culture; those in professional careers now are more likely to have gone to university, though the ONS study showed younger people are drinking less. “If they adopted heavy drinking practices, and associated their social life with alcohol it could be that this carries on in later life,” says Brown. The professional cultures are also an issue: “In some, such as the finance sector and the legal profession, we have seen recent shifts: drinking at lunchtime is less acceptable than it was.” Last year, Lloyds of London banned drinking during working hours. “However we haven’t necessarily seen a similar reduction in out-of-office-hours drinking cultures; client entertainment often revolves around alcohol.” Are people working in stressful jobs relaxing with alcohol? “We don’t have very strong evidence but it’s a plausible theory,” says Brown. “We know that people work longer hours and perhaps harder than previous generations. Alcohol seems to be the nation’s favourite drug when it comes to self-medicating stress.” The relationship between alcohol consumption and socioeconomic status is complex – it is also the case that alcohol-related mortality is higher in deprived areas – but Brown says stereotypes “around who are problem drinkers need to be dismantled. People can be drinking at levels that are harming themselves, their families and colleagues [by drinking] at what can be deemed socially acceptable levels.”