Bailey Davis, one of two National Football League cheerleaders to file gender discrimination claims against the league, says she is “disappointed” that the commissioner Roger Goodell has yet to agree to a sit-down meeting, as cheerleader claims of sexual harassment and discrimination continue to mount. Davis, 22, who was fired from the New Orleans Saints “Saintsations” cheerleader team in January for posting an Instagram selfie wearing a one-piece negligee, is one of four former cheerleaders seeking a meeting to discuss what her attorney describes as “blatant discrimination” in the way men and women are treated. Davis, who has filed a complaint with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, told the Guardian the discrimination she experienced over three seasons with her team left her feeling “worthless”. Among her discrimination claims, Davis points to the team’s anti-fraternization policies that requires cheerleaders to avoid contact with players (but not vice versa), and a ban on appearing nude, seminude or in lingerie on social media. She also complained about a lack of protection from harassment when she and other cheerleaders were sent out unaccompanied into the crowds before games and expected to meet quotas for selling the Saintsations’ magazines at tailgate parties featuring the cheerleaders. “The rules are discriminatory. We go out there in a two-piece outfit yet they say we can’t post certain things on social media because it makes them look bad. Other girls have reported having to be escorts. It just shows you that the NFL are putting us out there to make money. This is on the NFL and how they treat their women,” she said. Earlier this week, five cheerleaders with Washington claimed they were required to pose topless for a 2013 photo shoot on a trip to Costa Rica and required to serve as escorts to a nightclub for some of the team’s male sponsors. Washington president Bruce Allen has said other cheerleader accounts contradict the claims. We go out there in a two-piece outfit yet they say we can’t post things on social media because it makes them look bad Responding to the Washington cheerleaders accounts, Davis said she is “horrified but not surprised to hear that happened, that girls had felt that way and nothing was done about it. It just shows the control they like to have over the girls every place they go.” The Washington allegations add to a growing body of cheerleader accounts attesting to low pay, long hours and sexual harassment. The NFL issued a written statement that said it would work with clubs “in sharing best practices” to support cheerleading squads. Davis’s attorney, Sara Blackwell, says the NFL’s response amounts to washing their hands of responsibility “like Pontius Pilate”. “It’s like the monkey we don’t hear, we don’t see, we don’t talk. It’s a cop-out. To say they’re going to talk to the teams means nothing when they have power to make rules that apply to everyone and they’re choosing not to do it. The NFL is 100% liable, 100% responsible and 100% in the know,” she told the Guardian. Blackwell’s clients include Kristin Ware, a former Miami Dolphins cheerleader who had filed a complaint with the Florida commission on human relations claiming she was subjected to a hostile work environment and discriminated against because of her gender and religion. On Thursday, the National Organisation for Women weighed in, issuing a statement accusing the NFL of allowing “a culture of sexual harassment to continue” and doing “nothing to change the rules and regulations for cheerleaders”. The equal rights body said commissioner Goodell “should not even think twice” before accepting a meeting with Davis and Wade, who have proposed settling their discrimination claims for a nominal $1, if Goodell meets with them. But NOW president Toni Van Pelt also warned that the NFL must apply new standards. She said: “The NFL needs to recognize their obligation to make tangible changes, and most importantly they need to start listening. They can start with Davis and Ware.” The Saints and Dolphins are not the only teams to have come under criticism for their treatment of their cheerleading squads. Before they were disbanded, some members of the Buffalo Bills cheerleaders – the Buffalo Jills – claimed they were made to jump to see if their flesh wobbled. Ravens cheerleaders were subject to regular weigh-ins. Other teams, including the Oakland Raiders, Cincinnati Bengals, Tampa Bay Buccaneers and New York Jets, have settled cheerleader discrimination claims. In April, Leslie Lanusse, a lawyer representing the Saints, said in an email that the team planned to defend the organization’s policies and workplace rules. “It is sufficient to say that Ms Davis was not subjected to discrimination because of her gender.” Davis wants the public to think of cheerleading as the wholesome form of sports entertainment that it still largely is at the amateur level.  She said: “A lot of people have the perception that cheerleading is sexualized anyway. But being on the team and knowing the girls, none of them sign up for that job to be entertainment for men. Half the girls are married and on my team, they’re great Christian girls and none have the reputation of being sluts, basically.” Being a Saintsation cheerleader was “a professional dance job on a professional dance team,” Davis says. “I don’t know where the line from high school and college cheerleading to NFL cheerleading was crossed, but it needs to be fixed.”