The last time she was in Ireland two years ago, Brianna Parkins made headlines for talking about abortion. Parkins, an ABC journalist from Sydney, was competing in the Rose of Tralee festival – a pageant “which brings young women of Irish descent from around the world to county Kerry, Ireland, for a global celebration of Irish culture” – when she publicly backed a referendum on abortion rights during an interview on television. “I think we can do better here in Ireland,” she said. Sign up to receive the top stories in Australia every day at noon “I think it is time to give women a say on their own reproductive rights. I would love to see a referendum on the eighth coming up soon. That would be my dream.” Parkins was referring to the eighth amendment to Ireland’s constitution, passed in 1983, which guarantees the “right to life of the unborn and, with due regard to the equal right to life of the mother, guarantees in its laws to respect and, as far as practicable, by its laws to defend and vindicate that right”. It means that even in cases of rape, child sexual abuse and incest, or where fatal foetal abnormalities are present, a woman in Ireland cannot access a termination unless her life is at risk. On Friday, Ireland will vote on whether to repeal the amendment. Polling suggests the result could go either way. Thousands of members of the Irish diaspora from all over the world have headed back to vote. Universities in the UK have set up bursaries to help students fly back for the vote, and in Australia groups have been set up to raise money for the repeal campaign. Parkins is among those who headed back. Irish women who have come #hometovote arriving at Dublin airport. pic.twitter.com/jTMm1xg9a1 Voting rights for Irish emigrants are restricted to those who have left the country within the past 18 months, meaning she cannot vote. Instead she’s using her profile to become part of the repeal campaign, making television appearances and writing columns for the Irish Times newspaper. The Rose of Tralee pageant – sometimes called a “lovely ladies competition” – is determinedly apolitical, and Parkins’s comments made her a lightning rod for the abortion debate. #hometovote from Queensland to Dublin. Arrived in today and worth it. Drinking Lyons tea at 5am with jetlag. #repealthe8th #togetherforyes #hometovote #trustwomen #8thref pic.twitter.com/oWEzpfIkWk She was called a baby murderer and received death and rape threats. “It was pretty controversial [because] the Rose is middle Ireland territory, so to have a Rose talk about abortion was confirming that this is not a fringe issue,” she said. “Roses have had abortions. Future ones probably will too.” 1) Newcastle to Sydney Airport on 2 trains -3 hours2)Plane to Abu Dhabi -16 hours3) Plane to Ireland -8.5 hoursRepealing the 8th Amendment? Priceless.(Step 1 almost complete) #Together4YES #menforyes #HomeToVote #hometoveote #repealThe8th pic.twitter.com/tsG4Bh57n2 She has been struck by the way the conversation has changed in the two years since she was last in Dublin. “It wasn’t really in the mainstream,” she said. “There were marches [but] people weren’t talking about abortion as openly. Now I probably hear one woman’s abortion story a day.” Every year more than 3,000 Irish women and girls travel to the UK to have an abortion. Parkins has heard “terrible stories” of women taking abortion pills bought over the internet, or of women not being able to pay for anaesthetic because they had the money to cover only their flights and the abortion. “I’m the first generation of women in my family who has had access to full reproductive care,” she said. “I’ve been lucky enough to take for granted what Irish women have fought 30 years for. I don’t want any more women catching planes and boats on the hardest days of their life.”