Despite writing candidly about having a threesome with her husband, giving birth and being treated for cancer, author Pamela Druckerman considers herself a private person. Her latest book, There Are No Grown-Ups: A Midlife Coming-of-Age Story, is part memoir and part witty how-to guide about being in your 40s. It comes six years after her international bestseller Bringing Up Bébé, which charted the differences between US and French parenting styles, drawing on her experiences raising three children as an American in Paris. Druckerman’s writing is humorous, conversational and revealing, so it’s surprising when she admits to finding it “incredibly hard” to open up. “I read a lot about memoir writing when I was writing this book,” she tells the Guardian. “Everyone says you just have to be honest. If you’re not honest it’s not going to work, and so I really pushed myself beyond my comfort zone.” Particularly difficult to write was the chapter on being diagnosed with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma when she was in her early 40s, and her subsequent successful chemotherapy and immunotherapy treatment. Asked if it’s still hard to talk about, she pauses, nodding her head slowly. “Umm … yeah … I think it is still difficult, but I was trying to tell the story. I just couldn’t leave that out because it was such a big part.” She laughs, adding: “And here we are, out of my comfort zone.” Did the diagnosis change her? Another pause, then: “I’m not sure … It was a shock. I was quite a private person and I got a lot of solace from a few friends who had been through very intense health crises themselves. Somehow I felt very opened up to them and I needed to exchange with them … I was able to share the experience in a way that surprised me.” Druckerman, 48, is also a journalist and was a foreign reporter for the Wall Street Journal in her late 20s and early 30s. Shortly before being made redundant in 2002, she met Simon Kuper, a British sports writer, while on assignment in Buenos Aires. A few months after leaving the paper, she moved from New York to Paris to be with him and has lived there ever since. The idea for Bringing Up Bébé came to her while eating out with Simon (by then her husband) and their then 18-month-old daughter. She noticed that, unlike their child, French toddlers ate a varied diet and didn’t throw their food about or run around the restaurant. The French had a different attitude to child rearing than the Americans, she realized. Cafe culture also provided the inspiration for There Are No Grown-Ups. She noticed waiters calling her the mature madame instead of the youthful mademoiselle and realized she was now middle-aged. “It was like a gathering storm, you hear the thunder in the distance then a trickle of rain,” she said. “There was this period when they’d say madame and kind of wink like madame in quotes. Then suddenly it was just madame and there were a lot of madames. Like a hailstorm: madame, madame, madame. It was all I could hear. Then it was just a matter of fact madame. “It happened among many people at the same time, and not just one waiter because I looked haggard one morning. There seemed to be a group mindset between who was a madame and who wasn’t.” She wrote about being in her 40s in her column for the New York Times. “I had all these little bitty things I wanted to say. Little morsels of hard-won truths that I thought were interesting, but I didn’t know if anyone else would,” she says. “I was scared to do it. I was scared to say I was in my 40s because at that point it sounded really old, and to out myself as a middle-aged human – I felt very awkward about it. “I wrote the piece and it totally resonated with people. It was this very warming moment not only of being glad as a writer that people are reading something I wrote but as a human that these quiet, private experiences I have are shared by a lot of other people.” The more Druckerman read about mid-life transition, the more she realised that nobody fully understands it. “Your 40s is a very specific time of life. I quote from Aristotle and Schopenhauer and Dante, but I didn’t find any satisfying explanation of what this liminal time of life is. You’re changing, it’s definitely a pivot point, but into what and from what? “I just wasn’t satisfied with any explanation that I read, and I thought, ‘Oh this is good, it isn’t a question that has been answered and I can take a stab at it.’ “I also thought there was a lot of room for humour in this subject. I heard someone say that humour is putting people in circumstances that they’re not equipped to deal with. I thought, ‘That’s what the 40s are.’” Druckerman decided to write a book, focusing on the physical and emotional changes she has experienced in her 40s and how they have impacted on her friendships, marriage, parenting, fashion choices and other aspects of her life. She weaves this together with data, academic research and anecdotes about her friends and acquaintances. One of the most amusing chapters recounts how she organised a menage a trois for Simon’s 40th birthday present, writing about the experience in a magazine. Simon, an author and columnist for the FT, appears throughout the book. Asked if he minds, she laughs: “He knows he provides good material!” One of the big takeaways from the book is from French culture. Druckerman notes that the French learn to be comfortable in their own skin as they age. “There’s an American idea that you want to look as young as you can for as long as you can. If you can be mistaken for a teenager from behind into your 50s then you’ve won, you’ve succeeded. “I’m speaking in very broad brushstrokes, but in France there’s generally this idea that you should look like the best version of the age that you are. There isn’t this clinging to youth. “There is an assumption that women of every age can have their own allure.” In the book she cites national sex statistics which show many more women stay sexually active in their 50s and 60s in France than the US. “I really see that in women I encounter. It’s part of life, one of the great pleasures and stimulants and motivations. Part of the game you would never want to stop playing.” This feeds through into older women’s fashion choices too. Druckerman says it took her years to figure out the French approach to clothes. “There’s this idea in America that you can be whatever you want. That remains an ideal in terms of how you dress too – when you go shopping you try on all possible selves and then decide.” “In France there’s this idea that you’re absolutely constricted by your body and your budget. You have to see yourself really clearly and know yourself really well, then your style emerges. You pay attention to the silhouette. “In America there’s a lot of fat talk, where you’re supposed to say negative things about your own body to the point where you can’t even see yourself clearly. “In France, even the women I know who don’t have ideal proportions know what works on them. Women seem to understand what’s attractive about them and know how to work it and own it and feel good about themselves. That feels culturally different.” Druckerman grew up in Miami, Florida, where her father worked in advertising and her mother co-owned a fashion boutique. She clearly adores much about France and laughs off the thought of moving back to the US, saying: “It would be an achievement to even change apartments in my own neighbourhood.” But, she concedes, there are things she misses about the US. “I miss living in a place where I can be invisible, where I understand all the codes. I miss being in the place where I know the most people, where I have the most history, where my high school reunions are held, where my family lives.” Her daughter, 12, and twin boys, nine, have grown up in France, yet Druckerman still feels like an outsider. “I’m a bit of an alien here, a foreign plant. I read somewhere that the longer you stay, the more American you feel. I think there’s some truth in that. “Your narrative of how life goes, your basic assumptions about the world are just always going to clash with the local ones. That’s what makes it interesting.” She has become better at reading the French, she says, thanks to living there for 16 years and growing older and wiser. Druckerman believes everyone changes in their 40s, adding: “It’s the decade when you become who you are.” However, being a grown-up is nothing like she’d imagined. It’s not all knowing, omnipotent and large, rather it’s humble, solid and small. But, as she says at the end of the book: “At long last, it feels like you. And you think, just then, that this is the best age of all.” 