So much for chapter one, a glorious display of British romantic ceremonial at its best. Now for chapter two. I predict that this will not be about the obvious “mixed-marriage”, but about a different one. This is between a Briton and an American, and between two people with starkly different career trajectories. All comment on the Duchess of Sussex has been on what she will do for Prince Harry and the royal family. It has been one-way traffic, the benefit going to Britain and its global image. But what will the marriage do for her, beyond bring her staggering celebrity? It is taken for granted that the duchess will be the “dutiful wife”, living where her husband wants her to live, attending his charity events and doing and saying what “the palace” ordains. Her American life, her dysfunctional family and acting career are regarded as her past. This narrative has been universally patronising, a narrative of rescue. The duchess’s America has been depicted as Cinderella’s scullery. She may describe herself as an actor and a “feminist”, but few ask what that means. Having spent much of my own life married to a strong-minded American actor, I know that such “mixed-marriages”, however loving, are subject to unavoidable strain. I find it incredible that the duchess should be expected graciously to abandon her past for the warm embrace of British royalty – bringing to it just enough novelty to update the monarchy just a little, and make it seem “more relevant”. We should apply to this marriage a feminist template. Suppose the duchess had been an American man, marrying a British princess. Would he have been expected to come to Windsor to submerge himself in a life of sybaritic luxury? Would he be expected to obey “the palace” on his career moves and public utterances? I think not. American and British cultures are not the same. Where two careers diverge, where geographies diverge, the Atlantic suddenly seems very wide. Everything we are told about the duchess indicates an articulate and intelligent woman. At 36, she has a dazzling career ahead of her. Suppose after two years of royal candy-floss, she gets an offer she cannot refuse, and naturally expects her spouse to accompany her to Los Angeles? Suppose she – indeed, they – find California a relief from stuffy west London? The duchess has already shown herself adept at combining a career with a public platform. Her friends and associates affirm that she is a political animal. I suggested over the weekend that, such is her fame, she could perfectly well follow a route once taken by a certain Ronald Reagan. I even suggested she might lead for the Democrats against a Republican Ivanka Trump. It was treated as a joke. All I can say is, why not? I fervently hope this marriage succeeds – on either side of the Atlantic. And if they can put an American in Kensington Palace, surely we can put a Briton in the White House. • Simon Jenkins is a Guardian columnist