Saxon Warrior was an authoritative and exciting winner of the 2,000 Guineas here, raising the possibility of his connections landing the Triple Crown they were cruelly denied with Camelot six years ago. Aidan O’Brien clearly has another hugely talented horse in his stable, though it is much more newsworthy that there is a horse of comparable quality in the Berkshire yard of Roger Teal, whose Tip Two Win put in a mighty effort to be second at 50-1. O’Brien, whose extraordinary tally of Group One wins has now reached 300, was away in the United States, preparing Mendelssohn for Saturday night’s Kentucky Derby. This victory will have meant much more to him than most of the others, as it provided a first Classic success for his youngest son, Donnacha, the winning jockey. Aged 19, Donnacha was born the month after his father won this race for the first time, with King Of Kings in 1998. He was given a detailed breakdown of how to ride this tricky straight mile by his brother, Joseph, who bagged his own 2,000 aboard Camelot. “If I hadn’t won a Guineas, I’d probably be the disappointment of the family,” said Donnacha, who has evidently inherited his father’s facility for self-deprecation. Of his family connection, he added: “I’m under no illusions that’s the only reason I’m riding them but I’m glad I can do the business. I’m very lucky to be sitting on some of these horses. I didn’t mess up on him anyway.” One doubt about Saxon Warrior was whether a mile might now be on the sharp side for him but, having recovered from a slow start, he travelled strongly throughout and had the race in safe keeping after easing into the lead a furlong from home. His parentage suggests the Derby’s mile and a half will suit him well and he is a strong favourite for next month’s race at odds of 11-10, with no other horse shorter than 14-1. Victory there would lead naturally to the question of whether he should go to the St Leger in September in an attempt to be the first since Nijinsky to land the Triple Crown. It seems probable that Ryan Moore, who watched this from Kentucky, will be back in Saxon Warrior’s saddle by Epsom. If the trainer were tempted to let Donnacha keep the ride after this win he will face a very difficult conversation with his No 1 jockey. For his part, Donnacha appears happy to take what success comes his way and, in common with other members of his family, was in no danger of letting big-race glory unsettle his cool demeanour. “He was galloping over everything there and he shouldn’t be,” was his assessment of Saxon Warrior’s performance. “He’s very special.” Like Joseph, Donnacha is rather taller than your average Flat-race jockey and fully expects that weight will also force him into early retirement within a matter of years. “I’m not going to be riding all my life. I knew that from the day I started but at the minute it’s fine. “I did nine stone today no problem, I never struggled a bit. I’ll take it day by day and I’ll wake up some morning and I’ll be too heavy and that’ll be that. I’ll keep making the most of it while I can.” By contrast, emotion was overflowing in the spot reserved for second place, where Tip Two Win justified Teal’s faith in him and showed up all punters for allowing the diminutive grey to start at such big odds. Indeed, he made up ground on Saxon Warrior for most of the final furlong before seeming to run out of petrol in the final 50 yards. “When he came out of the Dip, I thought: ‘Oh my God, I’ve got a chance of winning the Guineas here’,” said the ebullient Teal. “I’m still pinching meself.” Fast ground is the key to Tip Two Win, who should continue putting Teal’s name in the racecard on big days through the summer, starting with the St James’s Palace Stakes at Royal Ascot. Teal says he has 25 horses at his Great Shefford base, about a tenth of what the big-name trainers have to look after, but really ought to be sent some better prospects in light of what he has achieved here. “It’s what you dream of,” the trainer said. “Getting a horse like him, I’m blessed. We’re in unknown territory here. It feels good.”