Your kids are playing it, your friends are complaining about their kids playing it, and the tabloid press are telling you no one should be playing it because it’s evil. But the fact is, Fortnite is here, it’s lots of fun, and if you can’t beat its 40 million players you may as well join them. Fortnite is a “battle royale” game in which 100 players land on an island, run around collecting weapons, resources and items from abandoned houses, build forts for protection, and then attempt to blast each other right back into the starting menu. The last player standing wins. When you first start out, it can be a little bewildering – but not nearly as bewildering as not playing and then trying to understand what your daughter means when she tells you she just took out two John Wicks with nothing but an uncommon silenced pistol. If you’re thinking of dipping your toe in, here are 13 tips to get you started. 1. Stay on the battle bus until the endIf you want to live long enough to collect a couple of guns and some resources, stay on the bus until the last few seconds and then land somewhere near the coast. Very few players will be around, because most of them eject immediately over Tilted Towers. This way, you at least get to arm yourself and have a little look around before being pulverised by a stranger dressed like Harley Quinn from Suicide Squad. 2. Land on a roof when you eject from the battle busYou’ll want to land near a house, where you’re most likely to find weapons and chests. But it’s even better to land on the roof. This gives you a height advantage on anyone else nearby, and also means you can quickly chop your way through each floor, grabbing all the goodies from the top of the house to the bottom. 3. Prioritise weapons over resources in the opening secondsAs soon as you’ve landed, you need to find something useful to fight with just in case someone else has dropped nearby – you don’t want to be running at them with your pickaxe. At this stage anything will do, though a tactical shotgun or submachine gun will be best because it’s likely to be a close encounter. Don’t engage anyone unless you really have to. You’re not Rambo. 4. Learn about weapon gradingThere are five grades of weapon in Fortnite: gray (common), green (uncommon), blue (rare), purple (epic) and orange (legendary). With each grade, the weapon’s damage capabilities improve, so always prioritise rarer weapons. 5. Learn to make a basic fortAs quickly as possible while you’re exploring the world, start smashing stuff up to get you the three basic resources: wood, bricks and metal. Wood is the weakest but also the quickest to build with, so, if someone is firing at you, this is what to go for first. The basic defence is to surround yourself with four walls, then build a ramp in the middle and jump on to it as its forming. This gives you height and cover. Building other identical levels on top of this will accentuate your height advantage, but only building upwards makes you vulnerable to someone blowing up your lower levels with a rocket launcher, destroying your whole tower. If you can, it helps to build around a scenic structure like a house, as that gives you a head start on gaining height and a decent foundation. As you get nearer to the endgame, start making stronger buildings out of brick and metal, but always use ramps so that you have cover. 6. An assault rifle and a shotgun are your must-have weaponsThese will see you through most encounters. Prioritise automatic assault rifles over burst fire models as the latter are trickier to use in a sudden firefight. There are scoped ARs, giving you the long-range aiming of a sniper rifle with the rapid fire of an AR (handy for when you’re exploring), and then there are special combat assault rifles, which do lots of damage and reload fast. They’re the motherlode of the assault rifle world. There are three types of shotgun. The pump model delivers more damage but takes longer to reload, while the tactical shotgun is quicker but weaker. The heavy shotgun – available in epic and legendary flavours – is powerful, quick to reload and has a longer effective range – it is very much the Incredible Hulk of short-range combat. Many players line up a pump next to a tactical in their armoury, getting away an opening shot with the former, before quickly switching to the latter. If you’re unsure, stick with any AR and a tactical shotgun. 7. If you want to practise shooting, go to Tilted TowersIf you’re new to the game, it’s worth getting some practice in with combat, and that means dropping down in a city and becoming bullet fodder for all the young scamps who have been doing this for three hours a day since September. Just land, find a weapon and try to shoot it at someone. Fortnite has an authentic – if rather exaggerated – physics system, so the further away your target is, the more you need to lead your shot, firing just over their heads, and slightly in front if they’re running past. 8. Pack your perfect inventoryEvery player has their own priorities when it comes to filling their backpack. Many go for three weapons (short, medium and long range), bandages or a health kit, and some sort of projectile, such as a grenade or clinger. If you’re new to the game, it’s probably not worth wasting an inventory slot on remote mines, impulse grenades or boogie bombs. If you pick up anything that boosts your shields, use it immediately – it’ll free up an inventory slot and there’s no benefit to saving them. If you’re not planning to get in many firefights, prioritise health kits and large shield potions over bandages and small bottles. As a newcomer, when you do get into a fight, it’s likely you’ll need massive medical intervention rather than a plaster and a kiss on your sore bit. 9. Use sound to your advantageIf you can, wear decent headphones, preferably with 7.1 surround sound. This way you get excellent audio feedback on where another player is in relation to you. (Footsteps are really noisy in this game.) Also remember that everything you do, from changing weapons to slurping some shield potion, is audible to nearby players. Oh, and crouching makes your movement harder to detect. Start weighing up every action in terms of how it gives away your position - especially in cities. 10. Stay away from open groundYou are basically cannon fodder when walking through open fields, so try to vary your movement, using jumping and weaving, rather than legging it in a straight line, which is basically the equivalent of shouting: “Shoot me now.” Use scenic elements such as hills, trees and walls as cover. Chopping down trees sends leaves flying into the air, alerting everyone within 500 metres to where you are. 11. Stay away from close encountersLet’s face it, the chances are, you’re going to lose in close, open combat. So be sneaky. If you spot another player, try to engage them from a distance using a scoped rifle – and wait until they’re standing still. Alternatively, watch them for a while, hold off until they’re engaged in exploring or building, then get into the crouch position and tiptoe up to them. Use a shotgun and aim for the head. It’s also a good idea to swoop in after you’ve observed two players fighting each other as they’ll both be low on health and shields. If all else fails, don’t feel bad about running away. 12. Tweak the controlsSome people find the controls over-sensitive, which can make it tough to construct forts at speed. If that’s the case with you, go into the menu and change the settings. You can also tweak the button configurations depending on whether you want to prioritise combat or building. Once you’ve learned what your strengths and weaknesses are, there’s no shame in using the controller options to augment them. 13. Watch the expertsIf you really want to immerse yourself in Fortnite’s surrounding culture (or properly get good at it), head to YouTube or Twitch and watch experienced players. The likes of Ninja, Myth and Dakotaz are considered the best in the world, but Britain’s Ali A is a really good starting point – he explains his strategies clearly and makes professional, watchable videos.