In the post-Weinstein era, it looked as if this year’s Cannes film festival was going to be different. A sexual harassment hotline was launched by the festival, and 82 powerful industry women staged a demonstration on the steps of the Palais des Festivals. Two days later, a panel of women from the international #MeToo, Times Up and 5050x2020 movements spoke passionately about their work, before the festival’s director signed a pledge for gender parity. It was a historic moment and strangers smiled and chatted to each other, high on hope. There was a more uncomfortable atmosphere at the closing ceremony, when actor Asia Argento spoke out. “In 1997, I was raped by Harvey Weinstein here at Cannes. I was 21 years old. This festival was his hunting ground.” Weinstein denies all allegations of non-consensual sex made against him. It’s likely the words “hunting ground” chimed with any woman who has been in Cannes during the festival, whether as an actor, producer, journalist or bar staff. The abuse of power in film industry meetings has been well publicised in Weinstein’s wake, but going out and about in Cannes can also be perilous – notably more so than in London, for example. While I’ve always had a terrific time covering the festival and am treated respectfully by male colleagues, I’ve learned the need to be especially aware at night. Out on the Boulevard de la Croisette, I’ve had drunken/predatory strangers lunge at me. Less crude approaches at parties have still carried a sense of entitlement or expectation, as if any woman in a dress in Cannes were fair game. Many younger attendees I spoke to had similar experiences – or worse. “Last year was my first time in Cannes,” says one actor and activist. “Let’s just say I mastered the art of declining advances that obviously had nothing to do with work. That includes an invitation to tag along with some people on to Weinstein’s boat – phew!” She had troubling experiences this year, too. “There were times when I still felt vulnerable and objectified. My guard was up, I didn’t drink and I wore unrevealing clothes, so I wonder: what happens when a girl is tipsy, more trusting and wearing whatever she wants?” Incidents are also taking place in broad daylight. One writer-director had cause to call the hotline this year. “I went to the hotline because [a chauffeur] drove me away against my will and tried to molest me,” she claims. “We spoke on the phone to a lady who arranged for me to be met immediately. I made a statement and she took me to the police, acting as a translator for the whole time. The police acted very swiftly, and he was fired. Without the helpline I don’t honestly think I would have been able to get the same outcome.” A spokesperson for one of the companies who operate the fleet of cars the chauffeur was driving said: “Her complaint has been closed as a non-case. Nevertheless we are shattered by her allegations and are taking this matter very seriously.” It seems that the #MeToo message will take time to filter through all aspects of Cannes. Melissa Silverstein of Women and Hollywood says: “Women are still perceived as second-class citizens all across this festival, from the types of movies that are sold in the market, to how women are still eye candy, to how women are sexually harassed, to how few women directors walk up the steps of the Palais. Having a jury led by a woman does nothing to quell the reality that men rule that town.” That said, initiatives such as the hotline seem like a step in the right direction. Kate Kinninmont, CEO of Women in Film TV (UK), says: “I’m delighted that the festival organised a sexual harassment helpline this year. This is a great way, not only to help the people being harassed, but also to get the message out that the Cannes film festival will not put up with the predatory behaviour of the Harvey Weinsteins of the world.” The actor also has reason for hope. “I met some men who were really sensitive to and supportive of gender equality,” she says. “One powerful Hollywood businessman told me, ‘Time is up, indeed’, while a British director asked me, ‘How can I join the movement?’” Let’s hope we can all work together to change Cannes for the better.