Alisson Could not be faulted for Liverpool’s goals although less convincing than Karius with his handling and command. 6 Alessandro Florenzi Deserves credit for providing an outlet down the right while dealing with the dual threat of Mane and Robertson. 7 Kostas Manolas Alert to several dangerous situations but often exposed by his team’s wayward passing and understandable adventure. 8 Federico Fazio Sharp in the tackle and intelligently restricted Salah’s chance to cut in on his left foot. Distribution poor. 7 Aleksandar Kolarov Remains a potent threat with his left-foot deliveries but also continues to offer little protection at the back. 6 Lorenzo Pellegrini Brought energy and better balance to the Italian club’s midfield before fading in the second half. Replaced. 6 Daniele De Rossi Always willing to take the ball under pressure and threaded the occasional telling pass but again over-run by Liverpool’s midfield. 7 Radja Nainggolan His awful pass to Roberto Firmino effectively killed Roma’s hopes of a recovery but admirably never hid and scored two late goals. 7 Patrik Schick Improved the team’s attack instantly at Anfield but struggled to have the same impact as Virgil van Dijk dominated. 6 Edin Dzeko The focal point for Roma worked tirelessly but his efforts, along with his eight goal of the campaign, always looked in vain. 8 Stephan El Shaarawy A constant menace on the left but needed more composure in front of goal to truly trouble Liverpool. 7 Substitutes: Cengiz Ünder for Pellegrini 53; Maxime Gonalons for De Rossi 69; Mirko Antonucci for El Shaarawy, 75. Loris Karius Commanded his area well against a procession of Roma crosses but could have done better for the second and third goals. 6 Trent Alexander-Arnold Another mature European display from the teenager but remains vulnerable to the ball over his shoulder. 7 Dejan Lovren Unlucky with the equaliser and harshly booked but dealt well with the threat from Dzeko and Schick. 7 Virgil van Dijk Utterly dominant against Schick and his power also paid dividends in the Roma box for Wijnaldum’s goal. 8 Andy Robertson There was no let-up against Florenzi but his energy and pace limited the danger. Supported Mané superbly. 8 Georginio Wijnaldum Always available, always taking responsibility and earned his reward with the header that deflated Roma. 8 Jordan Henderson Passing not always at its sharpest but was strong in the challenge and a valuable shield at times to his defence. 7 James Milner A ridiculous own goal could not disrupt another authoritative midfield display. Relentless work-rate added to Roma’s problems. 8 Mohamed Salah Jeered and clattered regularly on his return to Rome and while a 44th goal of the season proved elusive, linked Liverpool’s attack throughout. 7 Roberto Firmino Another reminder of why Liverpool tied him to a new five-year contract. There was an inevitability as soon as he pounced on Nainggolan’s error. 8 Sadio Mané Eased visiting nerves with a precise early finish. His pace and awareness unnerved Roma all night. 8 Substitutes: Ragnar Klavan for Mané 83; Dominic Solanke for Firmino 87; Nathaniel Clyne for Alexander‑Arnold 91.