I was 24 and had just finished my undergraduate degree when, out of the blue, my elderly Greek mother announced that she had something to tell me. “But you look busy, so I’ll tell you later…” I said, “Mum, if you’ve got something to say, tell me now.” She was nervous and asked me to sit down, but I refused. I thought she was going to tell me somebody was dying. Instead, she revealed that she was not my biological mother. Her brother, one of my many uncles, a man I’d never met, who lived in northern Greece, was my real father. I slumped against the wall in shock. By the end, I was splayed on the floor. I’d always known my parents, who had settled in Canberra, Australia, struggled to have children. They’d tried for 17 years and had three miscarriages. When Mum had to go back to Greece in 1973 to visit her sick father, Dad said, “Why don’t you see if you can get a baby from an orphanage in Thessaloniki?” But it didn’t work out. My uncle must have seen how sad she was. He proposed that he and his wife have a baby for her. They already had two sons, George and Billy, who were 10 and 11, and said their child-rearing years were behind them. It was to be a pure gift, but Mum was scared her brother and his wife might want to keep the child: there was nothing in writing. Still, she agreed, went back to Australia and waited. One day, she got a letter. It said: “We’re pregnant. The baby will be born in June 1974.” She flew back early, but missed the birth by a day or two. Mum spent five months in Greece, looking after me and doing the paperwork. My birth certificate was issued with my adoptive name and listed my adoptive parents as my parents. We left for Australia when I was six months old. It must have been difficult for my biological parents to give me up. George later told me that when I was taken away, it was like a period of mourning – nobody talked for three days. After that, we just got on with life. I had a happy childhood, but always felt conspicuous – as the only Greek child at school, and with no siblings. But I was everything to my parents and I looked enough like them not to question it. Mum said they’d been waiting until I finished my degree to tell me; they didn’t want to derail my studies. When I said I was going to do a PhD, they didn’t want four more years with the burden of that secret. It was causing them sleepless nights. They were scared they’d die and I’d never know the truth. Dad left it to Mum to tell me as it was her side of the family; he wasn’t one for talking much. Mum became teary as she told me, but by the end she seemed lighter. She was glad I’d found out from her. I felt shock at first. This woman suddenly wasn’t Mum any more. Then I felt deceived and angry. But after that came excitement that I had brothers. I wanted to call up all my old friends and tell them: “Remember that kid you went to school with who had no siblings? I’ve suddenly got two!” My biological mother had died in 1993. My mum felt guilty that she’d denied me the chance to meet her. I wondered at the time why her sister-in-law’s death affected her so much, but now it made sense. My biological father was still alive when I discovered the truth, but he died two years later, before I had a chance to meet him. I question why I didn’t travel to see him straight away, but I wasn’t in a hurry to do it. In truth, I didn’t want to get to know another set of parents. When I finally went to Greece in 2003 to meet my brothers, I told Mum she had to come with me. She’d been the architect of this, so she had to be there when we were finally reunited. It was wonderful to meet them, and we have a great relationship now. They’d always known I existed, but had to respect the family’s wishes. Now we Skype regularly and, as neither of them has their own children, they are delighted to get to know my sons. And all those years learning Greek, at Mum’s insistence, paid off, as I can speak to them. I forgave my parents quickly. At the end of the day, they’d always loved me. My wife and I struggled to conceive for two years, and that was tough. Mum and Dad had close to 18 years of that. My dad has since died, but he taught me so much, including how to be a father. My mum adores my boys. I’ll tell them one day: “Without that lady and the lengths she went to to become a mother, I wouldn’t be here and neither would you.” • As told to Sophie Haydock. Do you have an experience to share? Email experience@theguardian.com.