For those who still think that the menopause is the punchline to a joke (albeit told by someone who has never experienced a night sweat), the advent of a men-only menopause awareness session at the Scottish parliament was the cause of some consternation. Organised by the Holyrood Women’s Network, and led by the Good Morning Britain regular Hilary Jones, last week’s Q&A aimed to educate male MSPs about the physiological challenges facing middle-aged female colleagues and staff. Critics have understandably found it easier to complain about the waste of taxpayers’ money than admit that the whole notion of women’s ageing, leaky bodies being discussed in a public place makes them feel a bit yucky. I don’t remember much about puberty these days, aside from endless attempts to disguise sanitary products in fuschia plastic holders to avoid alerting the world to the shameful fact that I was bleeding. But I certainly don’t recall learning about the menopause during my patchy sex ed lessons. As an adult consumer, used to having my desire for hand-reared/organic/paraben-free products sold back to me with a hefty markup, it never fails to amaze me that we prize the “natural” in everything else other than the female body. But the campaign against period poverty that has gained momentum over the past few years has battered through those taboos effectively. While the focus has been on the substantial minority of women and girls who miss work or school, or use rolled-up newspaper or rags because they can’t afford basic sanitary wear, talking about the bloody reality of a monthly menstrual cycle seems to have gone some way to diminishing the stigma more broadly. There have been particular successes in Scotland, thanks to grassroots groups such as Women for Independence, alongside campaigning MSPs such as the SNP’s Gillian Martin and Scottish Labour’s Monica Lennon. Yesterday, the Scottish government announced the national rollout of an Aberdeenshire scheme to provide free period products to poorer families, and there is cross-party backing for a bill to introduce a universal system of free sanitary provision. Across the country, it is becoming increasingly common to walk into a women’s toilet and find free products by the sinks, as individual institutions – from the Holyrood parliament to Celtic’s Parkhead stadium – take up the gauntlet. It’s a pleasing reminder of the symbiosis between consciousness-raising and results-focused activism, and that one is half-done without the other. The Menopause Cafe movement is another example. Founded last June in Perth by local counsellor Rachel Weiss, these non-profit gatherings are blossoming across the UK as women seize the opportunity to identify symptoms together, share solutions, and say the previously unsayable. I wasn’t surprised that Menopause Cafes began in Scotland: one of the unremarked-upon consequences of the 2014 independence referendum was the way that it politically galvanised older women – individuals with personal and professional hinterland, often newly free of caring responsibilities – to make a difference in their communities. That’s particularly important when it comes to the workplace, where – according to one survey by the Scottish TUC – 63% of women said that the menopause was treated as a joke. And the majority of those experiencing it said they found that symptoms such as migraines, heavy bleeding and anxiety were difficult to discuss with colleagues or managers, especially if they were men. With increasing numbers of women working through their 50s and 60s, and with menopausal symptoms sometimes lasting a decade, this equates to an awful lot of women coping with physical discomfort and mental stress in workplaces ill-equipped to give them the support they need. It seems to me that it is assumed that women are endlessly rabbiting at one another about their gruesome bodily functions, passing down intergenerational nuggets in the queue for the self-checkout. But such sisterly illuminations happen less and less in these days of hyper-busyness, fractured communities, and the online imperative to keep things either porn-perfect or Facebook prim – the site has infamously censored photographs of breastfeeding women. I remember the surprise at my NCT class when the pregnant partners were separated from our menfolk so that we might more easily ventilate our concerns about shitting ourselves during labour. (In the event, that discussion assumed far more vanity than the circumstances allowed for.) According to Weiss, talking in a cafe setting fortifies women for talking elsewhere: “If you are able to say the M-word, then it’s also easier for you to go back to your 28-year-old male manager and say, ‘I need to wear a cotton shirt with this uniform,’ or ‘Yes, I really do need a fan at my desk.’” Any woman over 30 who has clocked comedian Amy Schumer’s brilliant sketch in which she stumbles upon her comedy heroines Tiny Fey and Patricia Arquette clinking wine glasses with Julia Louis-Dreyfus to celebrate her “last fuckable day” – as spuriously determined by male film execs – will have felt a shiver of recognition. Women are trained from birth to monitor their own bodies constantly and to work tirelessly to stop them becoming messy, chaotic or old. But beyond the Hollywood lens, women live, love, work, thrive and campaign long after they have stopped having periods. No wonder more and more of us, at all ages, want to say so out loud. • Libby Brookes is the Guardian’s Scotland correspondent