Apple’s music-streaming service has followed Spotify in ceasing the promotion of music by R Kelly on some featured playlists. Like Spotify, Apple Music, which has 40 million subscribers, still carries an extensive selection of Kelly’s songs in its library. Kelly, who faces longstanding allegations of mistreatment of women, recently saw a concert in Chicago cancelled after the #MuteRKelly movement accelerated boycott efforts, with help from the Time’s Up campaign against sexual harassment and assault. He denies abusing anyone and faces no current criminal charges. On Thursday Spotify, citing its new policy against hateful content and conduct, announced that Kelly’s music was no longer available on its owned and operated playlists and algorithmic recommendations. His music can still be found by those who search for it, but Spotify will not promote it. Apple did not announce its move and declined to comment further. The rival streaming service Pandora declined to discuss how it is now treating Kelly’s music in its curated playlists, but said it had decided not to promote “artists with certain demonstrable behavioral, ethical or criminal issues”, adding that it approached “each of these scenarios on a case-by-case basis”. At the Greensboro Coliseum in North Carolina on Friday night, demonstrators stood outside. Some criticized arena officials for declining to meet with a coalition of women’s groups that signed a letter alleging a “long term history of sexual misconduct” by Kelly. “It’s important for the black community to stand up and hold him accountable for his actions,” said Omisade Burney-Scott, a member of Sistersong, a reproductive rights group. On stage, Kelly interspersed references to God with suggestive lyrics and salty language. “Sometimes, some storms ain’t gonna stop,” he told the audience. “As long as my fans are calling for me, I’m gonna be on that stage, singing these songs.” The singer invited audience members to join him, while stage hands passed out T-shirts that read “Turn Up R Kelly”. “I’ve been through a lot,” he said, thanking fans “for y’all to fight for me all these years”. Kelly said he was approached backstage to tone down his songs and language because there were families in attendance. “Let me ask y’all something,” he said. “Can I do my show tonight?” He then launched into his sexually suggestive repertoire. At one point, he rubbed a fan’s phone between his legs. He persuaded another to wipe his face, tongue and crotch with a towel. One fan, Clarissa Kelley of Lancaster, South Carolina, said: “Everybody has some skeletons in the closet. I’m not going to tear him down, every good thing he does, because of something negative in his life.” In 2008, Kelly was acquitted on child abuse images charges after a video circulated appearing to show him having sex with a teenage girl. More women have come forward in recent years accusing him of sexual misconduct. In response to Spotify’s move, Kelly’s management issued a statement. “R Kelly never has been accused of hate, and the lyrics he writes express love and desire,” it read. “Mr Kelly for 30 years has sung songs about his love and passion for women. “He is innocent of the false and hurtful accusations in the ongoing smear campaign against him, waged by enemies seeking a payoff. He never has been convicted of a crime, nor does he have any pending criminal charges against him.”