F or a moment there was silence and then there was a small smattering of applause. At the Liverpool end, they were stunned, and they were not alone. The goal that won the European Cup had to be watched twice and they still couldn’t believe it; even the replay on the giant screen didn’t entirely shake them out of it. For the second time, they were left wondering if that had really happened. The first time was surreal, the second sublime. Gareth Bale had been on the pitch for only two minutes when he took flight. High in the Kiev sky, he connected with a wonderful overhead kick. Bale ran to the corner and threw himself to the turf, sliding face-down. Cristiano Ronaldo followed his team-mates over to the Welshman. On the far touchline Zinedine Zidane could barely believe it. He scored the winning goal in the 2002 European Cup final at Hampden Park, a volley that became emblematic. When Ronaldo scored an overhead kick in Turin in the quarter-final this year, Juventus’s fans had stood to applaud. Afterwards Zidane had been asked about it. “Mine was nicer,” he smiled, a twinkle in his eye. Even he may admit that Bale’s was better. Just as even Karim Benzema may admit that his goal was the worst he has scored – even as it may be the most important, his first in a European Cup final. Between them, they had taken Madrid to a third title in a row, history made. For Bale, it is his fourth Champions League title since moving to Spain. It may well be his last. If so, this was some way to bid farewell. Or perhaps it can be a new beginning. It was, after all, a moment beyond the reach of the plausible, like something out of a comic. Now the European Cup final had a moment worthy of it. Until then, and speaking of comic, the final had been marked by two moments. Loris Karius throwing the ball against Benzema’s boot and into the net and, before that, Sergio Ramos dragging Mohamed Salah to the ground, forcing him out of this final and seeming to change the game entirely. Even if Liverpool did find an equaliser, thus requiring Zidane to call on Bale. So, on he came, to score the decisive second. And then, with a few minutes left, to get the third. Scorer in Lisbon, successful in the shootout in Milan, he had done it again in Ukraine. Twice. The shot looped and slipped through Karius’s hands. The goalkeeper was embarrassed, Bale didn’t care, leaping in the other corner now. Here he was on the pitch, his moment, his final – one he had not even started. Bale’s absence from the starting XI was not out of keeping with his season: it had started on Valentine’s Day, when he was left out against Paris Saint-Germain, an unexpected decision which was soon revealed as no one-off, not least because of the sense that he did little to rebel when he came on, seeming instead to disengage. In the second leg he was again left on the bench. In Turin it was the same and although he started the second leg, he was withdrawn at half-time, with the team 2-0 down. He withdrew at full-time too, while his team-mates celebrated. “I had to do something,” Zidane said afterwards. But, Bale wondered, did it have to be that? There had been no explanation, no conversation; he and Zidane did not talk. Against Bayern Munich there was more of the same. Madrid had made it to the final but he had played only 99 of 540 minutes in the knockout phases. And yet his performance in Villarreal last week, widely assumed to be a dress rehearsal, the gathering speed and the specifics of Liverpool, had brought him back into a focus, a candidate to be included from the start for the final. Instead, it was the same XI that began in Cardiff in last year’s final, Benzema beginning ahead of him; then, Bale was injured; here there was no excuse. No consolation, either – that would come later. When Madrid’s subs came out to warm up, the Welshman did not join them. That is not so abnormal but as a staging of his separateness it is still striking. He too has become resigned to the probability of a departure. Bale, though, knew that there might always be a chance, that at least things could go the right way. Liverpool knew that Madrid could change the game from the bench in a way that they could not. In victory Bale said he was “obviously very disappointed not to start the game, so the best I could do was come on and make an impact – and that’s what I did. It has to be the best goal I’ve ever scored. Just happy to get the win. We know what we’ve achieved and how good we’ve been. We let everyone else speak, we know how hungry and determined we are and we showed it again today.” Asked about a return to the Premier League, he said: “I need to be playing week-in, week-out and that hasn’t happened this season for one reason or another. I have to sit down in the summer and discuss my future with my agent and take it from there.” A couple of months ago it had been suggested to him that for all that he had not been playing, for all that he had thought his time at Madrid was coming to an end, and that much as he would not start in Kiev, he would come on and win the final. Even if he had believed it, he would not have imagined it like this. An overhead kick, a long shot that Karius dropped into the net, and a fourth European Cup. No Briton has won more.