Do you trust women? Yes. No. X marks the spot. There is no room for “maybe” in Ireland’s referendum debate. “How do you feel?” my mother asked me this morning – voting day – and I wished I could have said that I felt hopeful, defiant, even angry. I wished I didn’t still feel afraid. I was seven when I first heard the word “abortion”. The X case was all over the news in 1992, there was no escaping it. A child raped. A child pregnant. A child forced to remain pregnant, against her will. And I learned my lesson. I learned that my body was not my own, that it belonged in some inexplicable way to the church and the state, and they could do what they wanted with it. I didn’t want to get in trouble so I knew that I would have to be a good girl, oh so good. I would need to be careful. Years passed. I learned about the Magdalene laundries and the mother and baby homes, women who even in the 1980s were cracked in half as they gave birth, without a second thought by holy men. The same holy men wanted to keep us small. They wanted to fill us with shame, to force us to carry our mothers’ and grandmothers’ trauma on our backs. If we were raped, that was our fault. If we had a crisis pregnancy, that was our fault. They can’t lock us up any more, of course, but they have tried to oppress us in other ways. The trap so sharp that we don’t notice we’re bleeding out until it’s too late. But we are women and women are warriors. Together we have risen for a yes vote, and we will, I tell you, rise again. The campaign to legalise abortion has been a long one. The anti-abortion posters have been hard to stomach, characterised by misinformation and virulent images, designed to shock and frighten. The fierce debates, the dismissal of rape victims and couples faced with fatal foetal abnormities as “hard cases”, the barely concealed contempt for people who were brave enough to share their stories – I have gone to bed too many nights over the last two months wondering why my country seems to hate women so much. I have worried about my friends who were knee-deep in the campaign, activists such as Tara Flynn and Janet Ní Shuilleabháin and Ailbhe Smyth, and many more besides. But I have felt pride too. I am proud of the people living abroad who have returned to vote, who understood that this was a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity that could not be squandered. There has been a sense of solidarity with women all over the world, particularly with our sisters in the UK, who used their voices to amplify ours and who understood that this was not our burden to carry alone. Eight hundred years of oppression, we had been told – “Brits out!” – and yet it is to your shores that we fled when we were desperate and in need of kindness. I’ve felt joy every time I walked past someone on the street wearing a yes badge and we shyly smiled at each other; yes, I said yes, I will yes. And to all the teenagers that I met while canvassing – their passion and spirit gave me hope for the future and I thank them for that. I tried, in the beginning, to have compassion for those who were voting no. They had been steeped in decades-worth of messaging, I told myself, intense conditioning that swore abortion is wrong; that it is murder. But it has been difficult at times to remain calm in the face of people who seem to believe that you are nothing more than a vessel, a walking womb that must be filled. People who would, if you lay dying in front of them, shrug their shoulders as you begged for a termination to save your life. Not here, dear. This is a Catholic country. I am tired today. I am fearful that I did not do enough, that there was one more conversation that I could have had, one more mind I could have changed, one more door that I should have knocked on. I have a sneaking suspicion that I will spend the next few months, if not years, silently wondering which way my neighbours voted, or whether they voted at all. In the end, when it came down to it, did they trust women? Or did they believe that it was acceptable to continue treating the bodies of Irish women like a battleground? But I know too that, no matter what the outcome, there is no going back for Ireland. Abortions happened in 1983, but no one spoke about such things. Women arriving back from a “visit” to London or Liverpool, their mouths sewn shut as they fell sick with their secrets. Things are very different now. Women, and men too, have spoken up about their experiences. They have refused to be silenced. They have told their stories. Here we are. Do not look away. This is my truth. If nothing else, we have started a national conversation about women and how Ireland has treated them, how men in positions of power conspired to control our bodies and police our sexuality. We know that there is no way of paying meaningful reparations to the women who were denied contraception or who were thrown in homes, those who endured symphysiotomies or were denied lifesaving medical treatment, or any way of apologising to every woman who was forced to board a plane or a ferry to seek help in a foreign land. But with every phone call we made, every door we knocked on, every leaflet we handed out – we did our best. • Louise O’Neill is the author of Asking For It, Almost Love and The Surface Breaks