The sharp and sweet acidity of the tamarind fruit is a much-loved tool of Indian and Pakistani cooks, as well as other parts of Asia and the Middle East. But it has never become a key player in western larders, which is a shame, because it shouldn’t be restricted to one cuisine. I often interchange tamarind with vinegar or citrus, and it’s already familiar to Brits through Worcestershire and HP sauces, where it provides the familiar, sharp kick. This southern Iranian dish features fresh fenugreek, which can be found in Middle Eastern shops and online. The leaves add a more herbaceous dimension than the seeds, although the latter would work here, too. It’s important to cook the herbs, because that creates the deep flavour. Serve with rice. Prep 20 minCook 50 minServes 4 500g raw king prawns, peeled and deveined4 tbsp olive oil1 tsp ground turmeric 5 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed Salt and black pepper100g tamarind pulp1 onion, peeled and finely chopped 2 green chillies, finely chopped5 spring onions, finely sliced80g coriander leaves, finely chopped, plus 5g finely shredded leaves, to serve 50g parsley leaves, finely chopped50g fenugreek leaves, finely chopped (or 2 tsp fenugreek seeds finely crushed in a spice grinder)1 tbsp plain flour1½ tsp ground coriander1½ tsp ground cumin1 tsp ground cinnamon⅛ tsp ground cloves¼ tsp chilli flakes1 tbsp soft brown sugar Mix the prawns with a tablespoon of oil, the turmeric, one crushed garlic clove and half a teaspoon of salt, then leave to marinate. Soak the tamarind in 200ml hot water for 20 minutes, then use your hands to separate as much pulp as possible from the seeds and fibre. Strain into a sieve, pressing down on the pulp to extract as much liquid as you can: you should end up with about 160ml tamarind liquid. Heat two tablespoons of oil in a large saute pan on a medium heat, then sweat the onion for 10 minutes, until soft and lightly browned. Add the rest of the garlic and half the green chillies, and cook, stirring, for a minute. Add the spring onions, herbs and fenugreek, and cook on a medium-low heat for 20 minutes, stirring often, until deep green. Add the flour, spices, chilli flakes, a teaspoon and a half of salt and a generous grind of pepper, cook for 30 seconds, then add the tamarind liquid, sugar and 500ml water, and simmer for 10 minutes, until the sauce thickens and comes together. Meanwhile, heat the remaining tablespoon of oil in a frying pan on a high flame. Fry a third of the prawns for two minutes on each side, until golden brown, then move to a plate. Stir the remaining raw prawns into the sauce and cook for three minutes, until just cooked through. Serve the stew from the pan or a large bowl, sprinkled with coriander, the fried prawns and the remaining green chillies. This sharp, fresh mint sauce is a condiment for keeping in the fridge. I guarantee you’ll find yourself reaching out for it with increasing regularity: it’s great with lamb or pork, spooned over rice or mixed with vegetables. I prefer to extract tamarind paste from compressed pulp. Shop-bought pastes vary greatly in concentration of flavour and are generally sharper and more intense than paste you make yourself, so add it gradually, until you get a level of acidity you like. Prep 8 minCook 3 minMakes 1 small jar – about 180ml 2 tsp shop-bought tamarind paste, or a lemon-sized piece of tamarind pulp 35g mint leaves15g parsley leaves, roughly chopped1 tbsp white-wine vinegar1 tbsp honey1 anchovy fillet, drained½ tsp ground cardamom½ tsp ground Iranian lime (optional)2 green chillies, deseeded and finely chopped1 small garlic clove, peeled and crushed1 tsp dijon mustardZest of 1 lime, finely grated2 tbsp olive oilSalt If using, soak the tamarind pulp in 60ml lukewarm water for a few minutes, work with your hands until the pulp falls away from the seeds, then pass through a fine sieve to make a thick paste. It will keep in the fridge for up to a month. Blitz two teaspoons of shop-bought tamarind paste – or two to three teaspoons of the homemade paste – with the remaining ingredients, two tablespoons of water and a quarter-teaspoon of salt: you should end up with a thick, green paste. Spoon into a clean jar and refrigerate for up to a week. This light, simple salad is perfect alongside a meat or veggie main. Counterintuitively, the sharp sauce complements the gentle flavour of the asparagus, rather than overpowering it. Gently mix the salad mere seconds before serving, to keep the thin asparagus slices as fresh as possible. Prep 5 minCook 10 minServes 4 as a side 400g thick-stemmed asparagus, woody ends snapped off1½ tbsp olive oil1 tbsp lime juice15g mint leaves, roughly shredded30g pistachio, very lightly toasted and roughly choppedSalt2 tbsp mint, lime and tamarind sauce (see previous recipe) Using a peeler or mandoline, slice the asparagus lengthways into fine strips and mix in a bowl with a teaspoon and a half of oil, a teaspoon and a half of lime juice, half the mint leaves, half the pistachios and an eighth of a teaspoon of salt. In a small bowl, stir the mint, lime and tamarind sauce with the remaining oil and lime juice and an eighth of a teaspoon of salt. Just before serving, spoon the sauce over the asparagus, and sprinkle on the remaining mint and pistachios. Brining chops doesn’t only add flavour to the meat – it also makes them incredibly tender. Serve with rice or new potatoes. Prep 10 minBrining 4 hr+Cook 50 minServes 4 2½ tbsp Chinese five-spice3 tbsp maple syrupSalt4 pork chops, about 2cm thick and 250g each1 tbsp olive oil1 tbsp tamarind paste90g mint, lime and tamarind sauce (see earlier recipe) For the herb salad20g mint leaves10g parsley leaves30g baby spinach, roughly shredded4 spring onions, finely sliced on an angle 2 red chillies, deseeded and finely sliced1 tbsp olive oil2 tsp lime juiceSalt Fill a small saucepan with 500ml water, put on a medium-high heat and add half the five-spice, two tablespoons of maple syrup and two teaspoons of salt. Once the salt has dissolved and the water is simmering, turn off the heat and leave to cool completely. Put the chops in a large bowl, pour over the cooled brine and refrigerate for at least four hours, and ideally overnight. Put the remaining five-spice in a small bowl and mix with a third of a teaspoon of salt, the oil, the tamarind paste and the remaining maple syrup. Drain the chops (discard the brine) and pat dry. Coat the chops in the five-spice mix and set aside for 30 minutes. Heat the oven to 220C/425F/gas 7 and put a griddle pan on a high heat. Once the pan is hot, grill the chops for 90 seconds on each side, until they have good char lines, then transfer to a baking tray and roast for about five minutes, depending on thickness, until the meat is just cooked. Leave to rest for five minutes before serving. While the chops are cooking and resting, mix all the ingredients for the salad with an eighth of a teaspoon of salt. Serve each chop with the salad and a generous spoonful of the mint, lime and tamarind sauce.