Free speech rows at universities have become central to the recent culture war: an easy way to lambast snowflaky students, the latest thing to induce eye-rolling and groans about “political correctness gone mad”. The most recent involves Theresa May, whose portrait was moved from the attic in which it has been mysteriously degrading to be included in a display of famous female geography alumnae at Oxford’s school of geography and the environment. Students then stuck messages around the painting arguing that, as Brexit trundles on and the Windrush scandal continues, the prime minister’s image went against the diversity and inclusivity that the school – and geography as a subject – should stand for. Academics also argued that an institution with an intellectual responsibility to hold power to account should not be honouring a head of government in this way. The portrait was removed for its own safety, but may be reinstated – all in a dizzying cyclone of denouncements and counter-denouncements on social media, a hashtag (#NotAllGeographers, naturally), and a pushback from Tory politicians. “Even portraits are being no-platformed”, tweeted the universities minister, Sam Gyimah, who declared the row “utterly ridiculous”. I doubt many people are preoccupying themselves with whether a picture of Theresa May should be displayed on a wall of an elitist academic institution, the inside of which most of us are unlikely to ever see. I suspect the only reason these Tory politicians care is that so many of them went there, and feeling rejected by the institution that primed them for power feels like a slap in the face. But what I am interested in is why these rows gain so much traction now – what is it about the times we live in that this story is making the news? (And yes, I recognise the irony in the fact that I am writing about this now). Because the thing is, students and academics have been having slightly tedious rows about the relative merits of displaying, inviting, funding or discussing – insert literally anything here – for years. They were certainly doing it when I was there; indeed, it’s one of the main reasons many avoided student politics, and they were definitely doing it in the 1970s. It’s partly what universities are for, this revising and unpicking and interrogating of history and politics. Even if people such as myself would rather stay in bed than listen to it, most students recognise it as part and parcel of the university experience. Does it even count as an institute of higher education if there isn’t some kind of boycott or strike or occupation going on? Couple that with the fact that humanities subjects have long included the study of colonialism and its legacies in their syllabuses, and you do wonder what has changed to make this suddenly so controversial. As we reflect on the 50 years since the student uprisings in May 1968, I don’t think students are more radical today than they ever were. This portrait was not torn down or even defaced with a Hitler moustache – a direction certain writers might have once been inclined to follow; instead it was surrounded by polite messages written on multicoloured bits of paper. Letters were written, hashtags were tweeted, and people acknowledged that having a female prime minister – the second only in history – is worthy of note despite other objections. These are hardly credible threats to establishment power. So why does the establishment care? One reason is, I imagine, the imperialism to which the students object. If you think that there aren’t people in government and the media today, in 2018, who believe the British empire was A Good Thing, then you are kidding yourself. Students are better aware of race issues, too, and more vocal about them. These underrepresented voices are amplified by social media. But the biggest factor in all this, I believe, is simple ageism. At a time when intergenerational injustice is rife, and the debate about what is fair and what isn’t becomes fraught, some will take any opportunity to take potshots at 21-year-old “snowflakes”. Universities are easy pickings, with kids challenging their elders all over the shop. And with many other industries and institutions top-heavy with baby boomers unwilling to make room for new blood, perhaps there are few opportunities to see what youngsters are up to. In fact, perhaps boredom and fear of cultural stagnation has led to this sudden attention. Perhaps, in a funny way, it’s something of a compliment. • Rhiannon Lucy Cosslett is a Guardian columnist