Spain’s opposition socialist party has filed a no-confidence motion against the prime minister, Mariano Rajoy, a day after his governing People’s party was found to have benefited from an illegal kickbacks-for-contracts scheme. Pedro Sánchez, the leader of the PSOE, said the verdict in the Gürtel corruption case had “seriously damaged the health of our democracy” and further diminished Rajoy’s credibility. “That is why we have filed a motion of no confidence against Prime Minister Rajoy this morning,” he said after a meeting of the PSOE’s executive committee on Friday. “A motion of no confidence that aims to bring normality back to our public life and to do away with this corruption thriller into which the People’s party has plunged our politics, so that we can talk about the things that matter to our citizens.” Sánchez said the PSOE’s “route map” was intended to usher in a socialist government that would restore stability and regenerate democracy before calling elections. The anti-austerity Podemos party has said it will back the PSOE’s motion. The centre-right Ciudadanos party – which appears to be creeping ahead of the PP in the polls – said it would support the motion unless Rajoy called a snap general election. “The government’s conviction for corruption has pulled the plug on this parliament,” said its leader, Albert Rivera. “We need a clean, strong government that can deal with the [Catalan] separatist challenge. We’re backing the democratic solution: either Rajoy calls elections or he faces the motion in Congress.” The ultimatum could prove fruitless as the constitution states that parliament cannot be dissolved “once a no-confidence motion has been filed”. The PSOE’s motion will require majority backing to succeed, requiring the support of 176 of the 350 MPs. As the socialists have 84 seats and Podemos 67, they will need the support of Ciudadanos, 32 seats, or other parties, including Catalan separatists, to carry the motion. Rajoy ruled out a snap election and said the no-confidence motion would damage Spain’s economic recovery and stability only days after the 2018 budget was approved. He added that it would weaken the political response to the threat of Catalan secession. “This motion is bad for Spain, bad for Spaniards, brings with it too much uncertainty and is damaging to all citizens,” he told reporters. The prime minister accused Sánchez of opportunism and said the move would not lead to a viable government. He also reaffirmed the PP’s decision to appeal against the €240,000 (£210,000) fine imposed on the party after Spain’s highest criminal court ruled that it had benefited from the Gürtel racket. Luis Bárcenas, once a close ally of Rajoy, was jailed for 33 years for his part in the conspiracy and fined €44m.