I am the promise guardian to a wonderful girl called Grace, a role akin to a godfather but without the Christian responsibilities, as I am a devout Jedi. Grace loves painting and a couple of years ago we decided to paint a mural in my office in Birmingham. As we worked, I asked her, out of curiosity, “What do you think art is?” She was 10 at the time and pondered quietly before responding: “It’s trust.” I asked her to expand on “trust”. “If you trust something’s good, then it is.” The girl is a profound genius. That is exactly what art is. Cut to an average Thursday in March this year – it’s midday and I’m mixing my first martini of the day when an email slips into my account from the Royal Academy of Arts. You heard. It reads: “Thank you for submitting images of your artwork CHRIS. The Members of the Summer Exhibition have considered them carefully and would like you to deliver your artwork to the Academy for the final round of judging.” At first the news was a shock. How was I, nothing more than a court jester and a drunk, suddenly being considered as an artist? Surely a clerical error? But then I remembered Grace’s theory, that art is trust, and it hit me: I am the greatest artist in the world. Perhaps who has ever lived. And CHRIS is my masterpiece. I’ve been making weird little sculptures for the last couple of years after seeing an album cover for Nitin Sawhney’s Beyond Skin, which consists of a stunning, lifelike bust of a man screaming at the sky. I thought it was so cool and powerful and I wondered if I could recreate something similar. I have since discovered that I cannot. Turns out it’s bloody hard to make a sculpture that looks like a human head, so I’ve not bothered. Realism is for squares. Instead I have been making clay heads that my mate Matt describes as “beef-textured relics of hate”. CHRIS is my finest to date, made while drunk last summer – he has a shimmering open smile with wild, adventurous eyes, wonky bone structure, and is totally brilliant. I hadn’t considered CHRIS’s worth until I spoke to another artistic genius, Harry Hill. We had just recorded an episode of his show Alien Fun Capsule and as part of the programme I had brought in a sculpture I had made of his head. It looked just like him, if his head was a bag of old cod. Harry told me that anyone could submit to the summer exhibition, that my work could be on display in the Royal Academy and that I should definitely go for it. At first I thought he was joking – he’s a man who’s hard to take seriously – but in this regard he has never been more serious in his life. My submission was deadly serious, too. If that is not clear then know that I listed CHRIS’s sale price as £10.5m. This came as quite the surprise to the Academy as I received an email from a perplexed assistant: “We just wanted to check this was correct… and could you kindly advise on the insurance value of the work?” I’m not sure why she was baffled. CHRIS is an out-and-out bargain when you consider the record-breaking £108m pre-sale price of the Modigliani going up for auction later this month. And it’s a pittance next to the $450m (£325m) paid for Leonardo da Vinci’s Salvator Mundi in 2017. I fired off a curt reply: “Gosh! Did I put £10,500,000?! It’s meant to be £12,500,000! Brexit! I expect the insurance value is £4.99 or the equivalent in Argos vouchers.” I like to imagine the moment when CHRIS is sold. Overnight I will become a multimillionaire. I beam at the idea of me at the wheel of a luxury yacht, surrounded by models and moguls, sipping cool Gavi di Gavi as we meander down the French Riviera. One of the guests approaches, some twink underwear model called Rocco, and asks: “Joe, how did you amass this fortune? The stock market? An invaluable invention?” I softly grasp the back of Rocco’s neck with my palm and give him a thin smile: “Oh, Rocco, my sweet child. I am rich from none of these things. I am rich because I am one of the greatest artists who has ever lived.” In truth, I have absolutely no idea how to value my work. I didn’t think I should be paid £75k for this article, but the Guardian insisted. But CHRIS is definitely worth something – why shouldn’t he go for £12.5m if someone wants to pay it? If I had the money I’d happily pay £12.5m for any of the etchings or paintings Grace has sent me over the years. Sure, I’ve seen more human-looking sculptures come out of the back of my cat, but so what? I’d rather convince a billionaire to invest in art than in arms. CHRIS might not make it through the next round of judging, or worse, not sell. I’ve not really entertained the idea because it’s too abstract and implausible. To my mind he is the finest sculpture since the Pietà. And that’s all that matters. Trust. I trust he is brilliant and I trust he will sell. There’s no plan B. See you on the Riviera, hun.