What were you hoping for?A fun night out that didn’t involve me making up an excuse to leave early. First impressions?Tall with a friendly smile. What did you talk about?School crushes, driving in America and marathons. Any awkward moments?I initially offered a handshake, then insisted on a hug. Good table manners?Maybe too good: he tried to eat a taco with a knife and fork. Best thing about Steve?He had some amazing stories. Would you introduce him to your friends?I’d introduce him to most of them. Describe him in three wordsEngaging, interesting, cool. What do you think he made of you?Someone who isn’t afraid to discuss inappropriate topics of conversation at the dinner table. Did you go on somewhere?We sure did. And... did you kiss?No, but we got a second hug in. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?I’d have found a way to make my job sound a bit sexier. Marks out of 10?8 (Steve told me he was going to give me an 8). Would you meet again?I didn’t make up an excuse to leave early, so yeah, I’d be keen to catch up again. What were you hoping for?An interesting story and a hangover the next day. First impressions?Very well turned out. What did you talk about?90s gay dramas, European social faux pas and running marathons. Any awkward moments?I made Cameron choose our dinner in its entirety. Good table manners?Perfect, especially because we were building and sharing the fajitas. Best thing about Cameron?Easy to talk to. Would you introduce him to your friends?Some of the more respectable ones, yes. Describe him in three wordsWell-travelled, driven, friendly. What do you think he made of you?That I talked too much, gave him my entire family history and offered little help in choosing our dinner. Did you go on somewhere?We did, to Hawksmoor for negronis. And... did you kiss?We didn’t, no. If you could change one thing about the evening, what would it be?Maybe that we had more chemistry? Marks out of 10?A solid 8. I had a really great evening. Would you meet again?Absolutely, as friends. • Steve and Cameron ate at Cantina Laredo, London WC2. Fancy a blind date? Email blind.date@theguardian.com. If you’re looking to meet someone like-minded, visit soulmates.theguardian.com