The ousted Malaysian prime minister, Najib Razak, has been prevented from leaving the country after appearing to attempt to take a flight to Indonesia. The country’s immigration department said in a brief statement on Saturday that Najib and his wife, Rosmah Mansor, have “just been blacklisted from leaving the country”. The statement came after a flight schedule had shown that Najib and his wife were due to take a private jet to Jakarta on Saturday morning. But Najib, who faces being investigated by the incoming government for alleged corruption, never appeared and the private jet, owned by Indonesian company Premiair, remained on the tarmac at Subang airport near Kuala Lumpur. Following the announcement of the ban, Najib said he and his family would respect it and stay in the country. “I have been informed that the Malaysian immigration department will not allow my family and me to go overseas,” Najib said in a tweet. “I respect the directive and will remain with my family in the country.” After the reports of his flight emerged on Friday night, dozens of people, accompanied by a large pack of journalists, had descended on the small airport just outside the capital in the early hours to protest his departure. Riot police were stationed outside the gate where people believed Najib would enter. After losing the election this week to the opposition, led by former prime minister Mahathir Mohamad, there had been concerns that Najib would try to flee the country to avoid the chance of prosecution for his alleged role in the 1MDB scandal, which he was accused of covering up while in office. Mahathir has pledged a full independent investigation into the billions of embezzled funds and many believe this will implicate Najib, who has consistently denied any wrongdoing and was previously cleared by the Malaysian attorney general. Mahathir confirmed he had already ordered the 1MDB investigation files to no longer be restricted under the Official Secrets Act. “They will then submit the report to me and I will study it,” he told a press conference on Saturday. Speaking about the re-opened 1MDB investigation Mahathir said: “We want to do it as quickly as possible.” “It is a very complex thing because it involves a lot of people, it involves a lot of decisions made, and the money you know has to be investigated as to the money laundering,” he added. “We have to contact America, Switzerland, Singapore.” By Saturday afternoon, Najib had resigned as the president of his UMNO and as chairman of the Barisan National coalition. “I have a moral responsibility to step down,” he told the party’s Supreme Council. “We all feel sad about what happened but as a party that upholds democratic principles, we accept the people’s decision.” Najib also took to twitter to apologise for his “shortcomings and mistakes”. “After over four decades in politics and the recent election campaign, which was regrettably personal and perhaps the most intense in Malaysian history, I will take a short break to spend time with my family whom I have not seen enough of in recent years,” he wrote. After over four decades in politics and the recent election campaign, which was regrettably personal and perhaps the most intense in Malaysian history, I will take a short break to spend time with my family whom I have not seen enough of in recent years. Najib also tweeted that he hoped the “divisive period” in the country’s history would end with unity. I pray that after this divisive period, the country will unite. I apologise for any shortcomings and mistakes, and I thank you, the people, for the opportunity to lead our great nation. It has been the honour of my lifetime to serve you and Malaysia. “I pray that after this divisive period, the country will unite. I apologise for any shortcomings and mistakes, and I thank you, the people, for the opportunity to lead our great nation. It has been the honour of my lifetime to serve you and Malaysia.”