John Oliver took aim at Rudy Giuliani, explaining why his entire life’s work has been perfect preparation for working alongside Donald Trump. On his HBO show Last Week Tonight, the comic started by covering Giuliani’s “ill-advised and chaotic” interview with Fox News host Sean Hannity, where he revealed damaging information about the president. Many pundits have struggled to relate the latest iteration of the former mayor of New York City with the person he is now. “People seem to be as shocked at finding out who Giuliani really is as a child at Disney World who accidentally saw Mickey Mouse pull off his head to reveal that he was actually Tilda Swinton,” Oliver said. Oliver then went back over Giuliani’s career, including his marriage to his second cousin. Giuliani claims they didn’t realize they were related until later into their relationship while Oliver rejects this. “He didn’t think it was just a little bit weird at the wedding ceremony when one side of the church was both families and the other side was just one very nervous photographer who didn’t take a single picture,” he said. In another marriage, Giuliani decided to announce it was over during a press conference without telling his wife first. “Just about the most humiliating way possible to end a marriage other than announcing publicly: ‘Whoopsy, I boned my cousin,’” he said. During his failed campaign to be president, Giuliani “could not stop leveraging 9/11 for his own ends” yet after spending $50m, he received zero delegates. He then “frittered away years as a rent-a-quote pundit” before joining Trump’s legal team. “Giuliani’s role as Trump’s lawyer isn’t an aberration,” Oliver said. “Everything in his life has led to this point and while he may well be providing terrible legal representation for Trump, he’s actually the most honest representation of him in general.” Oliver continued to describe how the pair are actually incredibly similar. “They’re basically two versions of the same person,” he said. “They’re both New Yorkers coasting on their reputations, they’ve both had three marriages, neither of them can shut up when in front of a camera and, perhaps most importantly, they both want to fuck Ivanka, which is weird for Tump because she’s in his family and weird for Giuliani because she isn’t.” But he also had a worrying vision for the future: “He’s so fatally flawed as a human being that he’s probably going to end up president.”