I first met Philip when I did a small book about him for a series for Methuen in 1982, when he was in the middle of writing the Zuckerman series. I got to know him after that, and then I was one of the group of people that read for him when a manuscript was in a penultimate stage. He revised and revised and revised. What seems like amazing spontaneous flow in these novels is massively worked over, over a very intense period of time. When he was living in England, I would go to his office and give him my thoughts about the books – like live criticism. He would record this and then he would take me out for lunch as a reward, where we would gossip. What made it not intimidating was that he was so eager to get feedback. This was not someone who was precious and protective about his own work. He wanted people to tell him what they thought; I remember him saying, at one point, “There’s no point in this if you’re going to be timid and polite.” He hated English politeness, everyone saying sorry the whole time (he used to do great imitations of English people apologising). He wanted his readers to say exactly what they thought did and didn’t work. Everything you said, whether it was useful or not, was grist to this great mill of intellect and energy and imagination He was an astonishing force field. Everything you said, whether it was useful or not, would be grist to the mill, this great mill of intellect and energy and imagination, churning over. You would find that something you’d said that he rather disagreed with would get put in the mouth of an unsympathetic character. He was very generous, and also fierce and demanding. He was prolific with jokes and stories – he loved to tell stories, and he loved terrible jokes. His last novel, before he stopped writing novels with that great proclamation, was Nemesis, in 2010, which was dedicated to me as his long-term reader. No one could actually believe he was really going to stop. I went to the celebration of his 80th birthday in 2013. Fittingly it was in Newark, and he made a terrific speech, expressing how pleased he was with having stopped, three years after having done so. He said, “I’ve finished with that stuff, I’ve described my last javelin throw, my last stamp album and my last glove factory and my last jewellery store and my last breast, and my last butcher’s shop and my last family crisis and my last unconscionable betrayal and my last brain tumour of the kind that killed my mother. I don’t have to do this anymore.” And he meant it. He made that decision – nobody could believe it. It’s an astonishing career. I can remember when Portnoy’s Complaint was the book that everyone identified him with. He was very much part of that great outburst of liberation, freedom and erotic excitement of the 60s. He was the head of that wave. But after the Zuckerman phase, he became much better known as an astonishing historian of America, with books like I Married a Communist, American Pastoral, and the deeply and sinisterly prescient The Plot Against America. This is an old diehard Roosevelt-era Democrat from the 30s, who was appalled by what was going on in the far right in America. Everything fed into the big machine that was Philip’s writing imagination. As told to Alison Flood “Enough being a nice Jewish boy,” declares Alexander Portnoy, as he confesses the guilt-ridden mess of his life to his psychoanalyst. Fizzing with energy, sexual tension, and a whole lot of “whacking off”, it was an immediate scandal, an instant bestseller and made Roth a household name. Roth’s alter ego Nathan Zuckerman moves centre stage for the first time as he decides that the young woman he meets at the house of an eminent Jewish writer, EI Lonoff, is in fact Anne Frank. The panel selected The Ghost Writer for the Pulitzer prize, but were overruled in favour of Norman Mailer’s The Executioner’s Song. At a high school reunion, Zuckerman is told the sad story of Seymour "Swede" Levov, the older brother of a former classmate. Roth explores the American political turmoil of the Vietnam war years, with Zuckerman reimagining the life of Swede, a promising young man who thought he'd achieved the American dream – until his life began to unravel around him. Another Zuckerman novel: here Roth's alter-ego observes as his neighbour Coleman Silk, a professor and dean at a nearby college, is accused of racism by two students and forced to resign his job after the subsequent uproar. Considered to be a (very) lightly veiled criticism of campus liberalism, the novel also considers sexual politics, with Silk beginning a relationship with an illiterate janitor working at the college while the US president Bill Clinton and Monica Lewinsky scandal is dominating headlines. What if the aviator Charles Lindbergh had been elected president of the US? Roth goes back to the 40s to imagine an America that never entered the second world war, signed a non-aggression pact with Germany and began persecuting Jews. Rooted in Roth’s Newark childhood, this fascistic takeover seemed utterly plausible in the wake of 9/11 and is ever more urgent in the era of Donald Trump. Roth was as great as any writer America has produced, in the company of Melville and Dickinson. If I have grandchildren, I hope and assume they will read him, and that their lives will be shaped by his words, as mine has been shaped. He was my hero. Philip Roth was a slightly older contemporary of mine. We had come of age in more or less the same repressive 1950s era in America — formalist, ironic, “Jamesian,” a time of literary indirection and understatement, above all impersonality — as the high priest TS Eliot had preached: “Poetry is an escape from self.” Boldly, brilliantly, at times furiously, and with an unsparing sense of the ridiculous, Philip repudiated all that. He did revere Kafka — but Lenny Bruce as well. (In fact, the essential Roth is just that anomaly: Kafka riotously interpreted by Lenny Bruce.) But there was much more to Philip than furious rebellion, for at heart he was a true moralist, fired to root out hypocrisy and mendacity in public life as well as private. Few saw The Plot Against America as actual prophecy, but here we are. He will abide. It’s strange that I’m sitting here on a holiday in southern Italy and reading – for the 10th time at least – The Ghost Writer by Philip Roth. It’s a book I can’t stop reading. I have gone back to Roth’s novels again and again over the years for energy and inspiration as a writer. His tangy and intensely palpable voice meant so much to American fiction over the last 50 years. He made poetry out of everything he touched, and even his raunchiest moments – Sabbath’s Theater is nothing if not raunchy – delighted me for the exuberance of its language. Roth was unafraid, and he wrote exactly what he wanted, as he wanted. He consumed the world, swallowed it whole. I think it’s a mistake to focus on the Jewish side of that Jewish American epithet. He was American to his fingertips, and my generation – the generation who came after him – looked to him with admiration as well as, now and then, frustration. He was uneven as a writer. What writer isn’t? But he was massive in every way. As a grateful reader, I will miss him. Philip Roth was already sitting at the table in his favourite tiny Portuguese restaurant in his Upper West Side neighbourhood when I walked in. It was the only occupied table in the place. He stood up and smiled, and pulled out a chair for me. “Hey, Geo, get the lady a menu,” he said to a man in the shadows. For the next two hours, he and I and a mutual friend talked about Yankees baseball from the 1920s to the present (he liked Tony “Poosh ‘em Up” Lazzeri), the excellence of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Roth’s brief time as a writing instructor at my university, the New School (“everyone taught there at some point,” he laughed), and dire contemporary days. His eyes were deep and warm and full of sharp thought, his long hands moving often as he talked, his humour swift and glad. He spoke like he wrote, in perfectly turned sentences as he told a story or elaborated on a moment in American history, or in a two-or-three-word riposte as the conversation sped and shifted. We walked him back to his apartment after lunch; outside it, three workers were smoothing fresh cement on the wide sidewalk. Our friend said, “Let’s write our initials,” and Roth eagerly agreed. We all compared keys to see which was the sturdiest-looking, and Roth said to one of the cementers, “Excuse me, we’d like to write our initials.” He paused, courtly, for a reply, and the guy shook his head, no, not yet. Then he nodded at Roth, but held up a cautionary finger. “When I’m finish,” he replied. Roth guffawed. “That oughta be the title of my autobiography.” The smoothing over, we wrote our three sets of initials, and said our goodbyes. He never wrote that autobiography, yet he’d written it in every work of fiction, every essay, every review. No American writer had a richer and righter knowledge of our country’s history, for better and for worse, and was more honest in his telling — The Great American Novel, Our Gang, and The Plot Against America should be required reading in any course on 20th century American history. No one could turn a sentence and keep it in you like Roth. Like other gifted wordsmiths, Roth gives you work and joy for your mind. Unlike them, he also feeds your heart. I appreciate and admire the other writers of my lifetime; Roth, I love. He is untouchably fierce, funny, and fine. No one else even came close, or will. Philip Roth was a towering figure because he could do so much: humour, darkness, America, politics, pathos, history, sexuality, identity (particularly Jewish identity). He was brutally honest about himself, via his fictional alter egos, and never shied away from the dark side of the psyche, exploring themes of sex and anger and dysfunction with unflinching honesty. When I first read Portnoy’s Complaint it was 30 years old, but it still felt dangerous and subversive and wildly funny. He was a highbrow writer but never a pretentious one, as he never wanted to impress with fine moral virtues. He just presented life, and the inner life, as he saw it, and made no compromises to what he called the “moral beauty contest” that other writers engage in. With his death it feels a whole era has passed.