Two days before the time trial which could prove a decisive moment in the 101st Giro d’Italia, Simon Yates took his third stage victory of the race at the Sappada ski resort on Sunday , extending his overall lead over the defending champion, Tom Dumoulin, beyond the two-minute barrier. It was a massive step towards what could be a first British win in the Giro while the race favourite, Chris Froome, flopped badly following his stage victory on Saturday, with the overall win slipping further out of reach. With two short sharp climbs in the final kilometres and a further ascent to the finish, this stage finish favoured Yates’s punchy, attacking style more than the relentlessly steep slopes of Saturday’s finish on Monte Zoncolan. He made two incisive attacks in rapid succession at the foot of the penultimate ascent, Costalissoio; the first pulled an elite group of half a dozen clear of the remnants of the lead peloton and the second took him clear for good. “It was a bit of instinct,” Yates said, and it was a similar move to attacks that gave him stage wins at the Vuelta a España in 2016 and Paris-Nice the following year. “When we came off the descent I saw there was a little gap to a few guys, so I asked Jack [Haig] to push up the pace, then George [Bennett] attacked. It was really hard from the bottom of the climb but I felt good, so I chose the moment to go. I’m a bit emotional because I gave it everything the second time to get away and it worked. I think it was the hardest 15 kilometres of my life.” Yates decided to press on immediately after the rapid, chilly descent from the Passo di Sant’Antonio, which led straight up on to Costalissoio without giving the riders a pause to gather breath or stretch the legs. Froome was already floundering a little way behind as Yates’s team-mate Haig increased the pace, prompting the New Zealander Bennett to make a brief, unsuccessful attack. When the pink jersey had flown, Dumoulin was left in the company of four other contenders for the podium: Domenico Pozzovivo, Miguel Ángel López, Richard Carapaz and Thibaut Pinot. Only the Frenchman Pinot was willing to collaborate consistently with the Dutchman Dumoulin, who could be seen gesticulating at the quartet in an attempt to make them cooperate. Dumoulin was briefly dislodged by his four companions on the final ascent to the ski resort but regained contact when they began marking each other with their minds on the time bonuses awarded for second and third places behind Yates, whose stage victory looked assured from the moment he went past the five kilometres to go mark with 51sec in hand. The Dutchman ended the stage third, just behind López, but his loss of 47sec to Yates, including bonuses, extended his deficit to 2min 11sec. Stage 15 (Tolmezzo - Sappada 176km) 1 Simon Yates (Gbr) Mitchelton-Scott 4hrs 37mins 56secs, 2 Miguel Angel Lopez (Col) Astana Pro Team at 41s, 3 Tom Dumoulin (Ned) Team Sunweb, 4 Domenico Pozzovivo (Ita) Bahrain-Merida, 5 Richard Carapaz (Ecu) Movistar Team, 6 Thibaut Pinot (Fra) Groupama-FDJ all at same time, 7 Alexandre Geniez (Fra) AG2R La Mondiale at 1m 20s, 8 Davide Formolo (Ita) Bora-Hansgrohe, 9 Pello Bilbao (Spa) Astana Pro Team, 10 Sam Oomen (Ned) Team Sunweb all at same time General classification after stage 15 1 Simon Yates (Gbr) Mitchelton-Scott 65hrs 57mins 37secs, 2 Tom Dumoulin (Ned) Team Sunweb at 2mins 11secs, 3 Domenico Pozzovivo (Ita) Bahrain-Merida at 2m28s, 4 Thibaut Pinot (Fra) Groupama-FDJ at 2m37s, 5 Miguel Angel Lopez (Col) Astana Pro Team at 4m27s, 6 Richard Carapaz (Ecu) Movistar Team at same time, 7 Chris Froome (Gbr) Team Sky at 4m52s, 8 George Bennett (NZl) LottoNL-Jumbo at 5m34s, 9 Pello Bilbao (Spa) Astana Pro Team at 5m59s, 10 Patrick Konrad (Aut) Bora-Hansgrohe at 6m13s As for Froome, Yates had failed to overhaul the Team Sky leader in the final kilometres up Monte Zoncolan the previous day but 24 hours later Froome looked as if he had not recovered from that monumental stage-winning effort. At the finish the four times Tour de France winner had dropped from fifth overall to seventh but he is now 4min 52sec behind Yates, suggesting even a place on the podium may be out of reach. There are only six contenders for the podium in Rome on Sunday – seven counting Froome – and Yates’s stage victory puts him on a par with Eddy Merckx and the Italian Gilberto Simoni, the only others to have taken three stage wins while wearing the pink jersey. Those are not the key statistics for the Bury cyclist entering the final week, however. Dumoulin may well wipe out most if not all of that 2min 11sec in Tuesday’stomorrow’s time trial – he is the world champion at the discipline and the flat course will favour him – but the three mountain stages that follow it will give Yates the chance either to regain the lead or to reinforce it, depending on how things stand after Tuesday. The structure of this year’s Giro, with two time trials, one short and one longer if not over-long, means the tactical equation has always been simple: gain as much time on the specialists as possible. “It’s a good gap but he can take two minutes out of me in the time trial in one stage,” said Yates. “I’ve been fighting since Israel to get a good gap. I’m happy with the gap but it could vanish in 35 kilometres. I don’t know if it is enough.” His directeur sportif at Mitchelton-Scott, Matt White, put it differently: “We’re going to take a kicking from one of the best time triallists in the world.” The dimension of that kicking – if kicking it turns out to be – will go a long way to deciding the final outcome of this Giro.