Fernando Alonso finally made it back to the top step of the podium last weekend when he, alongside Toyota team-mates Sébastien Buemi and Kazuki Nakajima, took victory in the first round of this year’s World Endurance Championship at Spa. It has been some time in coming. This was the 36-year old’s first win since 2013, when he took the flag for Ferrari in Spain and it would have taken a hard heart not to empathise with the evident pleasure he felt at being back where he belongs. The victory augurs well for his attempt to win Le Mans next month, as do his performances this season in Formula One. The two-time world champion is showing every sign of being reinvigorated but back in the day job at Barcelona this weekend he needs McLaren to give him the car he so desperately wants. Spa was Alonso’s debut in the WEC and his squad won from the sister Toyota TS050 of Mike Conway, Kamui Kobayashi and José María López, with an assured run over the six hours in the Ardennes and the Spaniard revelled in the victory. “I was saying to the guys, this is so nice to feel the podium,” he said. “I will be here all night long. Pick me up in the morning, I will try and sleep here.” He did hold the whip hand however. Toyota are the only manufacturer in the top LMP1 class in the WEC this season and enjoy a distinct advantage over their privateer rivals. Equally, having suffered some terrible misfortune at Le Mans in recent years – not least in 2016 when Kazuki Nakajima, enjoying a strong lead, lost power one lap from the end and was cruelly denied – the team took no chances at Spa. With Conway in a quicker car and on Alonso’s tail for the final stint, they opted to hold positions after the final pit stop. But Alonso and his team-mates had earned the win. Just as he adapted to the challenge of the Indy 500 last year, the Spaniard found his feet in the WEC. With four different classes this is a very different challenge to F1. Passing slower cars and managing traffic is key to lap times, as is staying out of trouble. Pace and aggression must be tempered by good judgment. Alonso mastered it with aplomb and verve, at one point going three abreast and putting two wheels on the grass to make a pass on the run to Les Combes. Le Mans is next and with Toyota this strong Alonso knows it is a golden opportunity to add the 24 to his Monaco win and leave only Indy as the final hurdle in winning the triple crown. But it is victory in F1 that remains his greatest desire and here there is much work to be done. McLaren have not delivered the car they were hoping for this season. They have yet to put either driver into the final session of qualifying thus far and are lacking straight-line speed. The late switch to Renault from Honda delayed development of the car and the team’s racing director, Eric Boullier, has said that the “real” McLaren would not be seen until this weekend in Spain when serious upgrades would be delivered. In the interim Alonso is making the difference. With three sevenths and a fifth he is sixth in the world championship, helping propel McLaren to an unlikely fourth in the constructors. His drive in Baku exemplified why he is so valuable. After suffering a double puncture on the first lap he nursed the car back to the pits on its wheel rims. With extensive damage to the floor, the diffuser and aero he took it back out and managed not only to race but was largely quicker than his team-mate Stoffel Vandoorne. After the final restart he passed Lance Stroll for seventh. It was by any standard an exceptional performance. “I compare him sometimes to a shark when it smells blood in the sea. Then it starts to chase. Fernando is the same,” said Boullier. Barcelona, then, was hoped to be where the team showed their teeth but they are already managing expectations. Boullier warned this week that with all the teams bringing major revisions to the Circuit de Catalunya, a major jump would be unlikely, a view with which Alonso seemed reconciled. “I think 95% of the paddock is bringing a new aero package to Barcelona,” he said. “So, maybe the gap remains as it is, or we just recover a little bit, or we lose more ground.” The focus has shifted to a stream of upgrades over the summer but the goal of racing against Red Bull for podiums looks a way off. The team believe they may not have been ambitious enough in setting performance goals and there is still hope they can redress this. With Alonso unerringly on target across two different series, the pressure is on McLaren to match Toyota and give him the tools for the job. If they do so, in this form, there is no doubt he can deliver.