Rob Kearney 7 Not quite the attacking force he once was, but never afraid of a cute counterattack. Remains as solid under the high ball as anyone. Reassurance in a crucial position – Leinster all over. Jordan Larmour 5 We got a glimpse of the dancing feet early on, and he found a few metres, but the key moments were happening elsewhere. All part of the learning curve. Garry Ringrose 6 Started to find the odd chink as the game built to its climax, which he took with his usual aplomb. Otherwise found Vakatawa in his face throughout and guilty of a high shot himself. Robbie Henshaw 6 A workmanlike afternoon for Leinster’s midfield, a few carries, a few tackles, but never quite able to spark in the relentless rain. Took a few hefty bangs but still running come the end. Isa Nacewa 7 Stood up to land the winning penalties and seal his time in Dublin in appropriate style. Looked great on occasion, a bit loose on others, but the man’s class came through, as ever. Johnny Sexton 6 A couple of misses from the tee, one particularly ugly, but his assured hand on the tiller could be felt throughout. Another crucial reference point just where a team wants one. Luke McGrath 6 Fitness in some doubt, but he looked fine. Generally sharp service and intervened a couple of times with crucial cover tackles. Kicking useful, if not quite as sharp as Iribaren’s. Cian Healy 7 A right handful with ball in hand, he has rediscovered some of the form of old, which makes him yet another bastion of experience and knowhow just where it’s needed. Sean Cronin 6 Never missed his man at the lineout on a filthy wet day and put in a few very handy carries, one in the second half in particular. Tadhg Furlong 6 He’s had more eye-catching performances in this stellar season of his. The scrum contest was pretty even, but if anyone edged it Leinster did, forcing the odd free-kick. Devin Toner 6 The big lump kept Racing’s defence honest, running forcibly on to Sexton’s deft passes. He was solid under the restarts and looks as assertive as he ever has been. James Ryan 8 Still unbeaten! Safe at the lineout and a tireless worker in the loose, second only to Leavy on that front. Doesn’t quite scatter defenders but is always on hand to sustain momentum. Scott Fardy 6 Had more than his fair share of run-ins with the authorities, which costs him a point. Made one fine gallop down the right, just when most humans would have been gasping for air. Dan Leavy 9 What a season for this guy. Leinster’s top trooper, as his battered face will testify, hitting up time and again, and throwing himself where knees are sharp. Top carrier, top tackler. Extraordinary. Jordi Murphy 5 A steady day’s work, always up for a carry. Some of the sheen taken off by a penalty and knock-on just before he was substituted. Louis Dupichot 4 Early take to settle nerves, but shakier after that. Missed one up-and-under and a horrible high tackle forced him off for treatment. Anonymous in the second half Teddy Thomas 6 We all know about the attacking skills, but he showed himself to be more than handy in defence too. Very cool under pressure, until one crazy run into touch with minutes to go Virimi Vakatawa 7 A menace to the Leinster midfield as they tried to weave their patterns with all that possession and those phases. Garry Ringrose felt him keenly. Also tested them out with ball in hand Henry Chavancy 6 A few mighty clashes, he ably assisted his mate outside on the defensive-nuisance front. Quick to the floor when he had to be – and to the air. Conceded a couple of penalties Marc Andreu 5 He was sought out by Leinster’s kicking game – and for good reason. The little feller couldn’t quite escape, but neither did he quite wilt. Ledger even come the end Pat Lambie 5 Had kept even the eventually injured Dan Carter out of the team. An early run hinted why, but he twisted his knee and was off in the third minute. Racing down to third-choice 10 Teddy Iribaren 8 Under pressure already with Maxime Machenaud, then more after Pat Lambie off. Loves pressure. Kicking from hand superb. Drifted a bit in third quarter but was sharp in the fourth Eddy Ben Arous 6 Huge work-rate, tackle after tackle. Did plenty of tidying and held up against Tadhg Furlong perfectly well at scrum. Little bit of indiscipline nearly costly at start of second half Camille Chat 8 This guy is France’s hooker, long-term. A ball of muscle and more or less accurate from the touchline, what’s not to like. Superb and vital turnover near end of first half Cedate Gomes Sa 6 Keeping the mighty Ben Tameifuna out of team and we were afforded glimpses of his athleticism. Solid at set piece and on hand to tidy up some filth round the fringes Donnacha Ryan 6 One of Racing’s top tacklers and a solid worker in the tight. Also ran hard and effectively as Racing tried to raise the pace as the game reached its sharp end Leone Nakarawa 6 Not the weather for his famous off-loading game, not that it stopped him trying it. Forcing it, indeed. Lucky not to see yellow in first half, but very effective at lineout Wenceslas Lauret 7 Endless tackling in the face of Leinster’s recycling machine. Put in the odd carry too, but defence is what he’s all about – today was just the day for it Bernard Le Roux 6 Did so much right – and more than the opposite – but did make a few errors to undo the tireless tackling and a couple of telling interventions in attack Yannick Nyanga 7 Inspirational performance from the captain. He was Racing’s most effective carrier, reading the game so well at the back, and cool at the base of the scrum