Australia’s attempt at repairing their battered public image has begun after they turned to Justin Langer to be their new head coach, with the former Test opener promising his new charges will remain competitive on the field while being careful not to cross the line into aggression. Speaking in his new role for the first time on Thursday, Langer also indicated the banned trio of Steve Smith, David Warner and Cameron Bancroft would be welcomed back into the fold once their suspensions are served. Langer, 47, was confirmed as the man to take over from Darren Lehmann, who resigned following the ball-tampering scandal in South Africa. Cricket Australia said that Langer will coach the side in all three formats and will begin his challenge on 22 May. He has signed a four-year contract, a period which will include two Ashes series, a World Cup and the World Twenty20 tournament. Lehmann stood down as coach in the days after the ball-tampering affair during the third Test in Cape Town which also engulfed the captain Smith and vice-captain Warner. Both players were banned for 12 months by Cricket Australia and sent home from the tour in disgrace while the batsman Bancroft was suspended for nine months. “They’ve made mistakes. We have all made mistakes and we can all get better,” Langer said. “David Warner made a mistake. I love the way he plays his cricket. I’m a cricket tragic, the way he fields and the way he bats, they are things, I guess to less trained eye, you might not respect that as much, but I love the way he plays his cricket. “Has he got areas to get better at in? Yes. Has Steve Smith? Has Cameron Bancroft? Has every single person in Australian cricket? Yes. They have all got areas in we keep helping and mentoring them and if they meet the standards of the Australian cricket team, of course, they will be welcomed back.” When questioned about the Australian team’s sledging tactics, which had been the subject of criticism on the tour of South Africa before the ball tampering scandal hit, Langer said he would ensure his team know where to draw the line. “We’ve always played hard … I think some of the best banter is amongst each other to try to get the opposition thinking about other things,” Langer said. “That’s mental toughness, it is about being 100% focused on the next ball. If you’re worrying about what you just said to me, there is a distraction. But we all know that what the behaviour, the acceptable behaviours are. There’s a difference between competitiveness and aggression and we’ve got to be careful with that.” James Sutherland, Cricket Australia’s beleaguered chief executive, was at pains to point out the new head coach was the clear choice with strong “values”. “Justin was the clear standout, particularly based on his recent coaching and player development achievements,” said Sutherland. “Justin’s work ethic, leadership and values are among his strongest attributes, and he is widely respected across the global cricket community.” Langer referred indirectly to the ball-tampering episode which has stained the sport in Australia and has led to widespread criticism of the culture within the team setup. “There will be some significant challenges ahead for our group, but there is a wealth of talent in Australian cricket that I know will do us all proud,” Langer said in a statement. “I’m thoroughly looking forward to working with all players, as we strive for a successful men’s team across all formats, with the support and respect of the Australian public.” Langer represented Australia in 105 Test matches over nearly 20 years, scoring 7,500 runs, including 23 centuries. As a coach, he has been in charge of Western Australia state and the Perth Scorchers T20 team since November 2012. He was considered the most likely replacement after Lehmann announced at an emotional media conference in Johannesburg that he would resign as a result of the Cape Town incident, in which sandpaper was used on the field in an attempt to alter the condition of the ball.