The family of George Michael have asked fans to take down tributes left outside the singer’s homes in London and Oxfordshire, after the growing popularity of impromptu memorials that have turned into international tourist attractions began to divide local residents and conservationists. Fans of Michael, who was found dead at his riverside house in Goring on Christmas Day 2016, flocked to his two homes to create memorial gardens filled with flowers, poems, cards, framed pictures and candles. In Highgate village, north London, a prosperous area that counts A-list celebrities as residents, a triangle of land opposite Michael’s Grade II-listed house has been festooned with a growing number of offerings. In a statement on his official website, members of Michael’s family, including his sisters, Mel and Yioda, father Jack and friend David Austin, said they had been touched by the tributes celebrating and remembering Yog – their nickname for Michael. “However, we feel we cannot expect our Highgate and Goring neighbours to continue to accept as normality, the memorials so personal to you all, to remain as and where they are any longer,” they said. The statement asked Michael fans, who call themselves “Lovelies”, to pick up their tributes by 27 May and make a donation to charity instead, “so we can return both Mill Cottage and The Grove to their former simple state”. “This will take time to do properly, so we ask for your patience while trying to improve the grass and railings at The Grove,” it said. The family added that Michael liked his privacy and “would not want to disturb or change the quiet neighbourhoods he so loved, for the people in the local area who, honestly, despite reports otherwise have been gracious and very understanding”. The houses on Michael’s road in Highgate face the famous Flask pub and are one of the area’s biggest attractions. Former residents include the 19th-century poet Samuel Taylor Coleridge, Sting, Annie Lennox, Kate Moss and the late Victoria Wood. At the end of last year, Susan Rose, the chair of the Highgate Conservation Area advisory committee, wondered what Michael “would think of it all outside the beautiful home that he looked after so well, and right where he erected a wonderful Christmas tree every year”. No permanent memorial to Michael exists. Fans have campaigned for a lifesize bronze statue of the singer on the land outside his Highgate property. But though the campaign was backed by Michael’s record label, Sony, and local councillors, his family decided against the statue, saying he was a private person and would consider such a gesture “embarrassing”. The Highgate Society planning committee has also said proposals for a statue were “problematic”. “We are hoping, into the future, to get back to you with some more thoughts on ways and ideas to remember Yog that we hope you’ll like, and be a part of,” Michael’s family said in their statement. Annette McHail, who lays flowers near Michael’s Mill Cottage home in Goring every week, told the BBC the decision would “put the house back to how George would like it”. “He was a private person and I can appreciate what the family are saying. It needs to go back to normal now,” she said.