Atlantis Santorini, Greece 2017 (£12, Marks & Spencer) Greece is the last great, historic southern European wine producer to really take off in the UK. In fact, it still hasn’t: it’s so much harder to find Greek bottles than their peers from Italy, Spain, Mediterranean France or Portugal. Still, for fans of the country’s wonderfully distinctive wines – which have improved massively in the past 20 years – it’s heartening to see a few more trickling into mainstream retailers. Both Waitrose and M&S are backing what is perhaps the country’s most admired white grape variety, assyrtiko, which makes wines that have some of chablis’ mineral coolness coupled with the fragrance of a Greek island lemon grove. M&S’s example, Atlantis, is sourced from the volcanic soils of the island of Santorini; Waitrose’s Thymiopoulos Atma Assyrtiko, Imathia 2017 comes from the north west, in Greek Macedonia. Both have that electric flash of acidity and tang that works so well with fish grilled or baked with lemon and herbs. Thymiopoulos Terra Olympus Rapsani, Greece 2015 (£21, The Wine Society) A modern star of Greek winemaking, Apostolos Thymiopoulos, is behind many of the best bottles available in the UK at the moment. As well as the Waitrose assyrtiko, look out for the fuller, more mouthfilling white grape malagouzia in both the delightfully exotically fruited, floral and herb-laced Thymiopoulos Malagouzia, Imathia 2017 (£10, Marks & Spencer) and Atma White Malagouzia and Xinomavro (£8.50, The Wine Society), where it is, unusually, blended with the juice (and not the skins) of red grape xinomavro. For a more conventional take on Greece’s signature red variety from Thymiopoulos – well, it’s red at any rate – two stand out: Thymiopoulos Jeunes Vignes de Xinomavro, Naoussa 2016 (from £10.95, The Wine Society; Roberson Wine) is made in a succulent, light, juicy, vividly red-fruited style for thirst-quenching sipping with charcuterie; Terra Olympus, is richer, darker, more structured but with the same thrilling acidity: one for herb-roasted lamb. Alpha Estate Reserve Barba Yannis Vieilles Vignes Xinomavro, Amyndeo, Macedonia, Greece 2014 (£21.14, Great Wines Direct) Wines made from xinomavro are often compared to those made from nebbiolo in Piedmont in Italy (the land of barolo and barbaresco), something to do with the way it combines complexity of fragrance with high acidity and the kind of raspy dry tannin that only makes sense with food. Another Macedonian, Alpha Estate, does exactly those things in the Barba Yannis Vielles Vignes, which has a fabulous intensity of cherry and plum, spice and chewy texture that must in part be down to using very old (90-year-old) vines. Another favourite Greek variety, moscofilero, could not be more different: in Semeli Feast Moschofilero, Peloponnese 2016 (from £9.99, Noel Young Wines; Theatre of Wine) and the delightful Skouras Moschofilero, Peloponnese 2017 (£14.20, Jaded Palates) it makes for a breezy, dry white wine of spring-like blossomy fragrance and joyous grapey freshness. Follow David on Twitter @Daveydaibach