In 2013, I sat in a courtroom in Bethel, Alaska, and watched the trial of 23 Yup’ik fishermen, accused of flouting a ban on the fishing of king salmon the previous summer. The ban had been implemented by the Alaska Department of Fish and Game as king salmon numbers plummeted, unexpectedly and inexplicably. The fishermen pleaded not guilty. They were justified in fishing, they said, because the taking of king salmon was part of their spiritual practice, their cultural heritage. First amendment. Mike Williams, then chief of the Yup’ik nation, pulled me to one side during a recess. “Gandhi had his salt, we have our salmon,” he said. For the Yup’ik, getting arrested was no accident. They had issued a press release about their intention to fish before setting out. That first day in Bethel the courtroom was full, standing room only. Defendants, supporters, families hefting babies, a handful of journalists and cops. Someone produced a bag of salmon strips and passed it along the benches. Everyone took a piece and chewed on it, including the two state troopers. As I listened to the evidence – the biologists stressing the need for a ban in the wake of the salmon’s collapse, the Alaskan Natives speaking of how the salmons’ spirits would be offended if they did not show up to catch them – I came to see how two different ways of interpreting the world were being forced up against each other. Bethel is the regional hub of the Yukon-Kuskokwim delta, one of the largest deltas in the world: the size of England, with a population of 25,000. It bulges from Alaska’s western coast, a relatively new growth 2,500 years old, from when the Yukon river settled on its current course and began discharging the 90m tonnes of sediment that it transports every year. The Yukon is the longest free-flowing river in North America. It rises in Canada and bisects the state of Alaska east to west. Where it meets the Bering Sea, a little north of Bethel, it stretches seven miles from bank to bank. The Yukon is also the longest salmon run in the world. The king salmon arrive at the river’s mouth from somewhere deep in the Pacific and shoulder their way upriver, against the current, to return to the exact same pools where they were born. They navigate, it is now known, by their sense of smell: they can distinguish a single drop from their home river in 2m gallons of water. From the time they enter the river they will not eat, they will not drink; they are fuelled by reserves of oil accumulated during lives spent in the ocean. Kings entering the river’s mouth can be as much as one quarter oil and it is this incredibly high fat content that makes them so highly prized. Those kings that travel furthest reach McNeil Lake, one of the river’s many sources, across the border in Canada’s Yukon territory. They will have swum 1,990 miles upriver and climbed 1,054 metres into the mountains. During their swim, the ovaries of the female hen swell to a sixth of her body weight, the cock’s testes increase fivefold; it is what they are wired for now. At the spawning grounds, the females deposit their eggs and the males fertilise them. And then, overcome by the exertion of their journeys, they will all die. It is said that pilgrimages began with nomads returning to the graves of their ancestors: such is the salmon’s return. The eggs lie in the river’s bed through the north’s dark, brutal winter. And in the spring of 2016, that was where I found them, recently hatched, all orphaned. A float plane had left me at the shore of McNeil Lake. It was late May, the ice had just gone out, and I had returned to the Yukon to follow the story of the kings. Since I had left the trial in Bethel, the situation had only worsened. In 2014, a ban on all fishing for king salmon, commercial and subsistence, was enacted along the entire Yukon, Alaskan and Canadian, an unprecedented move. In 2015, that ban was kept in place. In 2016, I decided to canoe the length of the Yukon, at the same time as the salmon run, in an attempt to try to understand what was happening to the kings and how the lives were changing for those who depended on them. Travelling in Scotland in 1724, Daniel Defoe wrote of “salmon in such plenty as is scarce credible”. Early in the 19th century, the fish sold at Billingsgate market in London had been caught a few miles from London Bridge – 3,000 salmon every year. When Lewis and Clark reached America’s west coast in 1805, the annual king salmon run up the Columbia river is thought to have been 15m fish. Across the northern hemisphere, from Japan to Siberia, from Canada to Spain, the return of the salmon was a migration as dramatic as any other on the planet and human lives were shaped by and contingent upon their journeys. A fine levied on Irish tanners washing leather near spawning grounds, imposed in 1466, is perhaps the first piece of anti-pollution legislation in the world. Such conservation measures persisted down the centuries and violations were punished with heavy fines, months in prison, even death. Yet by the 1700s, salmon populations in Europe were wavering. Deforestation was affecting the flow of rivers, removing the many overflows and sloughs that were necessary for their spawning. The waste from breweries, slaughterhouses, distilleries, farms, tanneries and textile mills, against a background of overfishing, hit the runs hard. And then came the Industrial Revolution. In America, the pattern played out much the same. Logging and canalisation; cotton mills and steelworks; armies on the march devoured whole rivers’ worth of fish. Later, the pesticides and dams. In 1933, the Grand Coulee Dam began to go up on the Columbia and salmon stocks declined by 92%, or 14m fish. Alaska remains the one place on the planet that can be said to have a wild salmon population that is any sense abundant. It has preserved its pristine landscapes; it banned fish farming in the 1990s, a practice that has seriously damaged wild salmon runs elsewhere, and despite a scheme for a dam in the 1950s, which would have created the largest artificial lake on the planet, it remains free-flowing from source to sea. And yet now the salmon are vanishing here. Along with its wild salmon population, the Yukon has preserved the ways of life that have evolved alongside the king. I left McNeil Lake at the same time as the young salmon, rushing down through torrents of rapids as the river gushed out from the mountains. Two thousand miles away, the adults in the last months of their lives were entering the Yukon’s mouth, bound for Canada. Somewhere along the way our paths would cross. In every village that I came to I met people mending their nets, repairing their boats, the anticipation palpable. Relatives were returning from the cities to their villages. Elders told me that they had heard the first of the thunder, the salmon tails hitting the water in the distance, saying, “we’re coming! Prepare yourselves!” I saw fishwheels being repaired, great wooden structures that float, revolving on the river’s current, with buckets to scoop out the passing salmon. Facebook posts from the far end of the river showed kings already hanging in the smokehouses. Before the late 19th century, life had not changed significantly along the Yukon for several thousand years. Each year was cyclical, as nomadic families moved through a series of camps, dictated by the rhythm of the seasons, following the resources that they lived by. Every summer, they would camp at prime spots for the kings and spend several weeks catching and smoking the fish to last them through the winter. With the arrival of the goldrushers, and then the missionaries, the natives were driven in a few short years into a series of encampments. The indigenous people the length of the Yukon are now permanently settled, albeit most of their villages hundreds of miles off the road system, and yet the tradition of heading out to make fish camp has remained. It is a time not just for the stocking of larders, but for the swapping of stories, for getting together as a family, for teaching the children how to fish and how to respect the water. The signs of the gold rush are fading now, the log cabins collapsing back into the forest. Coming across a vast paddlesteamer, abandoned on an island and rotting where she stands, feels like stumbling across some ancient Inca temple. There is a sense of time unspooling, drifting in reverse, as the land reasserts its grip. Yet the changes brought by the gold rush to the people, and to the salmon, have made a longer legacy. As the incomers flooded in, canning factories proliferated. Later, the arrival of monofilament nets and outboard motors, along with a cash economy, meant improvements in fishing techniques. There were no regulations and fishermen targeted the largest specimens. Eighty pounders were plentiful; the largest king ever caught was 126lbs (57kg), the upper limit of a featherweight boxer. Today, a good fish is 20lbs. Smaller salmon lay fewer eggs: once, five fish used to return for every spawning adult; these days, it is more like one to one. That gives very little leeway and makes them far more vulnerable to the other impacts they are now facing: poor management, warming oceans, overfishing, the spread of disease. “The dollar comes before,” one elder explained to me. “The fish didn’t change. We change.” Since the blanket bans of 2014 and 2015, some limited fishing has been permitted, but many people are still choosing not to set a net in an attempt to try to get the run numbers and the size of the fish back up. Some predict that to redress the king’s altered genetics will take eight to 10 cycles of fish, that is to say, at least 50 years; other estimates are as long as a century. Humans are the greatest evolutionary force on Earth; however long it took to make the changes they created, it will take longer for nature to redress them. For the time being, teenagers who have never been allowed to fish are being taught to prepare salmon with fish from the freezer. The First Nations are being forced into a choice between the preservation of the salmon and the preservation of their culture. I floated further down the Yukon towards Alaska. The sun spun circles in the sky overhead, the endless light of a northern summer. The international border was delineated by a 10ft gap between the spruce trees, a single crenellation in several hundred miles of unbroken forest. Each night, I camped on the river’s shore and each morning I paddled on. Occasionally, I would see a cabin, tucked away up some little creek. It is not only indigenous people who have come to depend on the kings, but those from the outside who have been drawn in by the same frontier mentality as the goldrushers. Many came dodging the draft for Vietnam, in search of a libertarian, self-sufficient lifestyle that was no longer available in the Lower 48. At one time, they fished as a means of eking out a meagre living. Since commercial fishing has been banned, they still rely on salmon to feed both themselves and their sled dogs, although that is getting harder. Many have been forced into finding income elsewhere: along the river, I will stay with no fewer than four men who make a large chunk of their income from appearing on reality TV shows about life in the bush. One day in mid-July, the kings arrive. With their arrival, the fish camps come alive and I spend time helping with the nets, brining salmon strips, talking to generations of families brought together by the occasion. They show me the best ways to prepare the salmon, the best woods to use for smoking it; everyone does it differently. We eat the heads and the hearts. But for every fish camp that is populated, I see far more that are abandoned, falling to pieces, their old tarps so sun-faded they are patchwork now. With all the regulations, the strict controls on who can fish and when, many people are choosing not to bother. The price of petrol makes it prohibitive to head out to camp for a few hours here and there. People have jobs to hold down and they cannot justify taking time off to then come back empty-handed. I spend time with elders who still make the journey every year, despite the fact that their children have moved to the cities and there are few fish any more. Their memories of past salmon runs feel inseparable from their other memories and I come to understand that by speaking to people about the salmon, we are speaking of many things. The place that food holds in a culture. The hopes they have for their children and grandchildren. Why they choose to live where they do. What it means to be both a 21st-century American and a Yup’ik drawing on millennia of heritage. How to survive as a hunter-gatherer in a capitalist world. The river snakes back to the Yukon-Kuskokwim delta. Almost half the population is under 18 here. It is the youngest county in the United States. It is the fourth poorest county in the United States and it has the highest unemployment rate of any county: more than a quarter of the population lives below the poverty line. I feel very far from America. In Emmonak, a Yup’ik village, there are 40 jobs for 800 residents outside fishing season and money is increasingly important as the subsistence foods become harder to obtain. There is a growing dependence on food stamps and on welfare. Alcoholism is rife. Suicide is commonplace. I hear similar stories the length of the river, stories of cultures trying to find their way in a new landscape, with changes being forced upon them as the resources they rely on dry up. Within weeks of seeing the first salmon, I am seeing the first dead ones, spawned out, at the end of their runs. They drift into the creeks, the dead and dying, monstrous fish with ragged grey sores, grotesquely humpbacked, bouncing in a daze off the sides of the canoe. I paddle through them, cutting a wake through their bodies. Flaccid and spongy, they are of little use to people any more, but this annual surge of protein benefits more than just the fishermen. The bears have been my constant preoccupation since I began this journey, but it is the salmon that they want at this time of year. The kings bring the fat and nutrients gleaned from a life at sea up these old trade routes, restoring the fat of the land. Grizzlies must add 50% to their body fat before they den for the winter; they can eat 40kg of salmon in a day. Often, they will take only the best, most calorific bits, biting off the skull to eat the brain or hammering with a paw on a female’s back, like someone with their change stuck in a vending machine, to see if they can squirt the eggs out. An eagle well fed on salmon will have more chicks and will hatch them earlier, giving them more time to fledge before the cold weather comes again. The abandoned carcasses descend the pecking order, feasted on by rodents, by smaller birds and beetles. The insects that pick at the meat left on the bones bring in the songbirds, swallows and amphibians. Kneeling angelica times its flowering for 10 days after the salmon arrive. This is when the blowflies emerge, to lay their eggs in the salmon carcasses. The blowflies need the angelica’s nectar for the energy for reproduction, the angelica needs the blowflies as its pollinator. Their maggots break down the carcasses into the soil. Spruce and willow grow up to three times faster along the streams by spawning grounds. The life of a fish and a river, I have come to see, is astonishingly complex. And however the king is managed in the future, whatever choices are made in prioritising regulation or the rights of people to go out and fish, the approach must be holistic, the many different voices heard. The king is embedded in every level of the ecosystem, an ecology that is connected not just to the animals and plants, but to the politics and culture and to spiritual beliefs. In the north, with the landscape’s bones laid bare, it may be more apparent that nothing exists in isolation, that to alter one element is to have an impact on the whole. But it is no less true for those of us who live in cities, it is only that the webs are more entangled. We are part of the landscape and the salmon’s story is our story. In early September, I reach the sea. It is already deep into autumn and there will be snow now, any day. It is as though the world has run out of ideas and is now simply petering out, a scatter of islands and mudbanks that blur into the water, some grassy flats and a slop of mud and then nothing but the ocean. If there was a place to topple off the end of the Earth this would be it, where the map falls to tatters. Right now, the young salmon will be tumbling from these river mouths, bound for their feeding grounds, untethering from the land and hurling themselves into another world, one that is saline and entirely without boundary. But here I must stop. I can follow only so far. Adam Weymouth’s Kings of the Yukon: An Alaskan River Journey is published by Particular