Daniel Ricciardo secured pole position for Red Bull at the Monaco Grand Prix after utterly dominating on the streets of Monte Carlo, with the Australian proving to be the class of the field in a Red Bull that has truly found its form on this circuit. Sebastian Vettel in the Ferrari was second, with Lewis Hamilton in the Mercedes in third. Ricciardo put in the culmination to what has been a superb weekend thus far by delivering a flawless and superb run on his first lap in Q3 that was a full four-tenths clear of his rivals. It was a masterclass in Monaco and although he could not improve it on his second run, he did not need to. Vettel could only close the deficit to two-tenths, with Hamilton four-tenths back. Ricciardo had gone quickest in Q1, four-tenths up on Vettel, and was again in the second session but only one-tenth up on Kimi Räikkönen behind him. It had looked tight going into the shootout but the Australian proved untouchable. He has topped every session in practice and qualifying, and in doing so set a new track record on six separate occasions. This is Ricciardo’s second career pole position, having taken his first here in 2016, a race he was set to win until a pit-stop error cost him time and left the Australian angry and disappointed. It was also the last time Red Bull claimed the top spot and Ricciardo, out of contract at the end of this year, is highly bankable on current form. He won with a fine drive in China and was in good shape at Baku before the accident with team-mate Max Verstappen that ended their race. He has not won in Monaco but has been on the podium here on three of his four visits with Red Bull, and it is a race he has been clear he dearly wants to win. He was hugely strong in practice, quickest in the opening two sessions and then topped the table on Saturday morning, and will be optimistic of his chances of converting pole into a win. The Red Bull has yet to have a chance to show its real race pace in clean air at the front from the off, and Ricciardo will expect to exploit his opportunity on a circuit where track position is all. Always strong through the slow corners, the downforce-dependent nature of Monaco plays to the Red Bull’s strengths and masks its power deficit. The aero upgrades they brought to Spain have proved crucial and will have been targeted at this race. Having started last season well off the pace of Ferrari and Mercedes and coming after Ricciardo’s win in China, this strong showing in Monaco will buoy the team: they have proved adept in the past at making the most of any opportunity and will look to do so again on Sunday. Mercedes had opted to try to set their time in Q2 on the harder ultrasoft tyres, the only team to do so, but Hamilton described them as “terrible”. They were almost a second a lap slower than the hypersoft tyres and Mercedes had to run on the faster rubber to make it into Q3. Ricciardo’s team-mate Verstappen had another difficult start to his weekend, however. Having crashed three times across three visits to Monaco, he once again put his Red Bull in the wall in final practice, an incident almost identical to his accident in qualifying in 2016. The team had to replace the gearbox for which he would have taken a five-place grid penalty but they were unable to do so in time for him to take part in qualifying and he will start from the back of the grid. Räikkönen was in fourth, with Valtteri Bottas in fifth. McLaren’s Fernando Alonso was in seventh place. The Force India’s of Esteban Ocon and Sergio Pérez were in sixth and ninth respectively, with the Renault of Carlos Sainz in eighth and the Toro Rosso of Pierre Gasly in 10th. Romain Grosjean in the Haas was in 15th place but will take a three-place grid penalty after causing an accident at the last round in Spain. Renault’s Nico Hülkenberg was in 11th in front of the McLaren of Stoffel Vandoorne. Sergey Sirotkin in the Williams was in 13th with Charles Leclerc’s Sauber in 14th. Brendon Hartley in the Toro Rosso was in 16th with Sauber’s Marcus Ericsson in 17th. Williams’s Lance Stroll was in 18th, in front of the Haas of Kevin Magnussen.