“I have never forgotten what James Hunt said to me: ‘Remember, Mika, remember to have fun,’” recalls the double world champion Mika Häkkinen, relaxing on a yacht in Monaco beside the very car that enabled him to fulfil Hunt’s bidding. Häkkinen believes his win here 20 years ago, on the way to his first Formula One title, was the stand‑out performance of his career and that the drivers who take to the streets on Sunday still face the ultimate test in Monte Carlo. Hunt’s words had been delivered to an intense young Finn in 1991. By 1998, after a life-changing accident and some tough years in F1, he was finally able to do as the British champion advised and revel in his endeavour. “When I did the first test in ’98 I felt the car was fast whatever I did, turn or break, it did exactly what I wanted,” he says. “I told myself: ‘Now is the time. You can win the world championship’.” The car was the McLaren MP4/13, the first Adrian Newey had wholly designed for the team and it was a remarkable piece of machinery. At the first round in Australia Häkkinen and his team-mate, David Coulthard, completed their one-two finish by lapping every other competitor. By the time they arrived in Monaco, Häkkinen had won three of the opening five races. Now 49 years old, having retired from F1 in 2002, he has lived in the principality for 25 years but back then he feared he was jinxed never to win the grand prix here, having suffered a series of retirements and accidents at previous races. However, with Newey’s world beater beneath him, he believed his time had come. Häkkinen began the serious business of the weekend with an exceptional qualifying lap to take pole. He always disliked understeer, preferring the car to have front-end bite he could throw at an apex, while catching and recatching the rear. On his final run in Monaco he deliberately braked early on a short, downhill section of track into the first corner, Sainte Dévote. This pitched the car’s weight forward and brought his tyres to their operational temperature immediately. It worked brilliantly, he had the front-end grip he wanted and he exploited it with “maximum attack”. In the race that followed Häkkinen was hounded by Coulthard until the Scottish driver’s engine gave out and, after putting in a series of perfectly executed laps, he left the Benetton of Giancarlo Fisichella and Michael Schumacher’s Ferrari squabbling for second in his wake. It had not been easy. “The track is very demanding physically and psychologically,” he says. “It take a lot of energy to stay calm, if you are panicking, you are in the wall. That’s why preparation is harder than anywhere else.” Nor can it be taken for granted, even for a moment. Easing up with five laps to go he lost temperature in the tyres and brakes and a rear tyre clipped the barrier at Rascasse. He feared the jinx had struck again. “I will never forget it,” he says. “I was 100% sure that was it, the race was over, but it didn’t break.” Now a brand ambassador for McLaren, he cites the team’s diligence and forward thinking as having saved the day. They had brought in new, stronger wishbones after qualifying – enough to withstand the blow. Four victories followed, the last in the season finale, at Suzuka, where he sealed the title. His second followed the next year, yet now at the top, he viewed his future with the perspective of a man who had already almost lost his life. In 1995, during first qualifying for the Australian Grand Prix, Häkkinen suffered a tyre failure that caused him to crash violently. He was severely injured and saved by an emergency tracheotomy at the side of the track. He remained in critical condition and was in hospital for two months. That he recovered to drive again the following year was remarkable but the incident had left its mark. “When I won the world championship I thought: ‘Don’t push your luck any further, this is good, now do something else,’” he says. He has since pursued a variety of business interests including a newly launched social media app. In Monaco this weekend, standing beside the car that was instrumental to his first title, Häkkinen describes Newey as a genius and believes his car – the Red Bull – will be the class of the field again. “He has always been a great designer of downforce cars and Red Bull have a good chance to get the victory here,” he says. But he knows how hard that will be in a race that requires an “incredible level of concentration”. A tough task then but one the flying Finn has only reason to remember affectionately. “Monaco is the best grand prix on the calendar,” he says, smiling. “When I take my children to school and we are exiting the tunnel I say: ‘Ah, sometimes I used to be coming out of here at 300kmh ...’”