Ask not for whom the bell tolls, it tolls for thee, New Zealand. Recent commentary in the New Zealand media that Australian rugby is sinking into oblivion may have some truth to it, but it would be wise for the Kiwis to appreciate they are in the same leaky boat in these troubled southern waters. Make no mistake, there is no immediate threat to New Zealand’s dominance of Super Rugby, particularly Trans-Tasman competition, which has stretched out to 39 consecutive wins against Australian opposition. But a few tiny weaknesses are starting to appear in New Zealand rugby. The NSW Waratahs should have beaten defending Super Rugby champions, the Crusaders, in Christchurch on Saturday after racing to a 29-0 lead in 29 minutes. There was a feeling the Crusaders were capable of coming back and winning, which they did, 31-29, but their victory was tainted by Joe Moody’s elbow to Kurtley Beale’s throat just before the All Black prop scored a crucial try in the 34th minute to ignite the Kiwi comeback. Moody escaped punishment on the day, but was subsequently suspended for two games, cold comfort for the Waratahs and if Moody’s foul play had been detected by the all-New Zealand officiating panel, the Waratahs may have led 29-12 at half-time instead of 29-19 and the Crusaders would have played the rest of the game with 14 men. Sign up to receive the latest Australian sports stories every day Whether the Crusaders could have come back from that scenario is problematical but it raises this question: does the result show New Zealand sides are fallible or does it just reinforce their aura of invincibility? It’s perhaps a bit of both. The Waratahs should have gone on with it and didn’t, which suggests they did not really believe they could beat the Crusaders. But other recent results indicate the New Zealanders are not invincible. In previous weeks the Jaguares beat the Blues (the first Kiwi team to lose to the Argentines) and the Chiefs on New Zealand soil, while the Highlanders were hammered 38-12 by the Sharks in Durban. These results show that the New Zealand teams, which follow a policy of resting All Blacks during Super Rugby, are vulnerable when they are not at full strength or mentally switched on. And this should be an area of concern moving forward. The biggest threat to Super Rugby in New Zealand is the potential removal of one of their greatest advantages against Australia and South Africa – the ability to retain talent. There is a dark cloud on the horizon for New Zealand if talented Kiwi players continue to join the player drain to Europe which has undermined Australian and South African Super Rugby teams. New Zealand has always relied on the lure of the All Blacks jersey to keep top talent in the country, but this is starting to change. All Blacks at the peak of their careers such as Aaron Cruden and Malakai Fekitoa have already left, while others such as Lima Sopoaga are going at the end of the year. While these players may not be first-choice All Blacks, they are still important to their Super Rugby teams. New Zealand has more depth than Australia and a much greater capacity to cover losses, but a mass exodus has the potential to adversely affect the standard of Super Rugby in New Zealand. The tipping point for New Zealand would be losing a player such as star playmaker Beauden Barrett, who has reportedly been offered $3.4m a season by a French club. The player drain is one of the main reasons Sanzaar has searched for an El Dorado, firstly in Japan and now possibly in the US, to enable the southern hemisphere nations to compete with rich clubs in Europe. With a new broadcast deal about to be re-negotiated Sanzaar must find a way to generate the revenue to compete with Europe or the player drain will continue. South Africa has just announced it will select overseas-based players for the Springboks. How long before Australia, who already have a 60-Test cap eligibility rule, and New Zealand follow suit? What would that mean for Super Rugby? If the competition is relegated to the B-League of the southern hemisphere, the bell will toll for everyone, including New Zealand.