Reaction to the live blog’s updates on what the best EU customs proposal looks like provoked some of the most interesting discussion on site today. We’re also looking at your views on tiny living spaces for milennials and whether driving licences should be revoked from older drivers whose fitness to drive is questionable. To join in the conversation you can click on the links in the comments below to expand and add your thoughts. We’ll continue to highlight more comments worth reading as the day goes on. Today’s politics live blog has generated a lot of conversation below the line about how much time has been wasted discussing custom deals that have already been rejected by the EU. Today is possibly the most farcical day yet with Brexit. The customs partnership and streamlined approach have both been turned down by the EU as feasible approaches. Davis may call this an “opening position” but so far it seems pretty clear that neither of them will work. They are both moot. Yet, here we have the Conservative party tearing itself apart about one of these options still being pursued. Not because the EU won’t accept it, but because the Brexiters won’t accept it. It would be like a couple arguing over whether they are still considering buying a Porche, instead of a Lamborgini, when in fact they would be lucky to afford a 20-year-old Fiesta. Neither of the options is viable, stop wasting time arguing about them and think of something new, anything.jezf Are they that stupid that they still think that after two years they have time to debate which of the two proposals to put forward to the EU, even though both have already been rejected? Are they too stupid to realise that they wasted 18 months pursuing the cake-and-eat-it deal and wasted precious time when they could have been planning to effectively and competently leave the EU? Now it’s crunch time and if we don’t stay in some kind of customs union the UK will face economic turmoil. Runningblade Elle Hunt discusses the suggestion that young people should live in “centrally located but smaller” housing. You’ve been sharing your own views below the line. There is a case for the minimum to be reduced. I lived for a year in a 23m2 apartment, perfectly OK when I was single. The problem is storage for stuff; bicycles, camping gear etc. The space is sufficient to live in, but we should adopt the continental idea of a storage cupboard or similar, not necessarily in the apartment.madridpunch When we have frequent articles and public concerns over loneliness, and articles on the effects that gadgets and TVs have on sleep if used in the bedroom, to encourage housing spaces with no communal areas seems a depressing step backwards. Not to mention the fact that constantly being out of your house socialising is very expensive, especially in a city like London. To be able to have friends over rather than go out for another overpriced cup of coffee or inflated bottle of wine would help a lot in terms of keeping costs down- for those millennials who can even afford to be constantly out of the house socialising.latenightreader You’ve been sharing thoughts on Ranjana Srivastava’s piece on whether older drivers should have their licences revoked if their fitness to drive is in question. A toughie. I live in a sea-side community where it is near imperative to drive to live your life. It has its share of elderly people who obviously should not still be driving. I know the day is not too far away when it will be me in that position. It will be hard but I hope I will recognise that my days of having the privilege of driving are over, that it is my responsibility to care for the wellbeing of other road uses and pedestrians and to hand my licence in. It is one of the reasons we are planning to relocate in the next couple of years to somewhere we can live without driving. We will be leaving our beautiful home of many years, but the elderly are not immune to the responsibilities of citizenship and should plan for not being able to drive as they plan for other contingencies.venusplutomoon In New South Wales the Roads and Maritime Services has strict guidelines for fitness to drive that MUST be followed. As a doctor if someone technically meets the requirements but I have concerns I refer them for a practical driving assessment. If they don’t meet the minimum requirements the decision is simple to make and explain but often difficult for the patient to accept especially in a rural area where there is no public transport. It always makes me very sad when I have to break bad news like this but the rules are quite clear on this with very little wriggle room.dtm1966 Comments have been edited for length. This article will be updated throughout the day with some of the most interesting ways readers have been participating across the site.