Amirullah, 55, was having a late afternoon nap in his home on Palu bay when the earthquake shook him awake. In the lounge his seven-year-old granddaughter was watching cartoons on TV. She was so close to the screen that the 7.5-magnitude quake caused the television set crash down on her head. “I told my wife to grab her and run first, that I would stay and help my cousin,” said Amirullah, recounting the disasters that hit Palu, on Indonesia’s Sulawesi island, last Friday. His cousin, 70, who was in the middle of a bad episode of gout needed his help. As the ground continued to shake strongly they made it outside and to the car, but it wouldn’t start. That was went the first tsunami struck, sending them up the street in a powerful whoosh and then back toward the house as the water receded into the next massive wave. Amirullah, tall and physically fit, grabbed hold of his roof on the slide back and he managed to get himself and his cousin up on to the tiles. Maruni, his wife, had jumped in the car of a fleeing stranger while his 12-year-old nephew, Riswan, who had been praying at the Arqam mosque, managed to survive by clinging on to a coconut tree. Each personal experience would be shared two days later when the family was reunited, but while on the roof Amirullah thought he would never see them again. He chose the roof because he thought that if he died it would be easier for his wife to locate him, rather than “washed up by a tsunami God knows where”. From there he had a clear view over the sea, to the left the Donggala regency and to the right, Palu’s Talise beach. He stood in horror and awe as tsunamis from each side met in the middle, and twice more smashed down. The first of three waves was clear but the second, and most powerful one, was muddy. Amirullah estimates that wave reached six metres in height; Indonesia’s disaster agency said it could have been traveling as fast as 250 mph (400 km/h). When movement in the Palu Koro fault caused last Friday’s strong quake, there was no official warning on the ground that a tsunami could follow. Straddling multiple tectonic plates, earthquakes are common in Indonesia. But residents in Palu say they are shocked a tsunami hit their bay, first smashing first into Donggala on the western tip and then barrelling into Palu’s usually calm waters. “I never believed there could be a tsunami here. Palu is on a bay, not open sea,” says Maruni, as she shakes her head and fights back tears. The 50-year-old was returning to her house for the first time on Friday morning, a week after the quake and tsumani flatten parts of the coast, killing more than 1,571 people. Less than a mile from her home the Ponulele Bridge lies half underwater; left and right the view is a one of devastation. “It’s just crazy. Crazy,” says Maruni, as she searches through the rubble of her home for important documents – land titles, school certificates, family photos. Driving along the coastline the seemingly fickle nature of the wave is striking, swaths are flattened, while some buildings stand untouched. Sutopo Purwo Nugroho, the disaster agency spokesman, said high resolution satellite data showed how Palu’s topography dictated how far the tsunami penetrated the land. When the wave met rivers, he said, it reached a mile and a half inland. In other areas, blocked by hills, it only reached as far as 2,000ft. But everywhere you go in Palu there are stories of loss and survival, each with their own set of dramatic and strange details. In the village of Loli Dongo on Donggala’s coast, Suriyani was knocked to the floor by the earthquake while she was praying. She ran up the hill behind her when she saw the sea was bubbling, and then watched as the tsunami hit her house below. Descending in the morning, she noticed the trail of beached tropical fish on top the rubble. On Talise beach, the annual Palu Nomoni cultural festival was meant to be in full swing last Friday night. In attempt to explain the incomprehensible destruction some have blamed the traditional animist rituals, such as throwing a live goat and flowers into the water to appease the sea gods, that residents say were a part of the festival. They believe god is punishing them for diverging from Islam, the dominant religion in Indonesia. Last year the festival was followed by a punishing storm; at the time local Islamic leaders said it should be banned. Now this year the festival is a marker for unimaginable loss. A week after the disaster a few angry signs have appeared around the Talise beach horse statue and allude to the perceived wrath from above. Scrawled on one in big silver letters is “we reject satan worshippers”. When the earthquake and subsequent tsunami hit, a group of dancers from the festival were performing, swallowing fire and swirling around to a quick drum beat, said Setyo Wibowo, a nearby shop owner. On Friday, Setyo was still searching for his daughter and daughter in-law who were on the beach for the event. All the dancers, he notes, are also missing.