Alisson Not his busiest afternoon by any stretch but equal to the shots Mahrez aimed towards his near post. 7 Joe Gomez More composed at centre-half than right back, although had the measure of Sterling all game. 7 Dejan Lovren Lucky not to concede a penalty for a clumsy tackle on Agüero. Made a superb challenge to stop Jesus late on. 8 Virgil van Dijk Almost gifted City victory when he caught Sané in the box. A rare lapse in an otherwise commanding display. 7 Andrew Robertson On the front foot and dominant against Mahrez early on but the roles reversed in the second half. 7 Georginio Wijnaldum Strong, defensively disciplined and played his team out of trouble several times; a hugely influential performer. 8 Jordan Henderson Won and used the ball effectively to provide much-needed energy and creativity. Required more in a defensive role. 7 James Milner Started brightly, in the tackle and with his movement, but forced off by an early hamstring injury. 5 Mohamed Salah The sharpest and most prominent of the home forwards yet that clinical finish eluded him again. 7 Roberto Firmino A subdued display by the Brazilian who was unable to unsettle the City defence with his runs and was replaced. 6 Sadio Mané Kept quiet by Walker and rarely found the space to get behind City. Having a quiet spell of late. 6 Substitutes: Naby Keïta (for Milner 29) Lacked the tactical awareness of the man he replaced but worked tirelessly. 6 Daniel Sturridge (for Firmino 72) In keeping with Liverpool’s attacking display as a whole, had little opportunity to make an impact. 5 Ederson Had a harder time trying to pick the right pass to a team-mate than dealing with Liverpool’s attack. A comfortable game. 7 Kyle Walker Would have liked to stretch Liverpool more with his pace on the counter but dominant defensively against Mané. 7 John Stones Impressed on his first league start since 1 September. Alert to Liverpool’s intentions and dealt with them convincingly. 8 Aymeric Laporte Slowed the tempo of the game – and Liverpool’s display – with patient and intelligent passing. Made several important interceptions too. 8 Benjamin Mendy Maybe it was a lack of match fitness but the left-back struggled to impose himself as an attacking force and was wasteful in his passing. 6 Bernardo Silva Sacrificed some of his creative instincts to work tirelessly at stopping the supply to Liverpool’s front three, although influential throughout. 8 Fernandinho Protected his back-line effectively although Liverpool’s deep midfield gave him more time on the ball than usual in these fixtures. 7 Riyad Mahrez Had the chance to deliver a significant victory from the penalty spot and blew it spectacularly. Has missed five of his last eight penalties. 6 David Silva Constantly closed down by Liverpool midfielders yet still managed to dictate City’s best moments with his ability to weave into space and play the right ball. 8 Raheem Sterling Ineffective, as is often the case on his return to Anfield, and easily contained by Gomez. Taken off to the home crowd’s amusement once again. 6 Sergio Agüero Anonymous and contained, although was fed on scraps throughout. Booked for a foul on Henderson and withdrawn. 5 Substitutes: Jesus (for Agüero 65) A lively replacement for the quiet Argentina international and worried the Liverpool defence. 7 Sané (for Sterling 75) Won the penalty that could have delivered victory and should have been on for Sterling from the start. 6