Glenn Hoddle is being treated in hospital after falling ill at BT Sport’s studios, where he had been a guest on Soccer With Sav. Hoddle, 61, collapsed after the show.A spokesman for the former England manager said on Saturday evening: “The condition is serious but Glenn is currently receiving specialist treatment and responding well. Glenn’s family are with him and would like to thank everyone that has sent their support. They have also asked for their privacy to be respected at this time.” The BT Sport presenter Jake Humphrey had broken the news on Saturday afternoon by tweeting: “Our friend & colleague Glenn Hoddle was taken seriously ill at the BT Sport studio this morning. Everyone of us is right with you Glenn, sending love & strength.” The Brighton manager, Chris Hughton, who was Hoddle’s first-team coach during his spell as Spurs manager, said: “It’s very sad. Glenn is somebody I’ve know from the age of 12 or 13.” “He was a schoolboy at Tottenham when I was there and he was the star player we all looked up to and could never get near. And of course I worked under him when he was manager. My thoughts and prayers are with him. He’s got a strong character and I’m sure he’ll battle through.” Hoddle, who was celebrating his birthday on Saturday, played for Tottenham, Monaco, Swindon and Chelsea in a career spanning two decades. He scored eight goals in 53 games for England and later managed the national team at the 1998 World Cup before pursuing a career as a television pundit after his last managerial job at Wolves in 2006. Gary Lineker, Hoddle’s former England teammate and BT Sport colleague, tweeted: “Hugely worrying news that Glenn Hoddle collapsed at the BT studios earlier. Thoughts are with him and his family. Come on Glenn.” Chelsea, who Hoddle made 39 appearances for as a player and took over as player-manager in 1993, tweeted: “Our thoughts are with former Blues boss Glenn Hoddle, who has been taken seriously ill on his 61st birthday. We’re right with you, Glenn.” Tottenham Hotspur, the boyhood club Hoddle also served as manager between 2001 and 2003, tweeted: “Everybody at the Club sends their best wishes to @GlennHoddle for a full and speedy recovery after he was taken ill this morning.” The FA, via the England team account, wrote: “Worrying news. Get well soon, Glenn Hoddle, we’re all behind you.” According to Hoddle’s personal Twitter feed, he was scheduled to analyse the 3pm kick-off between Brighton and Wolves for BT Sport as part of their live Score show. BT Sport presenter Mark Pougatch said: “You will understand why there’s no BT Sport Score this afternoon. All our thoughts are with Glenn Hoddle and his family.”