Described as “the national dish of Italy” by Christopher Boswell, executive chef of the Rome Sustainable Food Project and enjoyed, according to restaurateur Lucio Galletto, “from the small islands south of Sicily to the mountain villages perched high in the Alps”, pasta al pomodoro has a lot going for it. It’s cheap to shop for, easy to prepare and utterly delicious to eat – and, being Italian, comes in more varieties than HJ Heinz could even dream of, which means there’s a pasta al pomodoro out there to suit every taste, from tomato-faced toddler to ravenous runner. But, as with many simple dishes, the devil is in the detail. So what’s the secret to success? As the tomato season is sadly over for another year – in the UK, at least – I’ve chosen to concentrate on recipes that use only tinned, rather than fresh, fruit (if you happen to live somewhere where decent fresh tomatoes are still easy to come by, I implore you to have a salad for me instead). Most of these recipes call for whole San Marzano tomatoes, a plum variety grown in Campania, southern Italy, whose sweet flavour and meaty flesh has been honoured by DOP status (Denominazione d’Origine Protetta) from the EU, meaning that all tomatoes sold here under the name must come from the Agro Sarnese-Nocerino region. San Marzanos are the Rolls-Royce of the food world: they’re the best, and everyone knows it. However, they are also pretty expensive. If you can’t get hold of them and have to make do with the own-label tomatoes from your local supermarket, or the more widely available Cirio variety, don’t worry too much. The difference is marginal once cooked into a sauce and it’s nothing that some judicious use of seasoning can’t make up for. Only one recipe calls for chopped, rather than whole, tomatoes. J Kenji López-Alt, on the Serious Eats website, reckons chopped tomatoes don’t break down properly during cooking, and I find them watery, so I don’t tend to use them, though, again, you can if that’s what you have to hand. On the subject of hands, Serious Eats also suggests using them to crush the tomatoes to create a chunkier texture than would be possible through mechanical means, while Katie and Giancarlo Caldesi deploy a potato masher. But for this particular purpose, I prefer a smoother sauce – it clings to the pasta better – and a stick blender is ideal for the job. Whizzing the finished sauce, rather than the tomatoes alone, as celebrated Italian food writer Anna Del Conte recommends for the Emilian recipe in her book Pasta, ensures a perfectly even result – no little lumps of veg to disrupt the perfect harmony of sauce and spaghetti. Del Conte adds a dollop of tomato puree for good measure, but my testers find her recipe a little rich. It turns out you can have too much of a good thing, as is also confirmed by the Serious Eats sauce, simmered low and slow in the oven for five to six hours, until it’s jammy and thick in the Italian-American “red sauce” style. Both are utterly delicious, but prove too much in such a simple dish – they cry out to be balanced by meat and/or vegetables rather than pasta alone. On the cooking process, whichshould take about 40 minutes depending on your tomatoes, Rachel Roddy’s mother-in-law, Carmela, has some good advice in Roddy’s Two Kitchens: “The sauce should cook at a gentle simmer that has you peering under the pan to see if the flame has gone out, until a red burp on the surface reassures you that all is well.” The recipes I try fall into two camps: those seasoned with garlic and chilli, which feels like a more southern style (though I am willing to be corrected on that) and those that start with the traditional soffrito base of onion, celery and carrot, either sauteed until soft, as in Del Conte’s sauce and the Caldesis’ Roman version, or chucked straight in with everything else (and then, in López-Alt’s case, removed before serving). Certainly, as Boswell and Sarah Grueneberg’s sauces show, you can make a perfectly delicious sugo di pomodoro with nothing more than tomatoes, oil and garlic, but testers find them a little acidic when tasted side by side with the rest – nothing that couldn’t be solved with a pinch of sugar, of course (and if it’s good enough for Del Conte, it’s good enough for me). But if you’re willing to spend 10 more minutes at the stove, harnessing the sweetness of carrots and onions (preferably red, as Galletto recommends in The Art of Pasta) feels preferable. You can never have too many vegetables, after all. The aforementioned chilli is very much an optional extra: most of the veg-heavier recipes, with the exception of López-Alt’s, don’t include it, but I rather like a little heat in such a plain dish. Herbs are, in my opinion anyway, non-negotiable: peppery parsley proves marginally more popular with the simple garlic and chilli sauces, while sweeter basil is a clear winner with the others. López-Alt’s dried oregano is, as he notes, “an indispensable element of a good Italian-American red sauce”, but comes across as a bit strident in this simpler version. The same goes for Del Conte’s red wine, and the pork fat and meat stock in the Caldesis’ finto (or fake) meat sauce. Both would make excellent bases for other dishes, but are too rich for a simple pasta al pomodoro. The fat, whether lard, butter or oil, is an important ingredient in itself: Del Conte’s recipe contains two tablespoons of butter and four of oil for three to four helpings, In The Geometry of Pasta, Caz Hildebrand and Jacob Kenedy say their rich tomato sauce is ready when “the [five tablespoons of] oil has all risen to the top”. Testers go for the slightly lighter versions, but a certain amount of oil (my preference here) is necessary to give the sauce body. Last, but certainly not least, for a smooth sauce such as this, the experts recommend spaghetti, though richer, thicker sauces such as Del Conte’s can take shorter shapes like macaroni or penne. I recommend taking a tip from Boswell and Grueneberg, and finishing the pasta in the sauce itself, allowing it to absorb some of the tomato flavour and thicken the sauce in the process. (This doesn’t mean you can’t prepare the sauce in advance, of course – it’s a useful thing to have in the fridge. Just reheat it and add the parboiled pasta as below.) Serve with extra basil and a generous dusting of grated parmesan, grana padano or pecorino, as suits your taste and budget – or forked straight from the pan as it is. It really is that good. Prep 5 min Cook 50 min Serves 4 1 medium carrot, washed 1 stick celery 1 red onion, peeled 4 tbsp extra-virgin olive oil, plus a little extra to serve 2 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed 1 tsp chilli flakes (optional) 2 x 400g tins whole plum tomatoes, preferably San Marzano 2 sprigs fresh basil, plus extra to serve 320-400g spaghetti, depending on if it’s a first or main course Chop the carrot, celery and onion into very small cubes (a food processor is the easiest way to do this, but be careful not to reduce it to a mush – to avoid this, start with the carrot, then add the celery and onion once it’s roughly chopped). Heat the oil in a wide, deep, heavy-based pan (it needs to be big enough to hold the pasta, too) over a medium flame, then saute the vegetables until soft, but not brown. Stir in the garlic and chilli, if using, and cook for another minute or so. Roughly mash, chop or squish the tomatoes into the pan along with their juice and the basil, and bring to a simmer. Turn down the heat until only the odd bubble rises to the surface, and cook for about 40 minutes, until thick. Turn off the heat, remove the basil and discard, then whizz with a stick blender until smooth, bearing in mind it will be hot. Season to taste and bring back to a simmer. Cook the pasta in a large pan of boiling salted water for about six minutes, until bendy, but still chalky in the middle. Drain well, reserving a cup of the cooking water, and transfer to the pureed sauce. Stir in and cook for another six to eight minutes, or until done to your liking, tossing regularly to make sure it doesn’t stick and adding a splash of the reserved cooking water if the sauce gets too thick. Divide between bowls and serve with a dash of extra oil, a scattering of basil leaves and some grated cheese. • Pasta al pomodoro: is there a simpler, more delicious dish in the Italian repertoire, or do you prefer it with meat or extra veg? Are you a garlic and chilli or soffrito and red wine person, and what else should I do with my happy surplus of sugo di pomodoro?