Plenty of comics critique Donald Trump. Few until now have been greeted with cries of “Run for president!”. Such is the stature of tonight’s American headliners, Dave Chappelle and – the president-not-quite-elect in question – Jon Stewart. I’m not sure this level of reverence is ideal for comedy. But – give or take a self-mythologising moment, most of them in the post-show Q&A – Chappelle and Stewart keep it at arm’s length, delivering strong sets about the state of their nation, with peppy support from compatriots Mo Amer and Michelle Wolf. There certainly is a statesmanlike quality to Stewart’s 40 minutes, which prove he’s got standup chops while staying resolutely on left-liberal message. It’s textbook stuff, starting with jokes about how he looks (“Jews age like avocados”) then broaching one by one the racism, sexism and gun violence that exercise his Daily Show fanbase. Some jokes are old hat, such as the one about Leviticus, homophobia and shellfish, or the one about Obama’s un-American name. (Stewart argues persuasively that Obama’s, not Trump’s, was the anomalous presidency in US history.) Some are neatly done, like the switchback that makes a mockery of the safeguards around buying firearms. The strongest section simply gives Trump enough rope to hang himself (again), as Stewart coolly narrates the tale of his own presidential Twitter spat, when Trump accused the comic (real name Jonathan Leibowitz) of obscuring his Jewish heritage. A final section finds Stewart celebrating that heritage – albeit regretting its limited appeal to his kids, when compared with his wife’s chocolate-eggs-and-Christmas-presents Christianity. Two years ago, Chappelle called for Trump to be given the chance to prove himself – a statement he defends tonight. His set (introduced by Naomi Campbell, of all people) barely addresses the presidency, and takes the evening into more contentious territory than Stewart’s. As ever, it’s racially charged, as Chappelle jokes from a rich black man’s perspective about school shootings and opioid abuse as white people’s business. The sleight of hand is in aping mainstream attitudes to black social problems, and requires Chappelle to affect indifference to the suffering of whites – which he does with glee. On gun violence, too, Chappelle is wickedly sharp – “there’s no peaceful way to disarm these whites”, he deadpans – before volunteering a brilliantly mischievous solution to the problem. At its best, his material plays havoc with your moral radar while illuminating unspoken truths about American life. Elsewhere, his section on a Chuck Berry sex tape – while still showcasing Chappelle’s exemplary control of tone, timing and his audience – feels crude by comparison. A closing section on #MeToo – specifically, on how it excludes black women – is as much sermon as comedy, from an act whose material on gender is not always as authoritative as his material on race. But it remains a fine show, with Chappelle, Stewart and the excellent Wolf – whose gag about JFK, #MeToo and “dodging a bullet” is a highlight – delivering big, rich, sometimes complex laughs at America’s expense. • At the Royal Albert Hall, London, until 22 October This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.