It’s hard to find a compelling argument against drinking wine with your breakfast, although writing this a little bit drunk, as I am now, is one. In the past few weeks, a movement of pairing wine with “unusual things” has been doing the rounds online. One beauty site suggested pairings for wine and face masks – say, a clarifying clay with a verdant white – although the trend’s most accessible offshoot, which comes from New York magazine, is about pairing wines with breakfast sandwiches. It’s less about getting smashed and more about expanding your vinic horizons. Or, in my case, having a negligible amount of riesling with some heavily salted avocado on toast and seeing how the day unfolds. The easiest way to try this out without getting sacked is to not drink too much, or do it on holiday. But where to start? Jade Koch, wine supplier to London’s award-winning pasta restaurant Trullo, offers some hard-and-fast rules: “You want to pair something acidic with something fatty, like a sparkling wine with a fry up. Or something sweet with something salty, like a moscato, which is sweet and low in alcohol, with bacon.” With this in mind, I began looking for something dry, sweet and Greek while on holiday in Crete last week. Vinoteca in London recommend a sweet wine from Samos for breakfast, but I found something far more local, by way of a bribe. One morning, the glass door of the shower smashed in my hands. There was some blood, but mostly panic from the landlord who arrived at the house with a translator and three bottles of wine including a local dry white wine called eklektos. Bandaged and in need of a medicinal brandy, I tried it with a sort of Cretan gouda on toast with basil. The mix of light, sweet cheese with the saline minerality of the wine at 9am blindsided me. The trend started to make sense. Putting social mores to one side, and provided you’re not driving, there’s no reason why you shouldn’t try wine in the morning. After all, your palate is cleaner and it gives you a little pep. Plus morning booze has a curious history. In the modern world, we have mimosas and bloody marys. During the 1890s, soldiers in the British army would spike the tea of lower ranks with rum to give them courage; they called it “gunfire”. Breakfast wine probably sits somewhere between the two. The wine writer Henry Jeffrey offers further suggestions: champagne, for the acidity (“although it can be a bit much on just-brushed teeth”); an off-dry German riesling that is low in alcohol (“good if you need a clear head”); and vinho verde. His personal favourite, however, is a cold glass of fino sherry. “It is quite strong, though, 15%, so remember the old Jerezano saying on morning drinking: ‘One before 11 and 11 before one.’”