Best performance? The chant of “We’ve got our Arsenal back” during the 5-1 flaying of Fulham summed up the season so far. Will we see a better team goal than the skilful combination that ended with Ramsey scoring our third? And the worst? It’s churlish to pick one after nine wins on the bounce – but that 3-2 defeat to Sarri’s Chelsea back in August was disappointing. We failed to capitalise on a rare opportunity to come away from Stamford Bridge with our tails up, instead of between our legs. Happy with the manager? We’re one win away from the top: there are few complaints. But it still feels as if Unai is spinning the wheel of both team selection and formation as he looks for the ideal chemistry. Why I love … Lucas Torreira The intensity that the Uruguayan lends to our midfield is what we have lacked for far too long. How is the atmosphere? After the infighting of recent seasons, things are picking up. There’s more patience, and some nice songs, too. “He comes from Uruguay, he’s only five-foot high, Torreira …” What is “the Arsenal way”? Under Wenger we relied on outscoring the opposition. Hopefully now we can find a balance between George Graham’s pragmatism and Arsène’s romanticism. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? McLintock or Adams. A genuine leader. Funniest moment so far … The ongoing travails with the construction of The Toilet Seat at the wrong end of the Seven Sisters Road. • Bernard Azulay GoonersDiary.co.uk @GoonerN5 Best performance? 4-0 at Watford. We looked so solid at the back, and it was great to see both Callum Wilson and Joshua King among the goals. And the worst? The 0-4 at Burnley. A proper walloping. We chased the game but left far too many gaps at the back. Happy with the manager? Of course – we’re flying. Eddie has made his best start to a Premier League season. Why I love … Ryan Fraser He’s improved every season he has been here and really looks to be enjoying himself now, chipping in with some neat assists and great goals. He’s fast and tricky, and resilient – he’s always being fouled but bounces back. How is the atmosphere? Excellent – fans are really excited about what’s happening. I was also impressed by the Cardiff away crowd: they kept singing despite their defeat. One consolation for them: they got to see a fine young Welsh talent in Bournemouth’s David Brooks … What is “the Bournemouth way”? “We play from the back with pace in attack,” so our song goes. The passing has become quicker, though, and the creative play is exceptional at times. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Former captain Tommy Elphick. We never had a chance to say goodbye to him. It would be great just to see him do his pre-match routine one more time. Funniest moment so far … Was in the Carabao Cup against Blackburn: Derrick Williams, chased down by Callum Wilson, slipping over and picking the ball up in the process. The ref showed him a straight red. • Peter Bell AFCBchimes.blogspot.co.uk @CherryChimes Best performance? Beating Man United 3-2 at the Amex in August despite fielding pretty much the same team that were so dreadful at Watford on the opening weekend. We went at them right from the start, were 3-1 up at half-time. It was bedlam in the stands and great to see Anthony Knockaert back to his scurrying, magical best. And the worst? That defeat at Watford. We were awful. After all the hype in the summer, the only new player who started was Bernardo. It was such a disappointment – and Bruno went off injured after 20 minutes. A horrible day. Happy with the manager? Hughton’s caution is often questioned but after the win over United the frustration at seeing record signings on the bench reduced. He is managing the difficult job of integrating new players well. Why I love … Glenn Murray Five goals, 35 years old, intelligent, adaptable, likes to walk his dog before matches. How can you not adore him? How is the atmosphere? It’s become known as Fortress Amex and there’s a real buzz around the ground, though it can be more tense than last season. The best song was telling Manchester United fans: “Just like Brighton, your city is blue.” What is “the Brighton way”? Never giving up. The players know what the city went through to keep the club alive after the Goldstone was sold and they are battlers too, coming back to draw after being two goals down at home to Fulham and away at Southampton. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? It’d be great to have Iñigo Calderón back working alongside Liam Rosenior and Steve Sidwell. Characters who put so much into getting us into the division. Funniest moment so far … Glenn Murray’s goals. He cost us £3.15m, while Christian Benteke (0 goals) cost Palace £27m, Olivier Giroud (0 goals) cost Chelsea £18m, and Alexis Sánchez (one goal) earns £400k a week. • Steph Fincham Observer reader Best performance? The 4-0 home win against Bournemouth. Everything fell into place in what was our biggest top-flight win since 1970. We went into it on the back of four successive defeats in the league. It was just what was needed. And the worst? The 1-0 defeat at Wolves. It would have been a hammering if Wolves had taken their chances. As bad as we’ve been in some time. Happy with the manager? For the first time he’s come in for some criticism but we’ve had key players injured. What he should have done was force through more signings in the last window – but was that his fault? Why I love … Steven Defour He’s not played since January and we’ve missed him terribly. He makes such a difference in midfield. How is the atmosphere? Not so good, to be honest. Probably the best was against Aberdeen in the Europa League. That said, Kevin Long has got his own chant now, to the tune of Baby Shark. What is “the Burnley way”? Minimum requirement: maximum effort. The poor results were nothing to do with a lack of effort, so we’re living up to that. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? The former chairman Bob Lord. I’d love to see how he’d have coped with the saturation televising of games, huge wages and fan involvement. And he’d probably ban the internet in Burnley. Funniest moment so far … Watching José Mourinho’s personal soap opera. Very enjoyable. • Tony Scholes UpTheClarets.com @UTCdotcom Best performance? Outsiders say we’re agricultural, out of our depth – but we created more than enough against Burnley to have won that one. We’ve shown we can compete with half a dozen other teams to avoid relegation. And the worst? The 5-0 defeat at home to Manchester City was the most demoralising in a long time. Other teams have lost by more than five to City, but on a soaking, miserable day in Cardiff it was hard to watch our side being so timid. Happy with the manager? The Premier League isn’t Neil Warnock’s league. He knows what he does best, and that’s battle in the Championship. He’s struggling but I think he’s being prudent and realistic rather than buying players he might not be able to work with. Why I love … Harry Arter Passion and quality in every performance. How is the atmosphere? Great, despite not winning a game yet. The fans make a constant noise – admittedly it’s mostly one tune, but it’s loud. We back the team for 90 minutes. What is “the Cardiff way”? It’s currently the Warnock way: direct, long ball, rough-house. But it’s not always like that. The team have played some decent football and the passion is still strong. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? A striker, any striker. An on-form Robert Earnshaw or Michael Chopra. Funniest moment so far … Newcastle’s Kenedy missing a last-gasp penalty against us. But there’s not been a lot else to smile about. The fans are trying to enjoy it, having great days out – but with all the defeats it’s hard to feel anything other than a little bit down. • Michael Morris CardiffCity-mad.co.uk @cardiffcitymad Best performance? It’d be easy to say the one against Cardiff, but there aren’t many teams in the league who haven’t had a game like that against Cardiff. So I’ll nominate the league game against Liverpool. After so many meetings between these sides boring the bejesus out of everyone up and down the country, this was a very different beast. And the worst? West Ham at the London Stadium. The opposite to everything the Liverpool game was. We dominated, Jorginho got himself into the records for a pass every 30 seconds, but it led to a whole lot of nothing. And for all the possession, it was West Ham who arguably had the best chances. Happy with the manager? Jürgen Klopp said he’d never seen a team adapt to a new style of football so fast as Chelsea had under Sarri. The players are moving the ball around quickly and enjoying themselves again. He needs to change that tracksuit, though. If he doesn’t fancy sharp dressing, maybe he’d consider wearing something that at least fits. Why I love … Eden Hazard There aren’t enough words on this website to fully convey why, and how much, I love that little Belgian. Sarri has released the shackles, and just about every team Eden’s faced so far has fallen victim to extraordinary skill. How is the atmosphere? Markedly improved. It all got a bit dour in Antonio Conte’s second season: he wasn’t happy, his players weren’t happy and no matter the result the fans weren’t happy. After that the fans were primed for Sarri-ball to bring out the best in everyone. What is “the Chelsea way”? Absolute resilience and the ability to constantly and consistently bounce back from any obstacle that would prove an end game for other sides. John Terry always embodied this ethos. The more vitriol directed at him from opposition the stronger he would be come. He was able to channel negatives into positives. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Imagine the damage that Eden Hazard and Gianfranco Zola could have done if they’d ever been able to join forces. So either him or John Terry, a born winner who inspired everyone he played with. (OK – apart from Wayne Bridge.) Funniest moment so far … Some of Mourinho’s interviews have been classics: tossing Phil Jones and Eric Bailly under the bus after the Carabao Cup exit to Derby was impressive even by his standards. But Antonio Rüdiger slapping a Paok defender for holding his shirt was great – and worth the booking. • Trizia Fiorellino ChelseaSupportersGroup.net Best performance? The opener against Fulham. We held our nerve against a spirited promoted team, were clinical in front of goal and controlled the second half. It’s been downhill ever since. And the worst? Southampton at home. The Saints were awful but we somehow contrived to lose it. We haven’t scored once at home yet. Happy with the manager? Roy’s reluctance to use subs has increasingly wound up the fans – but worse is his continued reluctance to start our most technically gifted midfielder, Max Meyer. He played against Bournemouth, did well, and was then inexplicably dropped. Why I love … Aaron Wan-Bissaka Just 20 years old with 16 Premier League games under his belt, the academy graduate right-back will be playing for England soon, no doubt about it. How is the atmosphere? Dire. The dispute between the club and the Holmesdale Fanatics has been well reported, and though a solution has been reached for next season, it seems there’s no way of sorting it out in the short-term. Many believe the flat atmosphere has contributed to our poor home performances so far. What is “the Palace way”? Bringing academy talent into the first-team, and playing attacking football in an intimidating atmosphere. Currently, we’re a long way from that. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Andy Johnson. Pace up front, with a natural eye for goal: something we’ve missed horribly in the past 15 months. Funniest moment so far … A Fulham fan with a plastic clapper gesticulating at the Palace away support while pointing to his Liverpool v Real Madrid Champions League final T-shirt. So wrong, on so many levels. • Chris Waters PalaceTrust.org.uk @Clapham_Grand Best performance? Leicester away. We played really well, with Richarlison, Sigurdsson, Walcott and Bernard all on fire, carving out chances. We could have scored more but Gylfi’s strike was a proper goal-of-the-season contender. And the worst? Losing to Southampton in the Carabao Cup on penalties. It was a realistic chance to win a trophy, and even with seven changes we should have beaten them. Happy with the manager? Silva wants to play the right way. It will take time for him to get his ideas over to the players but it’s been a good start. Why I love … Gylfi Sigurdsson He appears in all the charts of top assist providers, passers, scorers, most ground covered – and he scores wonder goals from outside the box. How is the atmosphere? Same as always: good when you win, poor when you lose. I’m enjoying the Joy Division tribute “Bernard will tear you apart again” chant. What is “the Everton way”? Hard graft and attractive, attacking, dynamic football – something Sam Allardyce definitely never grasped. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Alan Ball. The World Cup winner was perpetual motion, the first player to wear white boots, a great character, and coined the phrase: “Once Everton has touched you, nothing will be the same.” Funniest moment so far … Seeing Kurt Zouma (6’3”) hug Bernard (5’5”) during the win at Leicester. • Steve Jones @BlueKippercom Best performance? Believe it or not, the first half against Arsenal is a contender, despite how the game ended up. But the single best show was against Burnley. Seri’s opener was a peach and, with Mitro netting two, it seemed we’d turned the corner. Apparently not. And the worst? That second half against Arsenal. Happy with the manager? He’s done reasonably well given the injury list and the big influx of players. But does he know his best XI? And has he had the chance to field it as yet? Stability isn’t a watchword at the Cottage right now; crack that and we’ve got a chance. But why take off Ream against the Gunners, Slav? Why I love … Aleksandar Mitrovic With all the chopping and changing, he’s been one of the few constants. Given how many are flying in at the other end, we need the big Serb to remain upbeat. How is the atmosphere? Understandably understated. There’s much bemusement given the huge financial outlay and the associated expectation levels. What is “the Fulham way?” Solid and successful under Hodgson; attack-minded and successful under Jokanovic. A fusion of the two styles would serve us well just now. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Brede Hangeland and Aaron Hughes. A phenomenal centre-back pairing made partly in heaven but mostly on the training ground. Funniest moment so far … We’re 3-1 down against Arsenal and the guy behind me, who’s been loudly bemoaning all and sundry from the very first whistle, offers this nugget: “Just look at the body language out there. It’s all so negative.” • David Lloyd Toofif.co.uk Best performance? A hard one: we haven’t won a single game so far … I’d go with Palace at home, though: we were desperately unlucky not to get anything. And the worst? The 6-1 defeat to Manchester City wasn’t great – but the 3-1 loss at Leicester trumped that. Town were utterly gutless, making a string of Sunday league errors. Happy with the manager? Wagner started the season all wrong – far too defensive and way too conservative against the better teams. More recently he’s gone back to basics and got the team playing with Terrier spirit again. Why I love … Christopher Schindler He scored the penalty that took us up and has done everything possible to keep us up since. He’s calm, composed and confident, and would make an excellent signing for a top six side. How is the atmosphere? It’s always good, thanks to the Cowshed Loyal. Wagner always mentions the impact that the fans can have on the team, and we’re giving it our all. As for away fans … the best so far were Palace – but the majority of Premier League fans are deathly silent. What is “the Huddersfield way”? High-pressing, full-throttle football. In the last six months we lost that identity somewhat, but it’s on the way back. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Denis Law would sort out our troubles up front, as would Jordan Rhodes at his peak. He was prolific at Huddersfield: we need that scoring instinct. Funniest moment so far … A personal one, this. I know a lot of Spurs fans, so it was amusing to see their uproar about Barcelona’s perceived play-acting, coming just a few days after we’d all seen Harry Kane and Danny Rose throw themselves around the John Smith’s. • John McNamara TerrierBlog.co.uk @TerrierBlog • Part 2: Leicester to Wolves