Is it time that women’s cycling got the message? As Christian Prudhomme announced “the highest Tour in history”, there was scant coverage of La Course and no mention of a women’s Tour de France. Gone is the mountain-top finish of last year’s race to Le Grand-Bornand or the quirky two-day pursuit format of the 2017 race. The race next year – a one-day, 120km event – will not show off women’s cycling in the spectacular theatre of the Champs-Élysées either, preferring a circuit race on the hilly route of the men’s time-trial course around Pau. Designed to test the legs of the puncheurs – those riders who can launch a stinging attack and punch time into the peloton over rolling terrain – the route will showcase a different type of rider on the stinging slopes of the Côte d’Esquillot, a potential springboard to overall race victory. Prudhomme clearly wants to give every style of rider a crack of the whip. But why not simply put together a two- or three-week stage race that lets the sprinteurs, puncheurs, baroudeurs and grimpeurs all have their day? When the Women’s World Tour schedule was released in June, La Course was pencilled in for 23 July. That date avoids a conflict with two of the biggest women’s stage races: the Emakumeen Bira raced over four days in the Basque Country, and Italy’s Giro Rosa, currently the closest thing the women’s peloton have to a Grand Tour. But by 23 July, the Tour de France will have moved from Pau to Nîmes. That makes it more likely that La Course will be rescheduled to 19 June, just five days after the end of the Giro Rosa. Otherwise ASO will face a huge logistical headache, with the men’s and women’s peloton racing 500km apart. Even if the dates eventually align, the women’s race will be expected to clear the roads by midday to let the men’s time-trial run its course. It’s a depressing if all-too-familiar story. In the year when the UCI announced reforms designed to professionalise the women’s sport and place it on an equal footing with men’s cycling, the commitment to a full-scale women’s Tour de France is reduced to vague promises. Gone are the glory days of the Tour de France Féminin, when the women’s peloton raced for 18 stages to the same finish lines in front of the same tumultuous and adoring crowds as the men. Catherine Swinnerton rode the second edition of the race, in 1985, losing on the Champs-Élysées by a sigh to French rider Dominique Damiani, with Jeannie Longo a distant third. Swinnerton, who finished the race 27th out of 64 riders in the days before lottery funding took British women to the top of the sport, says it was one of the most amazing experiences of her career. “I was so excited it was finished and I jumped away on the Champs-Élysées. I know it’s nothing compared with what the girls do now but for me it was amazing and the crowd were fantastic.” For all the advances the women’s sport has made, it seems a retrograde step not to piggyback a women’s race on the back of the Tour de France. Viewing figures for the men’s race fell last year due to the football World Cup and the Chris Froome affair, yet La Course was a thriller, with 2017 winner Annemiek van Vleuten catching and beating fellow Dutch rider Anna van der Breggen on the line after a brutal day in the Alps. The race highlighted the panache and attack of women’s cycling. That Van Vleuten wasn’t granted a press conference appeared symptomatic of a lack of will to make a women’s Grand Tour happen or to acknowledge the power of women’s racing to delight and entertain in a way that men’s cycling often fails to do. As South African cyclist Ashleigh Moolman put it: “Men’s cycling is getting criticism for being boring and monotonous and repetitive. Right now we have an opportunity to take advantage and show that we’re more exciting to watch.” On the route presentation on Thursday, La Course even struggled to match the attention given to a group of amateur riders. Donnons des elles au velo J-1 – a group whose name is a play on words around giving women’s cycling wings – have ridden the Tour de France route a day before the men every year since 2015. Their endeavours show that women can tackle the rigours of the entire route with ease. It’s a laudable exercise that raises awareness, but why not just let the professional women’s peloton have their own Tour de France? • This article is from the Guardian Sport Network• Follow Suze Clemitson on Twitter