“Love your neighbour as yourself.” [Leviticus 19:18]. “Do unto others as you would have them do unto you.” [Matthew 7:12]. “Wish for your brother, what you wish for yourself.” [Quran, Surah 24, “The Light”, v22]. “What goes around, comes all the way back around.” [Justin Timberlake]. Say what you like about religion/Justin Timberlake, they all seem to agree on one thing: be nice to people and they’ll be nice back. It’s a good set of morals to live by. And it’s an even better idea for a TV show. Earl Hickey is a small-time, small-town criminal. One day, he wins $100,000 on a scratchcard, gets hit by a car and loses the ticket. After learning about karma from hospital TV, he makes a list of all his crimes, preparing to make amends. While attending to his first good deed, “number 136, been a litterbug”, he picks up some litter and – blow me! – he only finds his winning scratchcard. Karma, innit? Earl now has a $100,000 budget to make good the 277 entries on his naughty list, in no particular order, convinced that if he doesn’t karma will kill him first. What was so great about My Name Is Earl was how likable the characters were. There is Earl himself (Jason Lee), happy-go-lucky but philanthropic. There’s childlike – “The doctors always said you were borderline ‘artistic’” – yet perceptive younger brother Randy (snigger), who still shares a bed with Earl in the motel room they rent. There’s antagonistic yet empathic ex-wife Joy. There’s Joy’s new husband Darnell, chilled out but living a double life. There’s Catalina the fiery Latin American housekeeper. And there’s Earl’s angry dad, Carl, who fails to believe Earl is really trying to mend his ways at all. We meet the unlikely characters who Earl has wronged. Kenny, the closet homosexual whom Earl used to bully. The girl with one leg whom Earl stole a car from. The guy Earl robbed for $1,000 at a gas station. Every episode wraps up with a little “what we learned” bedtime banter between Earl and Randy before they switch off the lights. “Night, Earl.” “Night, Randy.” No one sniggers. As Earl continued to cross misdemeanours off his yellow list, My Name Is Earl felt silly but heart-warmingly charming. Then came the rubbish third series. Earl is now in prison after taking the heat for his ex-wife Joy stealing a truck, and it’s at this point My Name Is Earl commits ultimate sitcom suicide. Earl is released from prison, gives up on karma, gets hit by a – wait for it – second car, goes into a coma, and IMAGINES HIS LIFE IS A SITCOM, complete with opening credits, cheesy laughter track, and all the characters from actual Earl weaved into the new sitcom narrative. If you haven’t seen it, you’ve mentally unseries-linked already, right? My Name Is Earl was cancelled halfway through the fourth series, so we don’t even know what happened next. Maybe he gets hit by a third car, has another eureka moment, ditches karma for crime again and spends series five to eight going round robbing everyone he’s helped. Then gets hit by a fourth car and … Well, some things are best left for dead.