Great Britain will host a home Fed Cup tie for the first time in more than 25 years in 2019, it was confirmed on Tuesday. The round-robin at Bath University from 6 to 9 February will be part of the Europe/Africa Group One zonal event shared with Poland and will feature some of the biggest names in tennis from eight countries. The winner of each tie will go into the World Group Two play-offs in April. The British captain, Anne Keothavong, who played in several of the 15 ties abroad since the last home fixture in Nottingham in 1993, said the ITF’s decision will give the women’s game a significant boost, much as the Davis Cup ties in Glasgow, Birmingham and at Queen’s have done for the men’s team. “We are absolutely delighted at the prospect of playing at home for the first time in 25 years,” she said. “This will give us a platform to show everyone what Fed Cup is all about and the passion the players have for the competition. I’m hoping we can replicate the support our Davis Cup team gets and that seeing our players perform up close will inspire the next generation of kids to get out there and pick up a racket.” Scott Lloyd, the LTA chief executive, added: “I’m thrilled that the ITF have awarded us the opportunity to co-host the Europe/Africa Zone Group I stage. Staging this Fed Cup tie forms a key part of our new strategy to open up tennis, showcasing our women’s team and bringing world-class tennis to existing and new British fans.” It is slightly disappointing the venue, on indoor hard courts, holds no more than 2,000 and a TV contract is yet to be finalised, although negotiations are under way with the BBC. Nevertheless, the home tie will give British fans a rare chance to see Johanna Konta, Katie Swan, Katie Boulter, Harriet Dart and Gabriella Taylor in a team setting. When Great Britain played at home a quarter of a century ago, the squad of Jo Durie, Clare Wood, Monique Javer and Julie Salmon did not lose once in 15 matches against Luxembourg, Lithuania, Russia, Ukraine and Turkey.