Parliament needs a “seismic shift” to change a culture of “deference and silence” which has enabled bullying and sexual harassment, a QC-led inquiry into the House of Commons workplace culture has said. The inquiry by Dame Laura Cox, prompted by allegations of bullying against the Speaker, John Bercow, said there was a culture in parliament which “actively sought to cover up abusive conduct” and gave no protection to those reporting bullying or harassment. Parliament is “diminished” by the unacceptable behaviour of some, she said. Cox, a QC who served as a judge from 2002 until she retired in 2016, was not tasked with responding to individual complaints, including those made against Bercow. However, she said many of the complaints she had heard during the course of her inquiry were “disturbing” and that staff “were not people set on revenge or out to malign either individuals or the reputation of the House itself”. She found there was a lack of faith among staff in parliament that a new complaints procedure would tackle the culture. “Members of Parliament are elected representatives, but their mandate does not entitle them to bully or harass those who are employed in the House to support and assist them,” she said in her report. Amongst current and former staff there is “an obvious pride and affection for the House and its status,” she said. “But that sense of loyalty has been tested to breaking point by a culture, cascading from the top down, of deference, subservience, acquiescence and silence, in which bullying, harassment and sexual harassment have been able to thrive and have long been tolerated and concealed.” The investigation was announced by Andrea Leadsom in March to examine the nature and extent of bullying and harassment in parliament, including how complaints have been handled, and how procedures can be improved. Staff and former staff were invited to submit their experiences confidentially in person or in writing. The investigation was prompted by a BBC Newsnight investigation into bullying claims made against the Speaker, John Bercow. Bercow has emphatically denied allegations that he bullied his former private secretaries Angus Sinclair and Kate Emms. Sinclair told BBC’s Newsnight that Bercow had undermined him in front of other staff, shouted, swore and attempted to physically intimidate him. His successor, Emms, served as Bercow’s private secretary from May 2010 to February 2011. Newsnight reported Bercow frequently shouted at her, and she was subsequently diagnosed with post-traumatic stress disorder. David Leakey, who stepped down last year as Black Rod, a ceremonial post in parliament, told Newsnight he had experienced the outbursts of temper described by other former members of Bercow’s staff. Bercow, who has been Speaker since 2009, said before he took the post he would resign after no longer than nine years – meaning 22 June of this year would be his departure date. However, he has signalled he may stay in post for another year, after he was re-elected in 2017 due to the snap election.