Étienne Capoue can be a frustrating player at times. He has real quality, which he showed occasionally in his unsuccessful spell at Tottenham, but this is his longest run of consistently strong performances in the Premier League. He has forged a solid midfield partnership with Abdoulaye Doucouré at Watford and has even overshadowed his fellow Frenchman, the club’s player of last season. Capoue’s total of 53 tackles and interceptions is second only to Idrissa Gueye (54) in the league this season and, having fallen out of favour under Marco Silva, he is now among the first names on Javi Gracia’s teamsheet. Rating: 7.13, up 0.38 on last season. Glenn Murray turned 35 last month but his form is not deteriorating in the twilight years of a career spent predominantly outside of the top flight. In fact, the Brighton striker has reacclimatised to the Premier League since the turn of the year. He finished last season with 12 goals and has already scored five in eight appearances this season. The veteran is the top-scoring player aged 33 and over in Europe’s top five leagues – a group that contains Cristiano Ronaldo (who has scored four goals for Juventus) – and he remains Chris Hughton’s go-to guy up front for good reason. Rating: 6.98, up 0.39 on last season. On the subject of players who seem to be defying their age, James Milner has proven indispensable to Jürgen Klopp this season. Summer signing Fabinho hasn’t had a look in and even Naby Keïta has fallen by the wayside in recent weeks as the versatile 32-year-old refuses to give up on a regular starting place at Liverpool. Milner has started seven of Liverpool’s eight league matches this season, all in his preferred central midfield position, and his fitness levels continue to put many younger players to shame. Rating: 7.17, up 0.39 on last season. Yet another experienced player, José Holebas has fought off competition from new arrival Adam Masina to remain an ever present for Watford. The 34-year-old is getting forward to support attacks more now than ever. His tally of four assists this season already matches his total from each of the previous two campaigns and is as many as any other player in the league. Rating: 7.19, up 0.43 on last season. If his debut season at City was one of patient integration, this already looks like being Silva’s breakthrough campaign in England. The natural successor to club legend and namesake David, who certainly isn’t ready to relinquish a place in the side yet, the Portuguese playmaker has undoubtedly profited from injury to Kevin De Bruyne so it will be interesting to see what role the 24-year-old plays when De Bruyne returns. Rating: 7.25, up .46 on last season. Without question the star performer so far this season, Eden Hazard became the first player in Europe’s top five leagues to reach double figures for goals (seven) and assists (three) combined – despite making his first two appearances of the season as a substitute following his late return from an outstanding World Cup as Belgium captain. The top scorer in the Premier League this season, finding the net every 82 minutes on average, Hazard also leads the way for dribbles once more (22). Rating: 8.15, up 0.46 on last season. Bournemouth’s fine start to the season began with Ryan Fraser’s goal on the opening day against Cardiff and the young Scot hasn’t let his form slip since, starting all eight games and having a direct hand in six goals. That’s just two shy of his tally of eight from last season (when he scored five and set up three). The winger has created more clear-cut chances (eight) than any other player in the league. Rating 7.21, up 0.50 on last season. Much like Capoue, Watford captain Troy Deeney did not always see eye to eye with former coach Marco Silva but Javi Gracia has made a point of making the fan favourite a regular once more. Deeney has played all but one minute of the league campaign so far and, while tallies of two goals and one assist may be modest, he plays a pivotal role in bringing those around him into the game. He has won 6.1 aerial duels per game, which puts him among the top five players in the league, and none of his teammates has created more chances from open play (10). Rating 7.19, up 0.57 on last season. Gylfi Sigurdsson had an underwhelming debut campaign at Everton last season, in admittedly difficult circumstances, but the club are getting their money’s worth this time around. Forced to play out of position on the left all too often under Ronald Koeman and Sam Allardyce, the Iceland international is now flourishing in his favoured role behind the striker following the arrivals of Marco Silva and, pertinently, Richarlison. The playmaker’s figures for key passes per game have more than doubled (from 1.4 to 2.9) and he has already scored some trademark stunners this season, with four goals in eight games enough to match last season’s total from 27 matches. Rating: 7.52, up 0.62 on last season. England didn’t need more firepower against Spain on Monday night, but Callum Wilson is one player who could consider himself unlucky to be overlooked for Gareth Southgate’s latest squad. The Bournemouth striker looks sharper than ever after a number of serious injuries and, while his return of three goals may be modest, his hold-up play and ability to pick out teammates has been key to Bournemouth’s fast start. The 26-year-old’s understanding with Josh King up front is crucial to Bournemouth, and Wilson is one of six players tied on four assists in the Premier League this season, with only Hazard (10) having had a direct hand in more goals so far. Rating: 7.27, up .73 on last season. Lewis Dunk, Brighton: 6.27, down 0.74 on last seasonChristopher Schindler, Huddersfield: 6.50, down 0.61Jordan Pickford, Everton: 6.12, down 0.51Wilfried Zaha, Crystal Palace: 6.90, down 0.48Florent Hadergjonaj, Huddersfield: 6.06, down 0.45Mousa Dembélé, Tottenham: 6.48, down 0.42Paul Pogba, Manchester United: 7.07, down 0.41Ayoze Pérez, Newcastle: 6.39, down 0.34Abdoulaye Doucouré, Watford: 6.68, down 0.32Mohamed Salah, Liverpool: 7.37, down 0.32 • Follow WhoScored on Twitter and Facebook• Follow Martin Laurence on Twitter