With its soaring mountains, glaciers, tumbling waterfalls, turquoise lakes, and expansive forests, there are few places in the world as spectacularly scenic as Alberta. Home to the Canadian Rockies, the province boasts one of the longest winter sports seasons in the world, stretching, on average, from early November through to May. Come summer, Alberta’s five national parks become the perfect backdrop for everything from wildlife spotting, cycling and rock climbing to rafting and gazing at the stars in one of the region’s dark sky preserves. But beyond the mountains, you’ll find both small-town charm, such as Lake Louise inside Banff National Park, and cosmopolitan buzz in Alberta’s urban hubs, Calgary and Edmonton. Besides the mountains, the province’s other great natural feature is its prairies. Alberta is cowboy country, and that means beef – namely Alberta’s famous AAA beef – is a staple of menus across the province. Head to the Longview Steakhouse, where the setting is casual but the food hearty and high-end, for a quintessentially Albertan experience with valley views. Or dine amid the forest at Tekarra. This log cabin, perched above the Athabasca River near Jasper, has been serving illustrious patrons, including Marilyn Monroe, since 1952. Bread & Circus (top); Jamie Harling, head chef, Deane House; the dining room at Deane House A new star in the contemporary culinary scene is Deane House. Set in a century-old Calgary mansion, dishes focus on seasonal, locally sourced ingredients. Or tuck into the tastiest trattoria-style food at Bread & Circus, nominated as one of Canada’s best new restaurants in 2018. And if you want to buy produce, you’re in luck – Edmontonians love a farmers’ market, with no less than 16 held weekly during the summer. It’s not just the restaurants making the most of locally sourced ingredients; craft beer and spirits are booming, as entrepreneurs also make use of Alberta’s natural larder. Head to the Park Distillery in Banff for the aptly named Glacier Rye whisky, made with glacier water from Banff National Park. The multi-award-winning Eau Claire – makers of Alberta’s first craft single malt whisky – uses ingredients harvested from farms in southern Alberta. Studio Bell, home of the National Music Centre, on Calgary’s Music Mile, and James McMurtry performing at the Ironwood Stage (top); the Unesco world heritage site of Head-Smashed-In Buffalo Jump Edmonton’s nickname as “festival city” is well-earned. No matter the season, there’s a festival in town. The Edmonton International Fringe Festival – the largest, longest running fringe festival in North America – is held each August. Watch the streets of Old Strathcona fill with performers, from circus acts to standup comedians. Calgary, too, is no slouch when it comes to getting into the party spirit – it even has its own Music Mile, a mile-long stretch of 9th Avenue SE bursting with music venues, including the Ironwood Stage and Studio Bell, home of the National Music Centre. But long before there was a city here in Alberta, bison roamed, and First Nations people lived off the land. Take in 6,000 years of plains culture at the evocatively and aptly named Head-Smashed-In Buffalo Jump cliff. The Unesco world heritage site, 14 miles west of Fort Macleod, was an important hunting site for First Nations communities. Today a visitor centre houses prehistoric artefacts and offers tours of the site. Ski in the Rockies (top) – or try horse riding or kayaking A tri-area lift ticket gets you access to Mount Norquay, Lake Louise Ski Resort and Sunshine Village – revered by skiers and boarders worldwide as one of the top places in the world to seek out feather-light snow. For the more adventurous, Fortress Mountain, located on the Kananaskis Trail, 70 miles west of Calgary, offers skiers and riders of intermediate-plus level the chance to go in search of virgin snow. Head to Castle Mountain to go cat-skiing, where you’ll have access to untouched powder so dry and light it’s nicknamed “liquid smoke”. If you’re after a more tranquil experience, take to the water in summer. Rent a canoe or kayak in Banff National Park and explore the waterways of the Bow Valley, including 40 Mile Creek and Vermilion Lakes. Or ride the backcountry mountain trails on horseback, camping out in the wilderness with a riding holiday. Hiking in Larch Valley Alberta’s ski-heaven winters and fine summers may draw the crowds, but make no mistake, one of the best times to visit is autumn. Take a hike up to Larch Valley in late September, starting at the unbelievably photogenic Moraine Lake , to see the trees turn a flaming yellow amid the wisps of the season’s first snow. The two-and-a-half-mile hike will take you from the spectacular turquoise waters backed by the ice-capped Valley of Ten Peaks, up to a high alpine meadow. Then there’s stargazing in Jasper, where you’ll find one of the world’s largest dark sky preserves. Every October, the Dark Sky Festival holds a number of events from symphonies under the stars to rocket building workshops. October brings the Dark Skies Festival; ice sculptures at Lake Louise’s Ice Magic Festival Of course, winter is magical in the Rockies. And that’s not just because of the skiing: stave off the January blues in Banff with the 11-day long Snow Days Festival, centred around massive snow sculptures in downtown Banff. Or head to Lake Louise for the Ice Magic Festival, as international ice-carving teams compete to create giant sculptures on the frozen lake. Discover more adventures throughout the year in Alberta with Canadian Affair