Ryan Giggs had challenged his young team to prove they could cope without Gareth Bale and Aaron Ramsey; Harry Wilson duly offered evidence with a goal that would have made the Real Madrid man proud. The 21-year-old’s beautiful second-half free-kick earned a victory that sent Wales to the top of their Nations League group and condemned the Republic of Ireland to bottom place. It also lit up an otherwise gruelling spectacle that intensified the pressure on Martin O’Neill. The Republic manager was hoping for a vibrant performance that would atone for his team’s sorry 4-1 defeat by Wales last month. He told them to “show you can play, take the game by the scruff of the neck”. They tried but rarely came close. Individuals in green made basic mistakes for which their manager could scarcely be blamed but collectively there seemed to be a haphazardness that did not reflect well on anyone involved with the home team. “I’m delighted with the endeavour but endeavour alone is not enough. We lacked a little bit of quality,” said O’Neill, who insisted he can lead the Irish to qualification for Euro 2020, especially if players such as Seamus Coleman and Robbie Brady return from injuries, adding that he continually reviews his abilities and remains convinced he will plot a successful path forward. “I’ve never not asked questions of myself,” he said. “I take responsibility for every kick made on that field by us. That’s my job. That will not change in terms of questioning. I do question everything that happens on the field. I’ll look back on the field to see if there are things we could have done better.” Both managers had promised to be bold in their approach and Giggs’s lineup backed up his words. He gave first international starts to a couple of teenagers, Leeds’s Tyler Roberts leading the attack while Matt Smith began in midfield. The experienced Sam Vokes and Andy King would have been safer options in the absence of Bale and Ramsey but Giggs put his confidence in youth as part of a plan to use speed and movement to pull Ireland apart. Their was little trace of such sharpness from either side during a first half when the ball drifted to and fro like a plastic bag in a fickle breeze. An error led to Ireland’s best chance, Smith miscontrolling at the edge of his box as Wales tried to play out from the back. Christie pounced on the error and sent a hasty curling shot towards the bottom corner, only for Wayne Hennessey to push it around the post. Injuries for both sides meant half of the participants are more commonly seen in the Championship and the match was distinctly second rate but Wales raised the standard in the second half. Wilson contributed the classiest moment in the 56th minute after an almost laughable tackle by Harry Arter at the edge of the box. Any Ireland fans thankful that Bale was not around to take the free-kick must have forgotten about the masterpiece produced by Wilson for Derby against Manchester United last month. He served up another, dispatching the free-kick into the top-right corner past a mystified Darren Randolph. “I thought about fining him after he scored at Old Trafford but I won’t be fining him now,” said Giggs, jokingly. Ireland tried to brew up a storm. Jeff Hendrick unloaded a shot after dainty footwork in the box but it was straight at Hennessey. Everything seemed a little aimless from the hosts and Wales would have inflicted more damage if Tom Lawrence and James Chester had finished better. “We played some really good stuff,” Giggs said. “But the thing I’m most proud about was that clean sheet, the will to defend and put their bodies on the line.” While hailing the contribution of his young players, he said the best player was a 34-year-old who came into the game on the back of criticism for recent displays. “Ashley Williams was outstanding, man of the match by a million miles. I get asked all the time about the young players coming in but the older, experienced one are just as important.”