The teenage Jane Fonda was told her mother had died of a heart attack. Only once she had been packed off to boarding school by her father, Henry, did she read in a film magazine the real truth: the desperate woman had cut her own throat in a mental health facility. Meanwhile, her recently remarried father returned to work on Broadway, showing little interest in the wellbeing of his children. Philip Larkin’s assertion about mums and dads has never rung truer. It is an oddly performative soul-baring that forms the centrepiece of Jane Fonda in Five Acts (Sky Atlantic), Susan Lacy’s mildly inquisitive but strangely unsatisfying portrait of the Hollywood superstar. Her life, as represented here, is one riven with careless emotional violence, her extensive film work and a glossy version of what purports to be genuine feeling. For all her talk of authenticity, Fonda sits, beautifully lit and perfectly groomed, skirting around the real meat of the matter, ever polite and in control of the final image. We first see her at a dressing table, surrounded by beauty professionals who polish and smooth her for the Golden Globes. She bemoans the lack of drink options: there is only wine at these things and she drinks vodka. It is a seductive start – this 80-year-old who will sit having a mid-afternoon whisky with Lily Tomlin to shoot the breeze about her latest Vanity Fair cover. Fonda’s early career was defined by the kittenish sex appeal that saw her first husband Roger Vadim persuade her to perform the infamous space striptease from Barbarella. The sequence was performed on a pane of glass, Fonda out of her mind on vodka just to get through it. She admits she spent those years “not asking too many questions”. Later, on the red carpet, she is an impossible confection in ivory; a high ruffled neckline perfectly framing her scrupulous jaw and imperious gaze as she gives the snappers what they want. Fonda always knows what is required and how to deliver it – a problem for a modern documentary maker who wants to get past the first layer of powder. She as good as says that her early political activism sprung from a “hair epiphany”. Sick of being the Barbarella doll of men’s fantasies, she went to a hairdresser and demanded change. Not a specific style; she left that to him to decide. It is a theme that recurs – her tendency to define herself by others, usually men. Four of the five acts are deliberately named after the influential men in her life. Only the fifth – Jane – deviates and it is clearly meant as a statement of independence. She claims to have left her last husband, Ted Turner, for “an idea” rather than the usual new lover. He is seen once, still lamenting the loss of his former wife and admitting he is less happy without her. But she is never asked to elaborate on her motives. The interview segments, presumably run by Lacy (although we don’t hear her voice), never interrogate beyond the carefully formed answers. This is not an exploration of a person, more a laying out of exhibits with judiciously prepared witness testimony. Modern documentaries have led us to expect more rigour in their storytelling but this, despite its willingness to touch on family discord and so on, keeps a respectful distance that ultimately frustrates. The cause of her father’s indifference is never explored, although exposure to it left her suffering from bulimia and anorexia, hepped-up on Dexedrine and looking for love in the wrong places. The story behind On Golden Pond is a documentary in itself, with the now middle-aged Jane buying the rights to a play about a recalcitrant old man and his emotionally deprived daughter, in a bid to have some connection with him before it is too late. When they come to his final close-up during the uneasy truce between fictional father and daughter, Jane touches Henry’s arm without warning and she swears she can see a tear in his eye. That is the defining image from this rather too polite film: a woman peering desperately into someone’s eyes, scanning for signs of feeling, for a sign that he could even really see her at all.