Theresa May has urged MPs to “hold our nerve” through the final stages of Brexit talks, while warning hardliners in her own party that compromise will be necessary to achieve a deal with the EU. In a crucial statement to the Commons after a weekend of lurid headlines about her potential political demise, the prime minister appealed directly to Tory Brexiters by reminding them to focus “on the prize that lies before us”. Briefing MPs on her talks in Brussels last week, May confirmed that a final proposal would most likely involve a brief extension to the transition period, but she stressed that this was not something the government had either sought or expected. Facing a packed and restive chamber, May repeated comments briefed out overnight in which she argued that 95% of a departure deal was in place and that the “one real sticking point” was how to guarantee there would be no return to a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland. While there was still disagreement with the EU over the form a backstop should take if there is no overall agreement, this should not be “the barrier to reaching the future partnership we all want to see”, May said. The EU’s original backstop – which would keep Northern Ireland in a customs union – remained unacceptable, May reiterated. “I do not believe that any UK prime minister could ever accept this, and I certainly will not,” she said. While the EU had issues with the UK’s counter-proposal for what May called a “temporary EU-UK joint customs territory” – a UK-wide backstop – the PM laid out what she said were four steps to break this impasse. The first, she said, would be to make the UK-wide backstop legally binding, meaning a Northern Ireland-only second stage of the policy would no longer be needed. She described agreement on this as “critical”. On the idea of extending the transition period, May said: “I have not committed to extending the implementation period, I do not want to extent the implementation period, and I do not believe that extending it will be necessary.” The third element laid out by the prime minister would be a guarantee that neither a backstop or the transition period could be indefinite; and the fourth would be a further commitment on full continued access for Northern Irish businesses to the rest of the UK. The prime minister urged MPs to think of the wider national interest. “When I stood in Downing Street and addressed the nation for the first time, I pledged that the government I lead will not be driven by the interests of the privileged few but of ordinary working families,” she said. “And, if doing those things means I get difficult days in Brussels, then so be it. The Brexit talks are not about my interests, they are about the national interest and the interests of the whole of our United Kingdom. “Serving our national interest will demand that we hold our nerve through these last stages of the negotiations, the hardest part of all.” It would also “mean focusing on the prize that lies before us: the great opportunities that we can open up for our country when we clear these final hurdles in the negotiations,” May said. However, immediately before May spoke another potential issue flared up as a series of Conservative MPs complained about limitations on how a Commons motion on a final Brexit deal could be amended. Answering an urgent question from the leading Tory remainer Dominic Grieve, the Brexit secretary, Dominic Raab, confirmed that while a motion would be amendable, this could not mean delaying departure or altering the final deal – in effect giving MPs a choice between the deal as presented or a no-deal departure. Grieve called this “entirely unsatisfactory” and was backed up by Tories including Nicky Morgan and Anna Soubry. But in one boon for May, the leading Brexiter and former minister Steve Baker withdrew an amendment to the Northern Ireland bill, to be debated next week, which could have ended up blocking the backstop by requiring any such plan to be endorsed by the Stormont assembly, which has not sat since 2017. In a tweet, Baker said he had withdrawn the amendments as it “would not be in the public interest” to push ahead with them.