Despite being described by the chair of the Man Booker prize judges as “challenging”, Anna Burns’s story of sexual intimidation during the Troubles, Milkman, has proved a hit with readers, its sales soaring in the first days after winning the prize. Already the second bestselling title on the shortlist before the prize was announced last Tuesday, Milkman racked up sales of 9,466 copies in the four days to Saturday, according to book sales monitor Nielsen BookScan, and now sits in ninth place in The Bookseller’s Top 50, ahead of titles by Ian Rankin, Tina Turner and Joanna Trollope. The previous week, it had sold 963 copies, with around 5,000 copies sold altogether. Her publisher, Faber, has reprinted 120,000 copies since to meet demand, bringing the total number of copies of Milkman in print to 180,000. Kwame Anthony Appiah, chair of the judges, had called the novel “challenging” when announcing its win, “but in the way a walk up Snowdon is challenging. It is definitely worth it because the view is terrific when you get to the top,” he said. “Because of the flow of the language and the fact some of the language is unfamiliar, it is not a light read [but] I think it is going to last.” Burns herself dismissed widespread descriptions of her novel as challenging, telling Channel 4: “I can’t see what the difficulty is myself.” At Waterstones, fiction buyer Bea Carvalho said the novel had been performing well. “It doesn’t seem to be striking our customers as a prohibitively challenging read: it had in fact been our bestseller out of the shortlisted titles ahead of its announcement as the winner (thanks in part to its availability in paperback), and since then we have enjoyed an excellent response to it from our customers. After a sales increase of over 1,200% week-on-week it is currently our bestselling paperback and our second bestselling book altogether,” said Carvalho. “Its central themes are so timely and relevant today that it promises to be a thought-provoking and rewarding read to anyone who might otherwise have found it a challenging proposition: we’re really pleased that the prize will encourage all kinds of readers to get stuck in.” Burns, who claimed benefits while writing Milkman, thanks a Sussex housing charity and a food bank as well as the Department for Work and Pensions in the acknowledgments to Milkman. She ends with thanks to friends and strangers for the “many gifts and much assistance” she has received over the years. “I look forward to throwing one hell of a party one day to say thanks to them all, but not yet, as they would have to pay for it.” “I couldn’t finish my book for quite a while. I thought I’d finish it in three weeks but it took 10 months. After that, my money was gone,” she told Channel 4 earlier this week, adding that she would now be declaring her £50,000 prize win to the DWP. “I’ve got 30 days to declare a change in circumstances and this is one hell of a change in circumstances so I will be declaring that … it’s just been a bit busy,” she said. At Faber, publisher Alex Bowler said that it had been “a beautiful, joyous week for all of us at Faber, witnessing first-hand what happens when the full transformative force of the Booker is focused on a work of art somehow perfectly fitted to our times, to this very moment”. “There has been an important debate generated by Milkman’s win — discussions about the role of the novel and the way we, as a culture and society, treat and represent our writers,” said Bowler. “For Anna’s novel to have instantly cracked the Top 10 in both physical and ebook, for there to already be 180,000 copies in print across all editions, is just stunning.”