Italians may find their morning espresso tastes awfully bitter this week, as the Bialetti group – the maker of the iconic stove-top moka coffee pot – struggles to stay afloat. The popularity of pod coffee machines, along with a sluggish Italian economy, has put the mockers on the moka, with Bialetti, a reported €68m (£60m) in debt, negotiating a bailout deal with the American hedge fund Och-Ziff Capital Management. Invented in 1933 by Alfonso Bialetti, the affordable aluminium Moka Express was meant to mimic espresso-quality coffee at home. Water boils in a bottom chamber and is forced up through the grounds to produce an intense hit of caffeine. The pot was once so popular that, according to a 2016 New York Times article, 90% of Italian households had one. Were they on to something? Or is there a tastier, more practical and sustainable way to make coffee at home? Yes, they’re cheap (John Lewis is selling Bialettis for £20), but the coffee is often hugely bitter and over-extracted rocket fuel. Priming the chamber with coffee that is ground to the right size is fiendishly difficult and coffee should not be boiled. For maximum character, brew at 90C-96C (194F-205F). Takes practice: 5/10 Good ones can set you back £2,000 (look for at least 15 bars of pressure; De’Longhi’s PrimaDonna Deluxe is impressive at about £800), but, indisputably, domestic bean-to-cup machines offer the closest in quality – freshly ground beans, correct serving temperatures, convincingly textured milk – to the coffee at your local hipster-barista hangout. A prohibitively expensive 8/10 There is nothing suavely George Clooney-like about scalding yourself while removing the pods in a rush. The hunt for a quality capsule and idiot-proof machine (Nescafé’s Dolce Gusto pods or Magimix’s Nespresso range) can be a sisyphean task, and all that plastic and aluminium waste is indefensible. But the coffee? Pretty impressive. An ecologically unsound 7/10 In theory, this should be a sustainable and superior option to the moka. In reality, it is impossible – blame steeping it too long, your juddering plunge action, a misjudged grind-size or the way the filter bends at its edges – to produce cafetière coffee that isn’t flat in flavour, full of bitter grounds or both. A gritty 4/10 Much derided but super-quick and cost-effective. The rise of upmarket instants such as Nescafé’s Azera Americano (they include 5% to 10% of ground coffee alongside the usual freeze-dried soluble granules) mean there are now instants out there that have some body and depth. An improving 3/10 Accept that espresso coffee is best left to the professionals. At home, pour-over filter hits that sweet-spot in terms of cost, quality and (if you use unbleached filters and compost them) sustainability. Keep a stash of single-origin beans in the freezer, hand-grind them for each cup and, using a Hario V60 “funnel” or similar, you can quickly master coffee of real character. Connoisseur’s cup: 9/10