The ghost of Richard Nixon may have chuckled on Tuesday. As Brett Kavanaugh took his seat at the end of bench, making five solidly conservative justices on the supreme court, it was the moment that Republicans have been working towards for half a century. In ornate, serene surroundings that belied the vicious fight over a vetting process rocked by sexual assault allegations, Chief Justice John Roberts wished Kavanaugh “a long and happy career in our common calling”. But for protesters outside, holding signs such as “We will not forget” and “We do not consent”, the ideal of a common calling rings increasingly hollow. America’s highest court has shifted to the right and, activists say, out of sync with public opinion. The tribunal that hands down far-reaching decisions on everything from capital punishment, gun control and healthcare to labour, reproductive and voting rights is, they argue, now unrepresentative of the general population, especially its growing numbers of young people and people of colour. “Providing we don’t have some ideological transformation of the people on it, it seems certain we’ll have a supreme court pushing out more and more decisions that are out of touch with the American people,” said Neil Sroka, communications director for the political action committee Democracy for America. “The supreme court’s power is in its perceived legitimacy and, as it falls more and more out of step with the American people, its legitimacy and power may be injured irrevocably.” Established in 1789, the supreme court is supposed to be above the fray of political shenanigans. It has often played a role of watchdog, ensuring that neither the president nor Congress becomes too powerful. Trump has sought to bluntly politicise it, however, a move that did not seem to trouble Kavanaugh when he tore into Democrats and the Clintons during a Senate hearing. A year ago the nine-person (six men, three women) court was divided between four conservatives, four liberals and so-called “swing vote” Anthony Kennedy, whose unpredictable decisions managed to thrill and infuriate both sides. Kennedy’s retirement this summer enabled Trump to elevate Kavanaugh, whose views on abortion, executive power and myriad other questions will tilt the court inexorably to the right. The “swing” vote now is Roberts, hardly a bleeding-heart liberal. Whereas Kennedy backed the 2015 decision that legalised gay marriage, Roberts opposed it. A recent survey by Gallup found that two in three Americans agree with Kennedy’s position. But in the new-look court, Roberts’ viewpoint seems likely to have prevailed. In August, Emily Bazelon wrote in the New York Times magazine: “Since the 1930s, justices who served as swing voters or drifted ideologically have made it possible to think about the court in nonpartisan terms. Kavanaugh’s confirmation will probably break this long tradition. He represents the fulfillment of the dearest political wish for two generations of the conservative movement.” No one is predicting that the clock will be turned back on gay marriage but numerous other issues that once seemed settled in line with public will are suddenly on the table. Although the Republican senator Susan Collins said she was satisfied that Kavanaugh will not seek to overturn Roe v Wade, the 1973 decision that enshrined abortion as a constitutional right, critics point to his past statements to suggest this is wishful thinking and warn of an all-out assault on reproductive rights. A poll in July by NBC News and the Wall Street Journal showed an all-time record in public support for Roe v Wade, with 71% saying the decision should not be overturned. Sroka said: “When you look at polling, the majority of Americans support abortion rights and we’re going to have a court with a solid majority opposing abortion rights. “We expect the court in the hands of conservatives to continue to chip away at abortion rights so they become meaningless rather than a full repeal of Roe v Wade. We have to make clear what the courts are doing when they push out obscure rulings.” Kavanaugh, who once dissented from a decision that upheld a Washington ban on assault weapons and magazines of more than 10 rounds, is expected to broaden gun rights and has been branded “a second amendment radical”. Last year Pew Research found that solid majorities of both gun owners and non-owners favour limiting access to guns for people with mental illnesses and individuals who are on the federal no-fly or watch lists. Strong majorities support background checks for private sales and at gun shows (77% among gun owners and 87% among non-owners). Sroka added: “You would be delusional to think this isn’t a far-right fringe court at this point. We should expect to see all sorts of assaults on our basic rights and progressive values. The Republican party has been on a 40-year quest to take control of the supreme court and, thanks to Donald Trump, they’ve finally gotten that.” Critics argue that the court now represents minority rule, a phrase more commonly applied to regimes such as apartheid South Africa. Trump, who has appointed the conservatives Neil Gorsuch and Kavanaugh to the supreme court, lost the popular vote to Hillary Clinton by nearly 3m ballots in 2016 and has a record high disapproval rating in surveys. A CNN poll conducted by SSRS found that 51% of people opposed Kavanaugh’s confirmation to court while only 41% backed it. Then there is Congress. An analysis by the Washington Post found that Kavanaugh was confirmed with the support of senators representing 44.2% of the US population, while he was opposed by senators representing 55.8% (Democratic-voting states such as California and New York are densely populated). “He will be the first justice nominated by someone who lost the popular vote to earn his seat on the bench with support from senators representing less than half of the country while having his nomination opposed by a majority of the country,” the Post observed. Democrats are also quick to point out that Gorsuch only claimed the seat vacated by the late Antonin Scalia because Senate Republicans blocked Barack Obama’s pick, Merrick Garland, on the questionable grounds that it was a presidential election year. And Trump’s lifetime appointments have been profoundly influenced by the rightwing groups the Federalist Society and Heritage Foundation, neither of which are democratically accountable. Conservatives, however, disagree that the court faces a crisis of legitimacy. Curt Levey, president of the rightwing advocacy group the Committee for Justice, said: “I’ve thought up until this point the supreme court was a little to the left of the American people on many issues: abortion, gay marriage, the death penalty, immigration. “I suppose if the supreme court was to vote to make abortion illegal, it would be to the right of the American people, but that’s not going to happen. Even if it overturned Roe v Wade, it would mean more freedom for the states rather than an outright ban. Most people I know want some sort of compromise on abortion.” Few observers believe that the now pivotal Roberts is to the left of the American people. Recent research by Stephen Jessee, an associate professor of political science at the University of Texas in Austin, and Neil Malhotra, a professor of political economy of Stanford University, revealed that the two past swing justices, Sandra Day O’Connor and Kennedy, “were not just moderate relative to their peers, but also that they hold views that are similar to the average American citizen”, Jessee said via email. “This comes despite the fact that the court was not designed to be a representative political institution. With the replacement of Kennedy with Kavanaugh, who is likely to be at least fairly (and possibly very) conservative, the median should shift to Chief Justice Roberts, who holds a position significantly to the right of the typical American. Our research estimated that Roberts is ideologically to the right of about 90% of ordinary Americans (the numbers are similarly stark for the court’s more liberal members).” Jessee noted views that when a justice becomes the court’s median, they can feel extra responsibility and may sacrifice their own ideological preferences to produce more moderate rulings. “It is not clear whether this happens often, or whether Roberts is likely to behave this way. There is, however, some evidence that Roberts has been moving to the left in recent years, so if he continues this trend, the court may end up in a similar ideological location to when Kennedy was its swing voter.” Roberts will, it is hoped, work hard to preserve the independence and integrity of the court, especially in the current highly politicised atmosphere. Laurence Tribe, a Harvard constitutional law professor whose students included Obama and Roberts, believes that the chief justice will take a “substantially different” posture on the court in the wake of Kavanaugh’s confirmation. “I don’t think Roberts will be a centrist in the way Kennedy was, or a swing vote,” Tribe said. “But I think if and when there are cases about the ability to order a sitting president to testify or to indict a sitting president, or matters that go to the fate of Trump, if Kavanaugh joins Gorsuch and [Samuel] Alito and [Clarence] Thomas, I don’t think we can assume Roberts will go with them.” Tribe, who was sharply critical of Kavanaugh’s partisanship during the confirmation process, added: “I think Roberts is an institutionalist, he believes in stability, he believes in the role of the court, he clearly sees it as part of his responsibility to protect it as a vital institution.” The burden will weigh heavily. At a symbolic swearing-in at the White House on Monday night, Trump issued an extraordinary apology to Kavanaugh “on behalf of our nation” for the pain and suffering he endured during the confirmation process. On Tuesday, the president declared it “a victory for the people”. Of all his false or misleading claims, these do not seem likely to age well.