Kevin Macken, 67, retired “I don’t normally have strong opinions on politics. The only time I’ve been to a protest before was 47 years ago, while I was training as a teacher in London, to demonstrate against Margaret Thatcher’s education cuts. This time, I’m doing it for my grandchildren: my eldest daughter Ellen has two, and my youngest, Becky, has one on the way. My wife and I live in Solihull – which voted by 58% to leave – and, now that I’m retired, I look after my grandson. For the past 45 years we’ve been an active part of Europe, and have benefited from it massively, but the next generation is about to lose all that. “A second referendum is essential because were lied to by the Leave campaign. The fact that Boris Johnson supported them says it all; he’s a comedian, not a politician. He doesn’t take anything seriously and that has ruined people’s lives – a British mother, Nazanin Zaghari-Ratcliffe, is still in prison in Iran because of him. Meanwhile, the Tory party is completely confused as to what it wants. If they can’t make their minds up, surely the question should be thrown back to the people.” Dave Disley-Jones, 51, NHS communications worker; Jenny Disley-Jones, 46, copywriter “It’s unfortunate how the remain campaign in 2016 was fronted by David Cameron and George Osborne, who were saying we should stay in the EU to maintain our prosperity,” said Jenny. “That didn’t resonate with many people who don’t view their lives as prosperous. It was a missed opportunity to make a strong case about the jobs outside London that rely on free trade with the EU, such as car manufacturing in Birmingham.” Dave says his home town of Birkenhead has benefited hugely from EU investment, but many people didn’t see it that way. “The EU has not been great at publicising its successes. I understand the concerns about uncontrolled immigration, but the conclusion that we should therefore leave the EU seems flawed because the net benefits of that migration have been positive.” Ella Thrush, 14, GCSE student; Ruth Thrush, 18, gap year; Fiona Cottam, 53, languages teacher “I’m angry that my age group didn’t get to vote,” said Ruth. “We’ll be the most affected if Brexit does happen. If there was a People’s Vote now, then I would get a proper say. “The first rally Ella and I ever went on was for Jeremy Corbyn, who we really support, and I’m now a member of the Labour party. But we young people are also very pro-Remain – and many of us feel misrepresented by the party we are loyal to on this issue.” Fourteen year-old Ella agreed: “If Brexit happens I won’t have the future I always dreamed of. Since I’m 14, demonstrating is the only way I can get my voice heard. A lot of people my age haven’t got fully formed views on politics yet, which is really frustrating. This is our future!” Fiona, a lifelong Labour supporter, said she was very unhappy Labour did not take a stronger position on remaining in the EU: “I recognise that we need to stay united to win the next election, which we have a good chance of doing, but this is the single most important issue that I’ve faced in my lifetime, particularly for my children and the children I teach. “I’ve seen the numbers of students doing languages at A-level drop year on year. Who can blame them, if the message is that we will no longer engage with Europe?”