David de Gea 8 Could do little about Dybala’s winner and made fine saves from Ronaldo (twice) and Matuidi. Ashley Young 5 Often had to pick up Ronaldo and coped as well as could be hoped for with this thankless task. Victor Lindelöf 7 Read the game well and showed pace with a lung-bursting sprint that beat Cancelo. Chris Smalling 5 Might have done better for Juve’s goal but was dominant in the air and made one surging second-half run. Luke Shaw 5 Took time to settle as he marked the lively Cuadrado and was continually swamped along his flank until United rallied somewhat. Nemanja Matic 5 Made early mistake and was unable to wrest control of midfield as Juve zipped the ball about. Paul Pogba 6 Shoulder-barge set up United’s first attack and might have connected cleaner with a header and hit post after break. Marcus Rashford 4 Surging run but a poor free-kick signalled another ineffective display under Mourinho from the 20-year-old. Juan Mata 5 The No 10 had scant chance to contribute as Juve dominated possession but showed flashes of creativity. Anthony Martial 6 Allowed Ronaldo space to create Juve’s goal but was lively thereafter, attempting to shape the contest United’s way. Romelu Lukaku 4 One aimless ball disappointed and though willing to press the No 9 was starved of chances and often clumsy. Wojciech Szczesny 6 Solid under one high ball and was largely a spectator owing to Juve’s near-total ascendancy. João Cancelo 7 Made De Gea save sharply to his right and was a threat whenever passing halfway line owing to his pace. Giorgio Chiellini 7 The captain led his defence when required but this was largely an evening of cigars and slippers for him. Leonardo Bonucci 7 Watched for Ronaldo runs in behind and constantly waved team-mates forward and made one crucial tackle on Martial. Alex Sandro 6 Looked to get forward along left-hand side in support of Ronaldo making it a particularly busy match for Young. Miralem Pjanic 7 Hit a regulation free-kick straight out but his touch and movement troubled United. Rodrigo Bentancur 7 A tidy performance in an engine-room that gave Juve the platform to take the game to United. Blaise Matuidi 7 Upended Pogba with a challenge and hit a fierce shot at De Gea.Continually posed problems. Cristiano Ronaldo 7 Floated around the pitch and his pass set up Dybala’s goal but is no longer the No 7 of his United years. Paulo Dybala 8 Accomplished finish to give Juve the three points, the forward was as sharp as Lukaku was muted. Juan Cuadrado 7 Linked well and might have created a chance for Dybala before he hassled Smalling for the former’s finish. Substitutes: Federico Bernardeschi 6 Solid in 10-minute cameo in Dybala’s lone forward role.