If you read a newspaper or looked at a billboard this year you probably noticed a giant advert from Facebook saying “we’re sorry”. If you missed them don’t worry! The social media giant just received huge fines for letting Cambridge Analytica harvest users’ data, among other things. So my guess is the ads will make an appearance again. The reality is a company as rich as Facebook doesn’t care about a £500,000 fine. They do care what users’ think, but as I learned recently they don’t really want to listen to what they have to say. Last month Rebecca Riley was catching the train home and eating a bag of crisps. She looked up and noticed a man filming her with his phone, and not very subtly. Rebecca did what any self-respecting crisp eater would do and asked the man to stop filming her. He briefly paused the video but when she looked back up he had his phone pointing at her again. This isn’t some weird fetish – Rebecca was being filmed by someone who has a problem with women eating on public transport, someone who may well have beena member of the Women Who Eat on Tubes Facebook group. That’s right. There’s a Facebook group where people post photos of women eating on public transport and make crap blow job jokes in the comments. At last count it had over 30,000 members. If you thought sexual harassment culture couldn’t get any weirder, you were wrong. Women can’t even eat a bag of crisps in peace in the digital age. I only know about this group because Rebecca is a member of Level Up, a feminist community that campaigns to end sexism in the UK. Other Level Up members reported the group to Facebook in early September. But Facebook’s desire to apologise seemed to have evaporated. Level Up supporters were told that the group didn’t violate its community guidelines. A group encouraging members to photograph women without their consent was fine by Facebook – but thanks for your feedback. So we launched a petition, which garnered thousands of signatures. We teamed up with a journalist who had appeared on the group a few years ago and managed to get her photograph taken down. Still no further response from Facebook. A group encouraging members to photograph women without their consent was fine by Facebook My local Nando’s seems to care more about women feeling safe and comfortable than Facebook does. If a man in Nando’s tried to film me while I was eating peri-peri wings I’m confident the staff would tell him to stop. They would probably kick him out. Facebook won’t respond to our complaints. Now I don’t want to tell the Facebook public relations team how to do their job. But I’m not convinced ignoring thousands of feminists who know how to use social media is a good idea. At least not in 2018. Even the guy who runs Women Who Eat on Tubes decided it was time for a rebrand – the group was made private and the name changed to People Who Eat on Tubes, and it now says: “PWEOT is observational not judgmental. It doesn’t intimidate nor bully. People are embraced and cherished. We celebrate and encourage people eating food on tubes. We do not marginalise them. We always look for the story in the picture.” Then I read the news that Facebook execs had decided to hire Nick Clegg. And I got it. Facebook isn’t listening to users like me because they don’t care what we have to say. They think the solution to their problems is hiring another self-important white man who didn’t see Brexit coming. All the hysterical women will calm down once they’ve seen a few more full-page “sorrys” in the newspapers. The reality is Facebook doesn’t have a PR crisis. It has a trust crisis. Users like me don’t trust the company to protect their privacy. We don’t trust them to pay their fair share of tax. And we don’t trust them when they say there won’t be a repeat of the 2016 US presidential election. I didn’t delete Facebook earlier this year. But I don’t use it in the same way I used to. And I’m not alone. The Pew Research Center found that 74% of US Facebook users had changed their privacy settings, taken a break from the site or deleted the Facebook app from their phones in the past year. I don’t tend to share photographs on Facebook anymore. I rarely use it to organise events. The organisation I run actually started out as a Facebook group, but I’m not sure we will use the platform at all in a few years. Any company the size of Facebook is incredibly powerful, but if users no longer feel valued how long will it stay relevant? Facebook’s position may seem secure, but it can’t last much longer if its users’ opinions don’t matter. Those of us older millennials remember tech companies like Limewire and Friendster. Most people reading this article will never have heard of either. Hiring Nick Clegg was the equivalent of launching Limewire Pro, it seemed like a good idea (to someone) at the time, but in a few years people will agree it was the beginning of the end. Women don’t need Facebook to listen to them when there are tech companies that get it. Take Bumble, a social network made by women. It’s a for-profit company that has managed to create a safe environment for women online. It started as a dating app but is now a platform for professional networking, friend-finding and dating. While Facebook talks about how hard it is to moderate users’ content, Bumble has a zero-tolerance policy for harassment, misogyny and hate speech. You can report and block people who make you feel unsafe in a few clicks and there are over 5,000 moderators around the world enthusiastically keeping the app a “safe and empowering space”. My favourite fact about Bumble is that it was founded by a woman who used to work at Tinder. I hope there is a woman who works at Facebook reading this now. I hope she knows she gets paid less than Nick Clegg. I hope she understands that you can’t buy integrity, you earn it through your actions. I hope she is getting ready to quit and make something better.