Any Real Madrid fans with a close affiliation to the Spanish national team would have been sick of the sight of Gary Lineker in early 1987. Eighteen days after he had scored a hat-trick for Barcelona in their 3-2 win over Real Madrid at Camp Nou on January 31, Lineker went to the Santiago Bernabéu and scored four more for England against Spain. At the time, it seemed that anything Lineker touched turned to gold. He had been top scorer in the First Division in the 1985-86 season, then won the Golden Boot at the World Cup in Mexico, earning him a lucrative move to Barcelona. In the lead-up to England’s friendly in Madrid, he also signed a new boot deal with Quasar that would earn him a reported £1m over five years. England were flying high in their European Championship qualifying group but Spain had not lost at home for three years, so Bobby Robson knew how tough the match would be. “Spain will lift their game because they are conscious ours is a good scalp to get,” said the manager. The inclusion of 20-year-old Tony Adams was the biggest news when England’s squad was announced. After working his way into the Arsenal team towards the end of the previous season, Adams was thriving under new manager George Graham. Robson was impressed. “The boy has everything. He is tall, quick, good in the air, reads the play well and, above all, seems to have great composure for a player of his age,” said the England manager. Adams would become England’s first full international debutant born after the 1966 World Cup. Arsenal provided the bulk of the England defence – with Adams, Viv Anderson and Kenny Sansom joining Terry Butcher in the back four – while Tottenham gave the side midfield creativity in the form of Glenn Hoddle, Chris Waddle and Steve Hodge. Before the game, the big debate was about who should partner Lineker up front. With Mark Hateley struggling in Italy and Peter Beardsley having scored just three goals for Newcastle so far that season, pressure was mounting on Robson to pick Clive Allen. The Tottenham striker was well on his way to scoring 49 goals in 54 appearances in the campaign, but Robson was adamant that Beardsley was the ideal foil for Lineker. He would be proved correct. England started brightly on a boggy pitch at the Bernabéu, but were made to pay for their missed chances in the 14th minute by Emilio Butragueño. The Real Madrid striker evaded a challenge from Anderson and finished coolly to put Spain ahead and show why he was nicknamed El Buitre (the Vulture). Unbelievably, Spain would be 4-1 down before the hour mark. Waddle, Hoddle and Beardsley buzzed around the pitch all night and England were rewarded for their endeavours when Lineker equalised after 24 minutes. A Robson strike crashed against the post, Andoni Zubizarreta saved Hoddle’s attempt from the rebound, before the Tottenham man chipped to the far post for Lineker to head past his Barcelona team-mate. Zubizarreta had to get used to the sight of Lineker celebrating. Just four minutes later, Hoddle swung a free-kick into the box, Anderson nodded it down and Lineker poked it in for his second. He completed his hat-trick just a minute after the break, heading in from close range after Zubizarreta had parried Beardsley’s original attempt. Beardsley was again involved in Lineker’s fourth goal, setting up his strike partner with a lovely weighted pass. After 56 minutes, England were leading 4-1. Spain narrowed the margin of defeat, Ramon Vazquez heading past Chris Woods, who had pulled off a couple of fine saves after coming on for Peter Shilton just after the hour. But it did not take the shine off of England’s night in Madrid. The display was the ideal present for Bobby Robson on his 54th birthday. “We have done well in Brazil and in the Soviet Union over the last few years but that was perhaps our best display since I’ve been in charge,” enthused Robson, who was full of praise for Lineker. “He has to be arguably the best finisher in the world. He gets a chance and it’s a goal. That’s what makes him a world-class player.” It was hard to argue with Robson. Lineker had now scored 18 goals in 21 internationals for his country – and 12 goals in his last six matches. “That is the first time I have scored four in my career, but I should have had six,” Lineker said. “It was a night the chances fell for me. I’d like to pay tribute to Peter Beardsley, who made life easy for me. I love playing with him.” When asked about scoring four past his friend Zubizarreta, Lineker grinned and replied: “I’m looking forward to training with him on Friday.” Quasar must have been delighted that Lineker had scored four goals in his new boots but the fact the soles were hanging off their product at full-time was a less than impressive advert. Immediately linked to a £10m move to Juventus, Lineker seemingly had the world at his feet. Never slow to bang the drum, the English press went to town, calling Lineker the “Matador of Madrid” and announcing that “Spain are Linekered.” Steve Curry, writing in the Express, suggested that, with Lineker up front, England could win the 1990 World Cup. In fairness, he wasn’t too wide of the mark. It wasn’t all good news for England. Sadly, three English fans were stabbed before the match and 18 were arrested on a night that was seen as another blow for English clubs and their re-admittance to European club competitions. But, for once, the headlines on the back pages seemed to overshadow the familiar news on the front. • This article appeared first on That 1980s Sports Blog• Follow Steven Pye on Twitter