Volatile weather in Kentucky is threatening to disrupt the final preparations for the Breeders’ Cup meeting at Churchill Downs this weekend, with thunderstorms and torrential rain forecast for the Louisville area over the next two days. Tuesday at Churchill, though, was very much the calm before the approaching storm, as a chilly start to the day gave way to temperatures in the low 70s by mid-afternoon.  Thunderstorms or a prolonged downpour could lead to the main track at Churchill Downs being closed for morning workouts, but more than a dozen of Europe’s challengers at the meeting, including Enable, the dual Arc winner, did at least get a glimpse of their new surroundings on Tuesday. Whether it will look or feel quite the same by Saturday, though, is anyone’s guess, as one forecast suggests tthree inches of rain could arrive at the track in a matter of hours on Wednesday with more wet weather predicted for the following day as well. Enable is the ninth Arc winner to travel on to America a few weeks later to run at the Breeders’ Cup, from Dancing Brave in 1986 to Found two years ago with horses of the quality of Saumarez and Golden Horn in between. Thus far, all have come up short, but what is different about Enable – so her connections and many fans will hope, at least – is that the beaten Arc winners of the past were at the end of a long season. Enable, by contrast, did not make her seasonal debut until September and has made only two starts this year, and she certainly looked like a fresh horse as she cantered around the turf track in the autumn sunshine on Tuesday. John Gosden, Enable’s trainer, is not due into Louisville until Wednesday and whatever the weather may bring, he is sure to be pleased with his filly’s condition. The four-year-old, who is drawn towards the inside in stall two, is top-priced at 4-7 to beat a dozen opponents on Saturday in a list in which the top four names are all from European stables. Waldgeist (André Fabre) is a 6-1 chance, while Aidan O’Brien’s Magical (8-1) and last year’s Turf winner Talismanic (14-1) are next in the betting. A long line of runners from Europe headed out to the track for a course for a gentle canter on Tuesday morning, including Havana Grey, who runs for Karl Burke in the Turf Sprint, and The Mackem Bullet, the runner-up in the Cheveley Park Stakes, who represents Brian Ellison’s dual-purpose Malton yard in Friday’s Juvenile Fillies’ Turf. Expert Eye (Sir Michael Stoute) and One Master (William Haggas) are both being primed for Saturday’s Mile, while Wild Illusion and Eziyra (Filly & Mare Turf) also spent time on the track getting used to their new surroundings. “I’m over the moon with her,” Ellison said after seeing The Mackem Bullet breeze around the track before her last race for his stable. “She arrived on Friday, had two days walking around the barn, did a steady canter yesterday, breezed today and that’s it. She’s eating well, and she’s settled well. “Oisin [Murphy] rides her and he fancies her. She’s got the best English form in the race, she was beaten a short-head in the Cheveley Park and a short-head in the Lowther. She’s the top-rated filly in the race so she has got to have a live chance.” The news that the weather may turn at Churchill meant that several European challengers with form on easier ground were popular in the betting on Tuesday. Hills reported strong support for Wild Illusion, the favourite, in the Filly & Mare Turf and Charlie Appleby’s runner is in to 2-1 (from 11-4), although a couple of firms were still showing 5-2 on Tuesday evening. On the domestic cards, Moyassar (2.10) stands out in the nursery at Nottingham despite being asked to concede lumps of weight to his seven rivals. Richard Hannon’s colt is carrying at least 11lb more than any of his opponents but he does look like he has a lot more to give after finishing a close third in a strong race at York last time out. Moyassar was caught behind horses at a crucial moment but still showed a good turn of foot together with in a length of the winner and three horses that finished behind him there were winners next time up. Tan (2.40) also catches the eye on the same card having finished within two-and-a-half lengths of the winner at Catterick last time despite racing from 9lb out of the handicap. The potential star name at Fakenham is Didtheyleaveuoutto, one of the leading bumper performers last season, who will be a short price to make a winning debut over timber in the opening maiden hurdle. Top Rock Talula (2.00) will be a more backable price later in the afternoon, while Divine Messenger (6.15) and Jumping Cats (7.15) look best at the prices on the evening card at Kempton Park. Nottingham 12.40 Asian Angel 1.10 Mubariz 1.40 Blaze Of Hearts 2.10 Moyassar (nap) 2.40 Tan (nb) 3.10 Rosie Royale 3.40 Just Wait 4.10 Champagne Rules Fakenham 1.00 Didtheyleaveuoutto 1.30 Salto Chisco 2.00 Top Rock Talula 2.30 Movewiththetimes 3.00 Polished Rock 3.30 Zamparelli 4.00 Skandiburg Kempton Park 4.40 Cobweb Catcher 5.15 Ticklish 5.45 Sky Defender 6.15 Divine Messenger 6.45 Despacito 7.15 Jumping Cats 7.45 Yaa Mous 8.15 I’m Running Late Tips by Greg Wood