The EU is willing to extend a transition period after the UK leaves the bloc, Ireland’s foreign minister has confirmed, but warned Britain must not renege on previous agreements to prevent a hard border in Northern Ireland. The confirmation came as the environment secretary, Michael Gove, warned a Brexit deal may not be in place until the December summit of EU leaders. Theresa May will address EU leaders in Brussels for the European council summit before dinner on Wednesday night, as negotiators continue to grapple with the drafting of the withdrawal agreement. A No 10 source said there was no change to the UK’s approach to the transition period, which is scheduled to end in December 2020. “We are not calling for an extension to the implementation period,” the source said. The UK is pushing for the Irish backstop proposal to be replaced in the withdrawal agreement by a temporary UK-wide customs union, insisting it cannot allow Northern Ireland to be “carved off”. A backstop is required to ensure there is no hard border in Ireland if a comprehensive free trade deal cannot be signed before the end of 2020. Theresa May has proposed to the EU that the whole of the UK would remain in the customs union after Brexit, but Brussels has said it needs more time to evaluate the proposal. As a result, the EU insists on having its own backstop - the backstop to the backstop - which would mean Northern Ireland would remain in the single market and customs union in the absence of a free trade deal, prompting fierce objections from Conservative hard Brexiters and the DUP, which props up her government. That prompted May to propose a country-wide alternative in which the whole of the UK would remain in parts of the customs union after Brexit. “The EU still requires a ‘backstop to the backstop’ – effectively an insurance policy for the insurance policy. And they want this to be the Northern Ireland-only solution that they had previously proposed,” May told MPs. Raising the stakes, the prime minister said the EU’s insistence amounted to a threat to the constitution of the UK: “We have been clear that we cannot agree to anything that threatens the integrity of our United Kingdom,” she added. The EU27 have said there must be unique “all-weather” insurance protections to avoid any hard border in Northern Ireland, and point to the wording of the December joint agreement that the backstop must operate “unless and until” alternative arrangements to prevent a hard border have been put in place. Before the summit, Ireland’s foreign minister, Simon Coveney, said the EU was willing to offer “new thinking and imagination” to try to close the gap but said the UK could not go back on existing commitments. “The EU side is willing to allow more time in the transition period to agree an alternative solution to the backstop,” he told BBC Radio 4’s Today programme. “What [the EU chief negotiator] Michel Barnier is now suggesting is: let’s ensure the backstop is never likely to be used by creating the space and time for the UK and the EU to be able to negotiate UK-wide customs arrangements.” However, he said, the backstop would not work as an insurance option if it was time-limited. “We do have to insist on the commitments that have already been made in this negotiation process,” he said. “This is like if you take out fire insurance on your home … it’s there to reassure people there is a fallback position if all else fails.” Coveney said EU countries including Ireland had no desire to see the break-up of the United Kingdom, or to impose a customs border down the Irish Sea but said British opponents also had to respect what had already been agreed. “Nobody is asking that Northern Ireland remain part of the EU,” he said. “But what we are doing is recognising that Northern Ireland is different to other parts of the United Kingdom. A peace agreement for the last 20 years has provided stability and normality on the island of Ireland and an absence of violence, that is what we are trying to protect. “We have been thrust into this position and we are trying to protect a basic core interest. The majority of people in Northern Ireland support that position, including a sensible de-dramatised backstop to settle nerves on the border issue.” Barnier, the EU’s chief negotiator, has suggested the UK government had failed to meet the conditions necessary for a special November Brexit summit to be called, though Coveney suggested on Wednesday morning it was still a possibility. Gove, one of the most high-profile Brexiters in the cabinet, told a committee of MPs on Wednesday it was possible no deal would be sealed until December. “It might be the case – we’ve seen how European negotiations work – that progress is made at October council, progress is made at the November council, and it is even as late as the December council before a deal is done. Obviously, everyone wants the deal to be done earlier,” he said. Ministers had hoped to put a final deal before parliament for a vote before the Christmas recess, and failure to reach a deal until December would put the government substantially behind schedule. Coveney said the EU would begin publishing its contingency planning for a no-deal scenario next week, which he described as “not a pretty picture”. Downing Street said May would meet the taoiseach, Leo Varadkar, as well as the EU council president, Donald Tusk, and the European commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, in Brussels on Wednesday afternoon for bilateral talks, before she addresses all of the EU27 leaders before dinner. She will not attend the rest of the meal, and will depart for the UK ambassador’s residence as Brexit talks continue among EU leaders over dinner in her absence. May received a boost on Wednesday morning in the form of a letter from the US president, Donald Trump, telling Congress that the US wants to start formal trade talks with the UK “as soon as it is ready” after Brexit. The letter from Trump’s trade representative, Robert Lighthizer, was sent to Orrin Hatch, the chair of the Senate finance committee, House speaker, Paul Ryan, and Democratic House and Senate leaders, Nancy Pelosi and Chuck Schumer, along with similar letters on starting trade talks with Japan and the EU. “We are committed to concluding these negotiations with timely and substantive results for American workers, farmers, ranchers, and businesses,” Lighthizer said, a hint that the US would expect a wide-ranging deal to cover controversial agriculture products. The UK international trade secretary, Liam Fox, has said the British public will not accept the diluting of animal welfare standards, though Trump’s commerce secretary, Wilbur Ross, has said a US-UK trade deal hinges on scrapping EU food standards regulations, including on chlorinated chicken.