Heather Lenz’s film is a brief, celebratory introduction to the work of Japan’s biggest-selling living artist: 89-year-old Yayoi Kusama. She rebelled against her stiflingly reactionary upbringing in provincial Matsumoto for a lifelong adventure in art. With vast, tapestry-like canvases and witty soft-material sculptures she experimented in abstract impressionism, pop art, and also live public-space happenings involving the naked body. Her career really began in New York, where she became a succès de scandale in the counter-culture scene, but she returned in early middle age to Matsumoto, where she had been widely reviled for her controversial artworks. In many ways, this is a story of a woman who had to fight her way to the top all over again, having battled depression, the complacent sexism and bland bigotry of the New York scene, and then finally the aghast conservatism of Japan. I would have liked to hear more personal detail about the artist. As a young woman she wrote a fan letter in English to the US artist Georgia O’Keeffe, so if she was taught English presumably her education was not as hidebound as all that? Lenz’s film also implies that, despite passionate platonic relationships, Kusama has never had sex at all, and that her displaced sexual energy has been poured into art; that her obsessive-compulsive pattern-making may be the result of a hysterical reaction against sex, having reportedly as a child chanced upon her father having illicit sex with a woman who was not her mother. Her parents were apparently revolted by her American work, but if she returned to her home town, she must surely have had some sort of relation with them. Was a reconciliation reached before they died? Lenz doesn’t say. Also: her red hair. It might have been amusing to ask when Kusama decided to adopt this look permanently. (Lenz hints that she deliberately chose to wear kimonos in New York and play up Japaneseness as a USP.) Kusama’s work is, in fact, therapy, because she is permanently resident at a psychiatric hospital in Shinjuku, and works at her studio nearby. It would have been interesting to see her private life in the hospital, but Kusama would have been unlikely to agree to this kind of access. As it stands, the film is a respectful and valuable tribute.