The classicist Professor Mary Beard found herself the focus of a flurry of headlines this week when she spoke of her refusal to appear in television history documentaries featuring reconstructions. Or, as she put it, “B-list actors dressed up in sheets, saying, ‘Do pass the grapes, Marcus,’ and the like”. Actors, or at least some actors, were not especially thrilled. Her substantive point, however, was nothing to do with actors – A-list, B-list or otherwise. Her remarks, part of a lecture for members of Voice of the Listener and Viewer, an organisation that campaigns for better public-service broadcasting, were part of a broader argument about the purpose of history on television. What Prof Beard was suggesting – in the lecture and in response to questions from the audience – was that TV history ought to put forward arguments. It can do more than just dazzle the viewer with enthusiasm or gorgeous visuals (though enthusiasm and beautiful filming are clearly a valuable part of what TV history has to offer). Furthermore, history on TV has the capacity, she suggested, to activate the mind of the viewers to “do history” themselves – that is, to use the intellectual tools of the discipline to undertake the work of reconstruction in their own minds. Once you have presented a viewer with a reconstruction, you have completed that act of historical imagination for them: you have closed down the potential and possibilities. After all, a reconstruction will present the viewer with one way, and one way only, of interpreting evidence from the past that can often, in fact, be brought to life in a myriad different ways. This point of view may seem rather hard work for the viewer; and of course reconstruction, in a broader sense, can take many forms and serve many purposes. The bronze age site of Knossos in Crete, for example was heavily restored in the 1920s by architect Piet de Jong, working with its excavator (and Manchester Guardian correspondent) Sir Arthur Evans. These remains, in their current form, have even been called the best art deco in Greece, and the reinforced concrete reconstructions are historical artefacts in their own right. Nevertheless, many visitors find them more impressive and inspiring than the low rubble walls of other Minoan sites on the island. (An undeniable problem is that it can be hard for visitors to distinguish the parts of the building dating from the second millennium BC from those dating from a century ago.) These days, a trip to an ancient archaeological site – such as Akrotiri on the island of Santorini, or to the emperor Nero’s Domus Aurea in Rome – can be enhanced by seeing computer-generated imagery of decoration, rooms and buildings that exist, for the uninitiated, only as rather confusing masonry traces. Even monuments often considered unchanging and untouched have often been subject to reconstruction. Stonehenge, for example, which celebrated a centenary in the care of the nation on Friday, has had all kinds of intervention, including the re-erection of a fallen trilithon (a pair of sarsen stones plus its lintel) in 1958. Non-western cultures, especially those where stone has not been a common building material, may take a much less reverential position on restoration of historic monuments, happily renewing in modern materials where deemed necessary. Others take a more romantic view, admiring the dilapidation of ruins for dilapidation’s sake. But surely Prof Beard’s substantive point is right: history on TV ought to spark intellectual curiosity, excitement and scepticism, not serve up certainty on a plate.