Prep 20 minCook 1 hrServes 8 For the tomato sauce2 tbsp olive oil2 red onions, chopped2 garlic cloves, chopped½ tsp fennel seeds1 tsp cumin seeds2 tsp ground coriander2 x 400g tins chopped tomatoesPinch of salt1 tbsp soft brown sugar 1 small pumpkin or 1 medium butternut squash, peeled and deseeded3 large parsnips, scrubbed and trimmed2 red peppers, deseeded1 red onion, cut into wedges2–3 tbsp harissa2 tbsp olive oilSalt and black pepper 1 small bunch fresh coriander, leaves chopped50g unsalted butter½ tsp smoked paprika, plus extra for sprinkling6 sheets filo pastry For the yoghurt dip250ml full-fat yoghurt1 garlic clove, crushed1 small bunch fresh mint, leaves roughly chopped1 squeeze lemon juice First make the tomato sauce. Heat the oil in a large pan over a gentle heat, add the onions and cook them for five minutes to soften. Add the garlic and spices and cook, stirring, for two minutes. Add the tomatoes, salt and sugar. Stir well and simmer gently, uncovered, for about 30 minutes, or until slightly syrupy in consistency. Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas 6. Cut the pumpkin or squash, parsnips and peppers into 3cm chunks and put into a large bowl with the onion wedges. Add the harissa, oil and a teaspoon of salt and mix well. Spread evenly over a large deep-sided roasting tin and put in the oven for 30 minutes. Remove the roasted vegetables from the oven and stir in the spiced tomato sauce. Add the chopped coriander and 100ml water. Melt the butter with the paprika in a small pan over a medium heat. Brush a sheet of filo with the paprika butter and lay it over the roasted vegetables. Brush the remaining sheets of filo with the butter, loosely scrunch them up and put them on top of the first piece of filo. Brush any remaining butter over the top and sprinkle with extra paprika. Bake for 25–30 minutes, until the filo is golden and crisp and the filling is piping hot. Mix the yoghurt in a bowl with the garlic, mint and lemon juice. Season and serve alongside the pie. From the Higgidy Cookbook, by Camilla Stephens (Quercus) Butternut or kabocha squash mixed with sweet potatoes comes close to the spicy sweetness and moist texture of a northern Italian pumpkin. These gnocchi are a speciality of Veneto and southern Lombardy. The cinnamon dressing is a classic from the Veneto, while the sage dressing is mostly used in Lombardy. I find it easiest to make these gnocchi with a piping bag and a plain, large nozzle, but you may prefer to make them the more traditional way, shaping them into small balls, using floured hands. Prep 20 minCook 1 hr 15 minServes 4–5 1 tbsp vegetable oil500g butternut or kabocha squash500g sweet potatoes200g flour2 tsp baking powderSalt2 eggs4 tbsp grated parmesan1 pinch nutmeg Option 1: cinnamon dressing75g unsalted butter5 tbsp grated parmesan1 tbsp sugar1 tsp ground cinnamon Option 2: sage dressing75g unsalted butter6 sage leaves, snipped10 tbsp grated parmesan Heat the oven to 180C/ 350F/gas 4. Line a baking tray with foil and brush with oil. Cut the squash in half, scoop out the seeds and fibres, and put the squash,it cut side down, on the foil. Pierce the sweet potatoes with a skewer and put them on the foil with the squash. Bake both vegetables for about an hour, until they can be pierced easily with a fork. Peel the sweet potatoes, scoop out the flesh from the squash, and puree both through a food mill or a potato ricer intoa bowl. Mix in most of the flour, baking powder and a good pinch of salt, then break in the eggs. Mix well to incorporate, adding a little more flour if necessary until you can gather the dough into a ball, then add the parmesan, nutmeg and salt to taste. If you have time, put the mixture in the fridge for 30 minutes; it is easier to shape when cold. Bring a large saucepan of salted water to a boil. To pipe the gnocchi, fill a piping bag with the squash mixture and hold it over the saucepan, squeezing it with one hand and cutting the mixture with the other as it comes out of the nozzle. Cut short shapes about 2cm long, letting them drop straight into the simmering water. In three batches, cook for one to two minutes after they have risen to the surface of the water. Lift out with a slotted spoon and put in a large, shallow ovenproof dish. Spoon a little dressing over each batch and keep the dish warm in a low oven. If you go for the cinnamon dressing, melt the butter in a bain-marie, then pour over the gnocchi and sprinkle with the parmesan, sugar and cinnamon. For the sage dressing, melt the butter, add sage leaves and let the butterave to melt and begin to foam. Spoon over the gnocchi and sprinkle with the parmesan. From Anna Del Conte’s Vegetables all’Italiana (Pavilion) Prep 20 minCook 2 hrServes 8-10 1 large pumpkin (2–3kg)½ tsp salt1 tsp white pepper1 tsp ground ginger¼ tsp grated nutmeg100g gruyere, grated6 slices white bread, cut into cubes and fried in butter200ml single cream Heat the oven to 200C/400F/gas 6. Cut a circle of 5–7cm radius around the stem at top of the pumpkin to form a lid. Lift this out and scrape out all the seeds from the inside with a spoon. Season the inside with salt, pepper, ginger and nutmeg. Add one-third each of the cheese, croutons and cream. Continue with two more layers. Hold back a handful of croutons for garnish. Replace the lid, wrap the pumpkin in foil, put in an ovenproof dish and bake for two hours. Remove the pumpkin from the oven and leave to stand, still wrapped, for 10 minutes. Unwrap and lift off the lid. Using a spoon, carefully ease the soft flesh away from the walls so that it mixes with the cream and cheese mixture. If you have a handheld blender, liquidise the soup inside the shell to a smooth puree. If not, whisk the ingredients together lightly to produce a more rustic and homespun style of soup. In either event, take the whole pumpkin to the table, garnished with croutons, and ladle the soup into bowls. From A Long and Messy Business by Rowley Leigh (Unbound) This is essentially a savoury shortcrust pastry with a few additions – a handful of grated parmesan and some finely chopped herbs for a little extra jazz. You can play around with the herbs, adding thyme or oregano if that’s your preference or what you have to hand.Here’s a deeply savoury tart filled with caramelised roasted pumpkin, bitter greens, salty blue cheese, squidges of roast garlic and hits of warm espelette pepper. If you can’t get hold of espelette pepper you could use dried chilli flakes, a pinch of smoked paprika or a drizzle of harissa. Whichever, you’ve got yourself a tasty lunch. If you can’t get hold of espelette pepper you could use dried chilli flakes, a pinch of smoked paprika or a drizzle of harissa. Prep 25 minChill 1 hr 20 minCook 1 hr 10 minServes 6-8 For the parmesan pastry250g plain flourSalt and black pepper125g unsalted butter, chilled and diced50g parmesan, grated4 tbsp ice-cold water1 tsp cider vinegar For the filling700g peeled pumpkin2 tbsp olive oil4 garlic cloves, unpeeled100g cavolo nero4 eggs350g ricotta50g parmesan, grated100g gorgonzola, broken into pieces1 tbsp pumpkin seedsChilli flakes Prepare the parmesan pastry. Put the flour into a bowl and season. Add the butter and, using your hands, rub it into the flour, until there are only small flecks remaining. Add the parmesan and mix in. Make a well in the middle, add the water and vinegar and combine until the pastry comes together in a dough. Gather into a ball, flatten into a disc, wrap in clingfilm and chill for at least an hour, until needed. Heat the oven to 190C/375F/gas 5. Cut the pumpkin into thick slices, tip into a roasting tray, add the garlic, toss with the oil and season well. Roast on the middle shelf of the oven for about 30 minutes, until tender and just starting to caramelise at the edges. Leave to cool. Blanch the cavolo nero in boiling, salted water for 30 seconds. Drain, cool under cold running water and pat dry on kitchen paper. Roll out the pastry on a floured surface so that it is 10cm wider than the tart tin. Line the tin, pressing the pastry into the corners, leaving the excess hanging over the edges, and chill for 20 minutes while you prepare the filling. Heat a baking tray on the middle shelf of the oven. Whisk together the eggs, ricotta and parmesan. Season well and pour the mixture into the pastry case. Arrange the pumpkin wedges and cavolo nero on top, squeeze the roast garlic from its skin and dot the garlic puree around the veggies. Crumble the gorgonzola and sprinkle the pumpkin seeds and chilli flakes over. for 30–35 minutes, until the pastry is crisp and the filling is set and golden. Using a serrated knife, trim the excess pastry from the tart, and serve hot, warm or at room temperature. From Pies and Tarts by Annie Rigg (Quadrille)