When the young engineer George Washington Gale Ferris Jr erected a giant rotating observation wheel in Chicago 1893, as the centrepiece of the World’s Fair, little did he know what he would unleash. It was planned as the United States’ answer to the Eiffel Tower, and received due acclaim, but the wheel left Ferris mired in debts, lawsuits and ill health. Bankrupt and suffering from typhoid fever, he died three years later, aged 37. His wheel was resurrected for another fair in Missouri, before being dynamited into scrap. A hundred and twenty five years on, his vision for a great circular ride into the sky continues to enrapture tourists and seduce mayors the world over. The ferris wheel has a timeless joy about it, combining the quaint charm of the seaside funfair with the stately drama of a hot-air balloon flight, the horizon gradually revealed as you ascend towards the clouds. Since the supposedly temporary London Eye was opened in 2000, swiftly joining Big Ben on mugs and tea towels, the big wheel has become the ultimate accessory for cities seeking an extra bauble to decorate the skyline, or a diverting garnish for a waterfront property development. Newcastle is the latest city bidding to join the club, with plans for a 140 metre (459ft) wheel (crucially, five metres taller than the London Eye), already known as the “Whey Aye”, as part of a £100m redevelopment of its quayside. It is the brainchild of the World Wheel Company, which has so far brought its “unique concepts” to the Georgian capital, Tbilisi, and the Chinese city of Suzhou. The Tyneside iteration will transform into an advertising billboard by night, and will come complete with a golf simulator and the “Geordie Giant”, a big steel man whose arms will move to tell the time. Newcastle’s wheel may be bigger than London’s, but it will be no match for the world’s biggest ferris wheel, nearing completion in the petrodollar fantasyland of Dubai. From the top of this 210 metre-high illuminated billboard you will be able to gaze from one icon to another, looking down upon islands in the shape of palm trees and the continents. It is another superlative trophy project from which to admire all the other biggests and tallests. But these great circles in the sky don’t always go according to plan. Last month, New York City pulled funding from the proposed Staten Island wheel, a planned 192m ride with a budget that skyrocketed from $250m (£190m) to $999m. Or spare a thought for the people of Changzhou, southern China, who were promised the world’s biggest spoke-less wheel, the “Turn of Fortune”. It was completed in 2013, but remains unopened, looming on the skyline like an abandoned Dyson fan. The sad fate of Ferris, it seems, is sometimes destined to linger on.