Viewers tuning into the NBC morning show Megyn Kelly Today on Thursday morning were greeted by Megyn Kelly from two months ago. Following a row over defending wearing blackface, Kelly has been removed from her namesake talkshow for at least the remainder of the week, with NBC saying in a statement that “given the circumstances” they will air repeats in her time slot. The episode that aired on Thursday was from 31 August. The scandal began on Tuesday’s show when Kelly said she didn’t understand why children couldn’t wear blackface if they were dressing for Halloween. She also defended Real Housewives of New York cast member Luann de Lesseps, who had previously darkened her skin for a Diana Ross costume. After outrage – including by some of her high-profile NBC colleagues – Kelly opened Wednesday’s show with an apology to viewers and hosted a discussion with two black panelists about her comments. But by Wednesday evening it emerged that Kelly had been dropped by Creative Artists Agency (CAA). No reason for the decision has been given by the talent agency, but insiders suggest that a potential conflict of interest would emerge in the event of a clash between Kelly and the network as CAA also represents the NBC News president, Noah Oppenheim. After she made the comments, Kelly retained the services of Bryan Freedman, one of Hollywood’s litigators. The Hollywood Reporter says Freedman is preparing for a “showdown” with NBC on Friday and it is increasingly unlikely Kelly will be able to continue at the network. NBC have not made any official statement about the future of the show. “Reports suggest she’s on her way out and will be paid her full contract, but she won’t be returning to NBC anytime soon,” Daniel Cassino, associate professor of political science at Fairleigh Dickinson University who authored the book Fox News and American Politics, told the Guardian. “If Megyn Kelly had been getting great ratings I imagine NBC would stand by her. But she’s costing a lot of money, they might lose advertisers over this controversy, and she’s not bringing any return,” Cassino added. Kelly’s co-hosts on the main Today show, who present between 7am and 9am before Kelly appears, were heavily critical of her comments. Craig Melvin said her comments were “racist and ignorant”. Al Roker said that Kelly “owes a bigger apology to folks of color around the country”. Kelly’s arrival at NBC was widely trumpeted as a huge win for the network. Kelly was the number one host on Fox News, a network she left amid a storm of sexual harassment allegations against the then network president, Roger Ailes, including allegations made by Kelly herself. She moved to NBC for a reported annual fee of just under $20m. But her initial outing on the network, hosting the political magazine show Sunday Night with Megyn Kelly, received poor reviews and modest ratings. “It’s funny what NBC were trying to do here,” said Cassino. “Megyn Kelly became the star of the 2016 election in the media because she was the one person on Fox News who was willing to call out Trump and willing to call out Roger Ailes. When NBC brought her over they paid her an enormously high salary, built her a $10m studio and let her bring all her own staff. They were hoping to bring some of her popularity. Instead they didn’t get any of the viewership and all of the controversy.”