Pop music is art. We know it is. Unless you’re a high court judge from 1967, you don’t need that debate re-running. Bob Dylan has a Nobel prize in literature now, and he once wrote: “Wiggle, wiggle, wiggle like satin and silk / Wiggle, wiggle, wiggle like a pail of milk”. But is pop art when it’s no longer in the medium of music? That is a harder question. Do its best bits, for instance, deserve to be separated out from the bits where DJ Khaled calls his own name in the background, skimmed off into words and given a nice hardback binding to go on your bookshelf besides the Auden and the Complete Works and that Caitlin Moran book someone you don’t know very well gave you for Christmas? Not all of it does. The best way to test what sort of pop qualifies is to publish a book of your lyrics. Neil Tennant has a Faber volume on the way, entitled One Hundred Lyrics and a Poem. Ian Curtis had his immortalised as part of the same series. Now, Kate Bush is to join them with her own anthology: How to Be Invisible, published in December, with an introduction by David “Cloud Atlas” Mitchell. Bush named her first hit after a school set text, which is a great way to get everyone to think you’re some kind of poet, the sort of person who reads for fun or something. She also wrote a lot of songs that need to be written down to be seen for their full oddness. Cloudbusting, don’t forget, is about a man struggling to recollect the time that his father was arrested for trying to build a rain-making machine. Yes. Breathing is written from the perspective of a foetus during nuclear war. Hounds of Love is about that picture of dogs playing poker. It isn’t, but you get the point. Even then, lines that work on record don’t always seem the same when written down. Her Mrs Bartolozzi is a deft sketch of the drudgery of the housewife, with dabs of Mrs Dalloway. But on the page, it’s hard to justify charging us £19.99 to read: “Slooshy sloshy slooshy sloshy / Get that dirty shirty clean / Slooshy sloshy slooshy sloshy”. The difference is that once they’re presented on the page, you are forced to read the words top-to-bottom, whereas most good pop songs aren’t end-to-end pieces so much as elegant compilations of slogans. That’s why Drake lines work so well as Instagram memes. His narcissistic “soy boy” sextets about sex texts are just phrases to live by, listicles of literature. Besides, like those Pam Ayres poems that always top polls of the nation’s favourites – much to the annoyance of literary types – the words we choose are often more to do with us than them. Noel Gallagher was once a master of this fine line between utter doggerel and shining truism. Ariana Grande is now. In either case, no one is mourning the CD inlay booklet, let alone the vellum tome.