T he only thing I can compare it to really is when I see boxers and UFC fighters that drop down a weight division,” James Doyle says, as he looks ahead to the moment when he weighs out for the Prix de l’Arc de Triomphe on Sunday. “You don’t want to dehydrate yourself too much, but you are going to be dehydrated for a little period of time and so you want to keep that as short as possible. That’s what they do, they lose the last little bit just before the weigh-in and then they put it back on straight after.” He pauses, and smiles. “Unfortunately,” he adds, “we don’t have the luxury of weighing in, and then going straight off and filling up.” Instead, having weighed out at 8st 9lb, three pounds below what would usually be his absolute minimum, Doyle will need to steer a half-ton racehorse – the second favourite, Sea Of Class – from a difficult draw around one of the most challenging tracks in the game. Only then will the pressure be off. Yet as Doyle discusses his pre-race regime and his big chance to win Europe’s most prestigious prize, it has to be said that there is little sign of pressure. His disposition is – typically – as warm as the afternoon at Salisbury racecourse, where he has just ridden the 130th winner of what is already the best season of his career. Some jockeys turn into surly, hollow-cheeked ghosts when they are wasting to make a low weight, but Doyle is not one of them. “I’ve not really thought about it,” he says. “I ride at close to my minimum most days, so if you have to dip below, it’s not like I want to be walking around at 8st 9lb now. You want to leave it as late as possible and trim the last little bit off just before the race. “It’s something I used to be worried about when I was a lot younger, and I didn’t quite understand the body and how certain things work, but as you get a bit older you start to learn what works well with you and what doesn’t, the things that you can eat happily and the stuff that you can only have every now and again. It’s just trial and error really.” Doyle is 5ft 9in tall, and every inch the professional, modern jockey. A quarter of a century ago, he would have towered over every other rider in the weighing room. Even Lester Piggott – famously dubbed the “Long Fellow” – is 5ft 8in. But times, and attitudes, have changed, both towards diet and, in particular, the view that six or seven rides a day is as much of a workout as a rider needs. Fitness regimes have helped jockeys to exert more control over their metabolism. “I’ve got my own gym, hot tub and spa at home and a personal trainer I train with three times a week,” Doyle says. “This week I’ve done a bit extra to what I’d normally do. I’ve got an air assault bike, which does exactly what it says, really. It’s a proper assault bike, 30 minutes on that really sorts you out. “I can pretty much tell without jumping on the scales what weight I would be, from silly things like whether I’ve got my watch on. You can feel it, it can fluctuate a bit and when I was younger it used to fluctuate a hell of a lot more than it does now, but I’ll ride at 9st every day, dip to 8st 12lb for the odd good one, and obviously 8st 9lb for one that’s once in a lifetime.” Sea Of Class, clearly, is very much in that category. She has won her last two races, both at the highest level of the sport, with a withering burst of speed in the final furlong. The anticipated fast ground at Longchamp on Sunday will suit her perfectly and like four of the last 10 winners, Sea Of Class is a three-year-old filly, getting weight from all but one of her opponents. Enable, a three-year-old herself when she won the race at Chantilly last year, will head the market on Sunday, but Sea Of Class has all the attributes that could be necessary to beat the favourite. “I’ve got huge respect for Enable and if she’s on her game, she’s going to be very tough to beat,” Doyle says, “but if our filly has improved from York [in August], and as far as I know, she has, then who knows what could happen? “It’s the biggest race in Europe and it would be a dream to win it. I’ve talked to Frankie about it in the past and he says there’s no other feeling like it, passing the line in the Arc is just the absolute ultimate for us in Europe. I’m fortunate enough to have ridden in it four times and it was amazing to have been part of the race, never mind actually going there with a sneaky feeling that you could be the winner.” 6.00am Wake up6.15am Breakfast: a few oats, a bit of yoghurt, fruit6.30am Air assault bike, 30 minutes7.00am Sweat in hot tub9.00am Fly to Paris11.30am Arrive Longchamp 11.45am Sauna3.05pm Ride Sea Of Class in the Arc