Need a convincing member of a street gang for a TV show? Or a suspected terrorist for a police interrogation scene? Britain’s typecast black and Asian actors are used to rolling their eyes, taking a deep breath and heading off for the audition. The chance to show off the wider range of their acting skills is rare. But a book published on 1 November is likely to help. The first of its kind, Hear Me Now: Audition Monologues for Actors of Colour, is designed to combat this stereotyping and allow actors to tackle a greater breadth of subjects. “Whenever I had an audition coming up, it was so hard to find something I really wanted to do,” said 24-year-old actor Shiv Jalota, who is on tour in the hit stage version of Mark Haddon’s The Curious Incident of the Dog in the Night-time. “It all gets so limiting, especially as I often felt I had to go for the role of a Muslim kid who is radicalising, or something about an arranged marriage.” Fellow actor Chinenye Ezeudu agreed: “This project is special, as we are often encouraged to pick a character close to ourself for audition. But it is hard to find pieces, so we’re always having to play something that isn’t true to us.” Calls for diversity in acting have grown louder over the past decade, but writer Titilola Dawudu, who has compiled more than 80 short original monologues for the book, came up with the plan with Tamasha Theatre Company because she felt there had been enough talking. “It came out of the idea that we don’t just want a better conversation about diversity – we want action,” said Dawudu, 37, who studied stage and screenwriting at Central St Martins drama centre, University of the Arts London, and who mentors young actors at Ovalhouse, a theatre in Lambeth, south London. “People in their early career regularly speak to me about their frustrations. They want to get away from the stereotypes that come up time and time again. Now at least they can have an audition piece they feel all right about and that can empower them.” The selection of monologues, published by Oberon Books, contains many more deliberately “nuanced stories”, ranging from a piece about a cross-dressing imam, to the first black prime minister and a British-Indian girl who dreams of becoming a country music star. “I used to write them for my performer friends in Croydon who were hoping to get into the Brit School,” said Dawudu, a Nigerian-born Londoner. “So, from workshopping with actors, we came up with ideas that could sometimes be played by a white actor as well, but were not so confining for BAME actors. There’s an astronaut, for example, and a superhero.” For Dawudu, a good audition piece, while only two or three minutes long in performance time, ought to take you on a journey. “It was about hearing what the actors said they wanted to play,” she said. “Some pieces are quite culturally driven, and might be about race, but some are not. A few pieces are about dual heritage. But it is not London-centric in its language and we’ve even had inquiries about it from as far away as Australia.” Jalota, who said his role in The Curious Incident is the first that is not predicated on his skin colour, took part in the workshops and found it a relief to jump out of standard BAME personas. “It opened it all up. I worked on one monologue about a karate teacher obsessed with scientology. It was so much more rewarding and not associated at all with my ethnicity.” While BAME actors are frequently happy to read for parts from the standard repertory of British theatre– the gamut of western plays, from Shakespeare to Noël CowardDawudu – the chance to represent their own experiences in auditions in unexpected ways has been welcomed. Dawudu said: “The industry is changing, and we now have more colour-blind casting, but casting directors are still usually white and so are directors. So, a lot of times, black actors are still going for bit parts, or parts that are negatively stereotyped, like terrorists. They may not feel good about it, yet they need the work, so they have to go for them.”