The New York Giants’ stormy season continues, with owner John Mara expressing his displeasure at star wide receiver Odell Beckham’s recent comments about the team. The Giants’ playoff chances are all but done after last week’s loss to the Philadelphia Eagles left them with a 1-5 record. That result came after Beckham had questioned quarterback Eli Manning’s ability during an interview with ESPN. “I wish [Beckham] would create the headlines by his play on the field as opposed to what he says and what he does off the field,” Mara said at Tuesday’s NFL owners meeting. “I think he needs to do a little more playing and a little less talking.” Beckham, one of the most talented receivers in the league, signed a five-year, $90m contract extension earlier this year but has appeared frustrated with the 37-year-old Manning’s ability to make long throws. Although Mara was unhappy with Beckham’s interview he did not give Manning a clear endorsement when asked about the quarterback on Tuesday. “I think when you’re 1-5, it generally means that everybody needs to play better, so he’s not alone,” Mara said. “I still ... we still believe in him, but everybody needs to do their jobs in order for us to be successful, and right now that’s not happening. I know he’s the punching bag right now, but a lot of guys need to play better when you’re 1-5.” The Giants had the No2 pick in this year’s draft but chose to select running back Saquon Barkley rather than a quarterback. The Giants’ cross-town rival New York Jets then took quarterback Sam Darnold at No3, and the rookie has shown glimpses of promise. Mara said he had no regrets about the Giants pick though. “We took the best player in the draft,” Mara said of Barkley, who has been a rare bright spot for the team this season. “I’m thrilled with what he’s accomplished so far, and I think the sky’s the limit for him.” Mara also said he had confidence in head coach Pat Shurmur and general manager David Gettelman. “I have confidence that we have the right guys in the building to get it to work,” he said.