A translucent bubble floats in the air next to a picture of a baby’s head cradled tenderly in an adult’s arms. Nearby, among an arrangement of similarly intimate images, an infant’s tiny hand is gently enfolded in an elderly grandparent’s grasp. On a single wall in the National Portrait Gallery, amid the contrasting styles and subject matter of the 2018 Taylor Wessing portrait prize, Rinko Kawauchi’s vivid images of four generations of her family create a quietly intense space in which to pause and ponder the beauty and fragility of the everyday. She is the fourth photographer to be commissioned for the In Focus section, which highlights new work by established artists in a mini exhibition. (Pieter Hugo, Cristina de Middel and Todd Hido preceded her.) “I need many elements to come together in a series to create a mood,” she says, “not just portraits, but landscapes and tiny details and also the mood, the sky, the air. It’s about creating mystery, but also expressing my own feelings about time passing, the fragility of life. They are metaphorical images, really, [about] how fragile our world is.” When a picture happens, I just say ‘thank you’ and move on. It is only afterwards that I become an editor Recently, that sense of life’s frailty has become more acute for Kawauchi following the birth of her daughter, whose first few years have been captured in characteristically hypnotic images. Since Kawauchi’s arrival on the art scene in 2001 with the simultaneous publication of three photobooks, Utatane (“Catnap”), Hanabi (“Fireworks”) and Hanako (a Japanese girl’s name), her family have featured in her work alongside often breathtakingly beautiful photographs of the natural world – insects, rainbows, clouds, butterflies and, of late, sacred rituals and ancient sites in her native Japan. She is an artist of the quotidian sublime, creating a world in which the tiniest details – a slice of watermelon on a plate, a bird’s egg cracking open – are imbued with meaning as part of the greater whole, the great interconnectedness. The images on show at the NPG are a continuation of an ongoing project that began with her 2005 book, Cui Cui, which comprised photographs of extended family taken over the previous 15 years. In that time, she witnessed the death of her grandfather and the birth of her nephew. It is not, though, she insists, a work of “personal disclosure” – rather a visual contemplation of the cycle of life in all its sadness and wonder. She is, she tells me in her faltering but often poetic English, “in sympathy with small things in the bigness of nature”. Her approach is patient, deeply attentive, akin to a kind of heightened meditation. “It’s about finding a certain space of mind, if that makes sense. When I am shooting, I am following my intuition without thinking. Thinking too much is boring, not good. It stops the surprising from coming through. When a picture happens, I just say ‘thank you’ and move on. It is only afterwards that I become an editor and impose the meaning on the work.” In person, the diminutive Kawauchi is quietly spoken and self-contained; one senses that her work is an extension of her self. It is difficult to imagine her operating in the combative world of commercial advertising photography, which she did for several years after graduating from college in the early 1990s. She cites the American master of the everyday William Eggleston as a formative influence, alongside the younger Japanese photographer Takashi Homma. Her early images, which often seemed like deftly composed snapshots, were bathed in natural light and washed with bright colour tones that added to their almost dreamlike quality. In 2004, Martin Parr gave her two gallery spaces when he guest-curated Les Rencontres d’Arles, and in 2006 she had a solo show at the Photographer’s Gallery in London. Back then, I noted that her work “might initially appear to approach the deadpan detachment that characterises so much contemporary art-photography, but on closer inspection there is always some glimmer of hope and humanity, some sense of wonder at work in the rendering of the intimate and fragile.” That remains the case, but, of late, her vision has widened and deepened. In 2013, her series Ametsuchi announced a departure of sorts. Using a large format camera mounted on a tripod, she shot from a distance, creating panoramas of the stark, elemental, volcanic terrain around Japan’s Mount Aso, a sacred site for Shinto pilgrims who gather there to perform often spectacular fire rituals. Last year, Halo continued her exploration of these bigger themes. In rural Japan and China, she photographed other religious fire rituals and the vast constellations above. On England’s south-east coast, she captured the wondrous natural spectacle that is the murmuration of starlings. The private and the everyday had suddenly given way to the celestial elemental, the tranquil to the spectacular. And yet, they remained Rinko Kawauchi photographs: striking, luminous, poetic. “Halo is really about the relationship between nature and the manmade,” she says, “There is something about time passing in all the work and, with Halo, it is about a practice that is unchanging for hundreds of years while the world changes around it.” Her work is changing in other ways, too. When she began making work, Kawauchi gravitated towards the photobook as the perfect medium for her closely observed images of the world around her. Now, she is intrigued with the possibilities of the moving image. To this end, in 2015 she created an installation in a gallery in Shinjuku of video works mounted on 30 monitors, her images, both intimate and elemental, unfolding to an ambient soundtrack of natural noises – wind, insects – and “music created on real instruments”. I ask her, in conclusion, if being a mother has changed her approach to her work. She thinks for a long moment. “I would say yes, but not in the expected way. In my personal life, it has been amazing of course; as a photographer, I am not so sure. When I feel happy, I see no reason to make work, but sometimes there is this hunger to make work. So, it is complicated. I need this hungry spirit and the calm. I need the balance to find the story inside me.” The Taylor Wessing photographic portrait prize is at the National Portrait Gallery, London, until 27 January 2019.