Of all the small, edible rituals that season the day – late morning coffee and cake; green tea and fruit in the afternoon; plain, unsullied goat’s yogurt at dawn – there are few I enjoy more than our working breakfasts. Shopping done. Oven on. Camera primed. Notebooks at the ready. We then sit down to that first meal. There might be mushrooms on toast, Cumberland sausages from Mr Godfrey or cheese sandwiches, their filling dripping out on to the grill, sending out a ribbon of savoury smoke to set off the fire alarm. There is the inevitable request for ketchup. Sometimes we have a bottle of commercial stuff, other times we make our own. A sweet-sharp-spicy dollop, thick enough to need help out of its bottle, but soft enough to stick to whatever is dipped in it – a chewy crust; the tip of a glossy sausage. The balance is achieved by a careful juggling of the sugar and some form of acidity. The sweetness can come from brown sugar, honey or from the fresh ingredients themselves, and the acidity from various forms of vinegar. The essential spicing could include mustard, ginger or chilli. This week there was horseradish-hot beetroot ketchup for sausage sandwiches, but we made another, too, a silky, ochre dip with bananas and ginger that was destined for grilled fish, but would have been just as welcome for a massaman curry or a bowl of steamed white rice. A lump of cheese, broken off and dipped sleepily into the ketchup at midnight isn’t too shabby a ritual either. A ketchup that is good with beef, duck, pork but also with cheese. The consistency will thicken in the fridge, something to bear in mind when adding the vinegars. Makes enough to fill a 750ml jar beetroot 5, small to mediumthyme 6 sprigswater 5 tbspolive oil 4 tbsponions 3, mediumgarlic 3 clovescider vinegar 80mlred wine vinegar 160mlgrated horseradish 3 tbsp To serve with pork chops for 2:black peppercorns 8salt ½ tspthyme 6 small sprigsolive oil a littlepork chops 2 Set the oven at 200C/gas mark 6. Place a piece of kitchen foil in a large roasting tin. Wash the beetroot and trim their stems, taking care not to puncture the skin. Add the thyme sprigs, water and 2 tbsp of the oil, then loosely scrunch the edges of the foil to make a parcel. Bake for 45 minutes until the beetroot is just showing signs of tenderness. Peel and roughly chop the onion and garlic and mix with the remaining oil. When the beetroot has been cooking for 45 minutes, add the onion and garlic mixture to the roasting tin around the foil parcel and return to the oven. Continue cooking for a further 40 minutes or until the beetroot is tender and the onion mixture is sweet and caramelised. Unwrap the beetroot, let it cool briefly, then peel off the skin by rubbing with your thumb. Put it into a processor or blender with the onion-mixture vinegars, a generous seasoning of salt and the horseradish, added to taste, if you like. Check the seasoning for vinegar. Process to a coarse purée. The ketchup will keep in a sealed jar for up to a week in the fridge. To cook the chops, put the peppercorns and salt in a mortar. Pull the leaves from the thyme and bash with the seasonings with a pestle or heavy weight. Lightly oil the chops then rub the thyme seasoning into them. Cook on a heated griddle until the fat is golden and translucent. This ochre, ginger and chilli spiced ketchup will darken slightly in the fridge, but you can keep it for up to a week in a jar, tightly sealed. Makes enough for one 500ml storage jar banana shallots 2 largecherry tomatoes 200ggarlic 3 clovesginger 40gred chillies 2, small and hotgroundnut oil 3 tbspbananas 4rice vinegar 3 tbspsalt ½ tsp To serve with fish for 2: seabass fillets 2butter 30gnigella seeds 2 tsp Peel and roughly chop the banana shallots. Cut the cherry tomatoes in half. Peel and thinly slice the garlic. Peel and finely dice the ginger. Finely slice one of the chilies, removing the seeds if you wish. Warm the oil in a deep saucepan set over a moderate heat, add the shallot, garlic, ginger and sliced chilli, and cook for about 20 minutes, stirring regularly, until the shallots are soft and sticky. You should be able to crush them between finger and thumb. Peel and chop the bananas, stir into the shallots with the tomatoes and continue cooking for 5 minutes. Stir in the rice vinegar and a ½ tsp of salt, then remove from the heat. Process the mixture in a blender or food processor. You can stop at any point depending on how smooth or textured you like your ketchup. Finely slice the remaining chilli and fry for a couple of minutes in a little hot oil until it sizzles and darkens. Transfer the ketchup to a bowl to serve and scatter over the hot, fried chilli. To store, transfer to a clean glass jar and store in the fridge. For the seabass, place the fillets, skin side down, on a grill pan or baking sheet. Melt the butter then stir in a little salt, pepper and the nigella seeds. Brush over the fish then cook under an overhead (oven) grill, basting with the butter from time to time, until the fish is cooked. Served with the banana ketchup. The Guardian aims to publish recipes for sustainable fish. For ratings in your region, check: UK; Australia; US Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater