The Week in Patriarchy is a weekly roundup of what’s happening in the world of feminism and sexism. If you’re not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. First lady and devoted public servant Melania Trump has been working exceptionally hard lately. Not only did she spend last week parading around Africa dressed like a Nazi collaborator from an Indiana Jones movie in an effort to promote her Be Best program. She also graced us with her thoughts on #MeToo. In an interview with ABC News, the first lady said, “I support the women and they need to be heard” but added that if they come forward as victims they must “show the evidence”. Unfortunately, Melania did not elaborate on what sort of evidence she considers acceptable. Might she accept, for example, a tape of her husband boasting about grabbing women’s crotches without their consent? Despite her immense advocacy for women, I’m sorry to report that Melania feels let down by the sisterhood. “I could say I’m the most bullied person in the world,” she said in her interview. Listen, I support the Melanias and they need to be heard, but if you’re going to come forward as a victim, you must show the evidence. And right now all the evidence seems to point at the first lady being just as morally bankrupt as the president and deserving every ounce of criticism she attracts. If you do feel any spark of sympathy for Melania, I suggest you redirect your attention to the thousands of migrant children the Trump administration has kidnapped. Despite being the most bullied person in the world, Melania ought to feel optimistic. Trump keeps floating how great his daughter would be as ambassador to the United Nations: he tweeted about it again on Friday morning. If Ivanka does get the UN job, and let’s face it, it’s not beyond the realm of possibility, I’m sure it won’t be long until Melania is appointed secretary of defense. Let’s see you try and bully her then. Navy veteran Pieter Hanson, 32, became a meme this week after his mother tweeted his photo and said he was too afraid to date because of #MeToo madness. “This is MY son,” Pieter’s mom tweeted. “He graduated #1 in boot camp. He was awarded the USO award. He was #1 A school. He is a gentleman who respects women. He won’t go on solo dates due to the current climate of false sexual accusations by radical feminists with an axe to grind. I VOTE. #HimToo.” Turns out Pieter doesn’t hold quite the same views as his mom. “Let’s turn this around,” he tweeted. “I respect and #BelieveWomen. I never have and never will support #HimToo.” Good man. Amazon has scrapped an artificial intelligence-powered recruiting tool after discovering it discriminated against women. The machine-learning system was trained on 10 years of CVs submitted to the company, most of which came from men. This caused the system to penalize CVs that included the word “women”. There’s been a lot of hype recently about using AI in the recruitment process to overcome unconscious bias and increase diversity. However, as this case study shows, technology is far from neutral and can entrench existing prejudice. On Thursday, Manhattan’s district attorney dropped a charge involving claims made by Lucia Evans, one of three accusers in the case. Weinstein still faces charges over allegations he raped a woman in 2013 and forced a sex act on another woman in 2006. He has pleaded not guilty. But while a poorer man would be locked up while he waits for his day in court, Weinstein is free on $1m bail. I’m sure you’ve already seen Lynzy Lab’s viral song A Scary Time for Boys. But if you missed it she performed it on Jimmy Kimmel Live on Thursday, which was International Day of the Girl. Same-sex penguin couple Sphen and Magic, residents of Sea Life Sydney Aquarium, have started a family. The two lovebirds, known as Sphengic, have been practicing their parenting skills on a pebble and have proven themselves very good at sharing responsibilities. Now they’ve been given a real egg to look after. I’m sure they are going to make great dads. If you enjoy reading The Week in Patriarchy and would like to help support the Guardian, make a contribution. Thank you.