Donald Trump has said newly-confirmed supreme court Justice Brett Kavanaugh, who was accused of sexual assault or misconduct by three women, was “caught up in a hoax that was set up by the Democrats”. Speaking to reporters before departing for a speech in Florida on Monday, Trump said the allegations of sexual misconduct against Kavanaugh were “all made up, it was fabricated and it’s a disgrace”. Kavanaugh was accused by several women of sexual misconduct, including California professor Dr Christine Blasey Ford, who testified under oath that he assaulted her at a party when the two were in high school. Kavanaugh has denied all the allegations. Trump had once said he found Ford’s testimony credible, telling reporters after she testified on Capitol Hill that “she was a very credible witness. She was very good in many respects.” However, he has since increasingly questioned her testimony, openly mocking her at a campaign rally last week in Mississippi. However, the use of the word “hoax” marked Trump’s most direct attack on Kavanuagh’s accusers overall throughout the confirmation fight, which culminated in the judge’s confirmation on Saturday by the US Senate by a vote of 50-48. He hailed the vote at a campaign rally later that night in Kansas where he told a crowd “I stand before you today on the heels of a tremendous victory for our nation, our people and our beloved constitution.” Speaking later on Monday afternoon Trump amplified his views about Kavanaugh’s treatment by Democrats during the confirmation fight, when he gave a speech in Orlando, Florida, before the International Association of Police Chiefs. “It was a disgraceful situation brought about by people who are evil,” said Trump, who also described Kavanaugh as “flawless”. The president also told reporters on Monday morning that he thinks many Democrats will vote Republican in next month’s midterm elections because they are angry about Kavanaugh’s treatment. Republican strategists in races across the country have pointed to a surge of energy among conservative voters in recent weeks, particularly in Senate races. One top Republican strategist, who preferred not to be named, told the Guardian: “The Kavanaugh issue has reset the playing field in a major way that I frankly didn’t expect at all. It’s got our side energised.” However, the Republican cautioned that “it remains to be seen whether this lasts for the next three weeks or not”. Although Kavanaugh was formally sworn in as a supreme court justice on Saturday evening after the final vote – while angry protesters banged on the huge front doors of the court building in Washington – there was due to be a ceremonial swearing at the White House on Monday evening where Trump himself will administer the oath of office.