Pep Guardiola has called on Liverpool and their fans to ensure there is no repeat of last season’s attack on Manchester City’s team bus, with the manager wishing the police could be at home “drinking a beer” instead of having to offer protection for Sunday’s game at Anfield. City’s coach was severely damaged before last April’s 3-0 Champions League defeat. Merseyside police did not make an arrest and a City fan group, 1894, has stated on social media it may line the players’ entrance to Anfield to shield the vehicle. Guardiola said: “The best way is that we should not need the police. Why should the police need to be there? For what? We arrive there, both sides, to play a Premier League game. Why should our fans have to protect our bus? Are you kidding me? “I would like the police to go home at 4.30 with their families, drinking a beer and loving the show, that is what they should do. But that depends on the Liverpool people, not on Manchester City. The best way to protect the bus is down to the Liverpool fans who are there. The best way is that when the people arrive at the stadium [they are] going to see football game and enjoy watching both sides.” Guardiola is also insistent it would be “boring” for City to change their attacking style for the match, despite City losing three times to Jürgen Klopp’s side last season. In the corresponding Premier League fixture the champions conceded three times in 10 minutes, going down 4-3. They allowed Liverpool to do much the same in the quarter-final first-leg defeat at Anfield. City also lost the return but did beat Liverpool 5-0 in the league game at the Etihad Stadium. “We have to defend but not in the approach because it’s boring and we have to be ourselves,” Guardiola said. “These kind of games we have to be ourselves. If we lose then congrats to Jürgen but we try to improve and go again.” Kevin De Bruyne could be available after eight weeks out with a knee injury. “He made a part of the training session today,” Guardiola said. Benjamin Mendy may start, having rejoined the squad after a foot problem.