Imagine being the chief financial officer of a corporation whose headquarters is squarely in the path of a high-category hurricane. You are delivering your annual statement to the principal shareholders, many of whom think it would be a good idea to get out of the way of the whirlwind. Others, mysteriously, dismiss the strong advice of “expert” meteorologists and insist that the hurricane will somehow be good for the business, liberating its full potential as it tears the building from its very foundations. Yet another group – the Jeremy and John Consortium – thinks that the battering storm will enable them to transform the business and collectivise its assets. This is pretty much what it will be like for Philip Hammond when he stands up on Monday to deliver his third budget, the last before Hurricane Brexit hits the United Kingdom on 29 March. By definition, the chancellor of the day is always the cabinet’s party-pooper, the minister whose task it is to contain the spending ambitions of his departmental colleagues. But there is a special loathing reserved for Hammond. Many of his fellow cabinet ministers seethe about him in private with a ferocity that is simply not warranted by his love of Microsoft Excel spreadsheets and aversion to political showboating. No: senior Tories hate Hammond because he challenges their magical thinking about Brexit, their faith that our departure from the EU will be a triumph of the will if we dare to embrace the power of positive thinking. Tediously, laboriously, but entirely correctly, the chancellor maintains that bravado and conviction have nothing to do with it: Brexit will be a highly technical, operational matter, not an exercise in pageantry and rightwing performance art. Still, he is obliged, ex officio, not to panic and to deliver a budget that as far as possible cleaves to the rules of normal service. As ever, a series of measures has been heavily trailed before his speech: additional defence spending, a fresh box of sticking plasters for universal credit, help for rough sleepers, money for broadband, a boost for the UK’s beleaguered high streets, an extra £420m for potholes and – pure bathos – the announcement of a review to enable couples to be married in the open air. Next Conservative slogan: Britain Just Got Wetter. There has also been speculation that the chancellor will raise income tax thresholds in 2019 – a year earlier than planned. That would certainly be consistent with the fiscal strategy adopted by the Conservatives since the formation of the Cameron-Clegg coalition eight years ago. But it would sit uneasily alongside Theresa May’s promise in her party conference speech that austerity “is over”. Hammond might argue, with much evidence on his side, that revenues increase when tax thresholds rise and rates fall. But this is a very difficult argument to make politically at a time when so many are feeling the full impact of eight years of cuts – with more to come. From Hammond’s interview on Sunday with the BBC’s Andrew Marr, it was clear that the chancellor wants to postpone as many serious decisions as possible until next year’s spending review. Who can blame him? For better or worse, the moment of departure from the EU will be in the rearview mirror: whoever is chancellor will at least have the measure of what is happening, and a sense of the depth of the economic craters (or the height of the sunlit uplands if, against all logic, the Brexiteers prove to be right). As for this budget, Hammond cannot even be sure that it will get through the Commons. The Democratic Unionist party, whose 10 MPs prop up this minority government, have been explicit in their warning that they may vote against the finance bill if they are unsatisfied by May’s negotiating position on the Irish border. This would be, to use the cliche, a nuclear option. But we are living in one of those phases in politics where cliches regain their original force. It is now more than conceivable that the DUP, perhaps in alliance with a few hard Brexiteer Tory MPs, could vote down the budget. So shrunken and petty does politics seem these days that it is easy to neglect the scale of what is at stake. Even as we approach the greatest single change in our institutional and commercial arrangements since the second world war, there is a parallel ideological conflict over the very nature of the state and citizenship. Jeremy Corbyn and John McDonnell want a very different system, with nationalisation and Keynesian borrowing, taxation and expenditure at its heart. The Conservatives still stand for fiscal conservatism, moderated to a greater or lesser extent by the occasional spree. This is indeed an important and necessary debate: the role of the state in the 21st century will certainly change as automation means that there is less work for us to do as we live longer, and as the inequalities of globalisation become ever more intolerable. Yet our political class, as presently configured, is not up to the task of this dual conversation: it is seriously overstretched, tested way past its enfeebled civic capacity. There is terrible weakness on both sides of the dispatch box. Yes, Labour is (up to a point) defining the battle of ideas, but – to judge, at least, by the opinion polls – it is nowhere near where it needs to be electorally. The Tory minority government could be accused of playground politics – though that would be grossly unfair to the children in most playgrounds. The system is dangerously close to overload. Hammond will doubtless be as smooth as ever. But all around him will fizz and fly the sparks of a political circuitry that may soon be ablaze.