Children in the Kennedy household had to follow the rules. The horses, seals and coatimundis in the grounds of Hickory Hill – the imposing family home John F Kennedy sold to his brother Robert – might have made it feel a long way from Capitol Hill, but for a family inextricably connected to the formalities of high office there were certain expectations. Dinner was served at 7pm sharp every evening, no exceptions; each of the siblings would have their nails scrubbed and hair brushed when they took their seats at the table. Sunday mornings were spent in church, Sunday nights were for poetry recitation. That said, Rory, now 49, and the youngest of Bobby and Ethel Kennedy’s kids, understands it to have been a household of welcome contradictions: “There was a healthy encouragement of rebellion, too.” On a December evening in 1984, Rory, then 13, and her brother Douglas were watching the news. Anti-apartheid activists were being handcuffed at protests outside the South African embassy in DC, just 10 miles from where they lived with their nine siblings. It was decided: if other people were putting their bodies on the line, these two would as well. At breakfast the next morning, they made their case for getting arrested to their mother. “Without missing a beat, mummy looked at us and said, ‘Fantastic, get in the car, I’ll get you down there’,” says Rory, smiling as she remembers. “They arrested me and I was thrown in a police car and handcuffed. I looked up at my mother and I tell you, I don’t think she has ever been prouder.” Moments like this were just one of the ways in which Robert Kennedy’s presence continued to be felt by his widow and children after his 1968 assassination. Ethel was three months pregnant with Rory when her husband was fatally shot, having just addressed his supporters in a Los Angeles hotel ballroom while on the campaign trail in his bid to secure the Democratic presidential nomination. He died in hospital 26 hours later. “I grew up without a father, and with a sadness for sure, not having him or knowing him,” she says. “I also grew up with family who had a real sense of gratitude for the life we have, and for all the extraordinary gifts. There wasn’t a lot of tolerance for feeling like a victim, or feeling sorry for yourself.” While conversations about Bobby’s life and work were commonplace, when it came to his death, talk was more muted. In 2012 Rory directed Ethel – an HBO documentary about the life of her mother. “Can we talk about something else?” Ethel says, holding back tears, when her daughter brings up her father’s murder on camera. “We grew up in a family where we were encouraged to look outwards at what was going on in the world,” Rory explains. “There was less focus on what was going on inwardly.” Today she lives on the outskirts of Los Angeles with her husband and film-making partner of 20 years Mark Bailey and their three children. There’s no doubt the Kennedy name has been of use to her – her family is undoubtedly of more interest to the public than her films - but nobody could accuse Rory of taking the easy path into the industry. A director and producer, she has turned her lens on gun violence, HIV and Aids, the Vietnam war and her own family – hardly straightforward or glamorous subjects. And she’s clearly talented too: she’s won an Emmy and been nominated for an Academy Award. Her new film, Above and Beyond: Nasa’s Journey to Tomorrow looks to the space agency’s past successes and future challenges as it marks its 60th anniversary. In 1962, her uncle John F Kennedy launched Nasa’s programme to take man to the moon. “The film jumps around through time, and it’s organised somewhat thematically rather than a chronological telling. Part of that was because of my personal connection.” As a student at Brown University, Rory found herself drawn to documentary. “Cable was exploding during my college years,” she recalls, “and we grew up in an Irish family, where storytelling was a big part of my experience.” Looking back, she says, film felt like a natural fit – but in its own way it was also another act of rebellion. “I’ve considered going into politics or becoming a lawyer, but I wanted to beat my own path.” There were a lot of men in the Kennedy family, and that’s one reason she gives for enrolling on a women’s studies major. “There were seven brothers and the influence of the older generation was dominated by men in my family.” But there were lesser known figures who, to Rory’s mind, also did great things. “My aunt Eunice started the Special Olympics. That was one of the most amazing contributions of our family, and a lot of people aren’t aware of it.” For all the privilege, wealth and power the Kennedy family possesses, theirs is a story also defined by grief and sadness. Both Rory’s uncle and father were killed before she was born; Rory was only 15 when her brother, David, died from an overdose. While on a skiing trip with another brother, Michael, he had a fatal accident. She knelt by his side while attempting to resuscitate him. The tragedies continued. En route to Rory’s wedding in Connecticut, her cousin John F Kennedy Jr, who was piloting a light aircraft, died in a plane crash with his wife, Carolyn Bessette, and sister-in-law, Lauren Bessette. The official investigation by the National Transportation Safety Board concluded that Kennedy fell victim to spatial disorientation while he was descending over water at night and consequently lost control of his plane. Before he flew his friend John Barlow, former lyricist with the Grateful Dead, said: “You know just enough to be dangerous. You have confidence in the air, which could harm you.” As the American journalist Edward Klein wrote in his 2001 book The Kennedy Curse, Rory Kennedy “suffered more from the Kennedy Curse than any other member of the family.” How did she navigate the darkness? “It’s an ongoing process. I’ve worked on it. I’ve…” Rory falters. “I feel pain, sorrow and sadness. That’s part of the process, over these many years.” She goes silent again. “I think that I’ve also, over the years, gotten tools to help me work through it in a positive way, turning those experiences into a deeper understanding of others. You see somebody else suffer and you feel that suffering.” Not every Kennedy has dealt quite so well with the pressure. Theirs is a dynasty defined not only by politics and power, but scandal too. There were the affairs: brothers Jack and Bobby are both rumoured to have had flings with Marilyn Monroe; Rory’s brother Michael with his children’s teenage babysitter. A cousin was charged with rape, another of murder. Uncle Ted survived when he drove off a Martha’s Vineyard bridge. The young woman he was driving was left for dead, submerged in the water. Ted fled the scene, his blood alcohol levels never tested. And there were the assassinations: killings which to this day are subject to countless conspiracy theories. Through it all, Rory has kept her name from headlines. “I try to deepen my understanding of those events, that loss, I try to… ultimately it’s hard, and sad, and difficult. But I do feel that it has had a positive influence on me and my ability to do the work that I do.” Democrats across the USA are struggling to stomach the Trump administration, but for Rory, seeing the presidential office being denigrated on a daily basis comes with its own particular, personal sting. If it wasn’t for a gunshot, the White House might have been her childhood home, as it was for her cousins. “It’s horrible. It actually makes me depressed,” she says of Trump’s presidency. “It has a psychologically damaging impact on me, as an individual. It’s really upsetting, and it is personal. “You feel it walking around and talking to people – there’s a cloud of sadness, disappointment and anxiety,” she says. “He’s doing damage to the climate, to immigrants, to people who live in poverty, to workers, to women, to race relations… There’s a sexual predator in the White House,” she adds – a label she also applies to Trump’s Supreme Court nomination, Brett Kavanaugh. As with the most experienced politicians, in almost two hours of conversation, Rory gives only what she wants of herself away. Questions are smoothed over with fluff and platitudes. One gets the impression that Rory doesn’t resent still having to speak about her family – she says she “love[s] the association” – but just as with that documentary, Ethel, it’s a rose-tinted vision. As the New York Times put it: “Watching [Ethel] is a little like reading a classified report redacted by Dick Cheney – so much material is blacked out that it’s almost impossible to follow.” Rory’s take on her family is subjective. The fact she’s a filmmaker doesn’t change that. Yes, the Kennedy’s salacious stories are what make Rory interesting, but you can’t blame her for not airing the dirty laundry in public again and again. She herself has managed nearly half a century scandal-free (which, all things considered, is arguably her most impressive achievement), and as a documentarian she’s now somewhat removed from the Kennedy narrative – more comfortable behind, not in front of, the camera. And, if you’re really looking for that dirty Kennedy laundry, it has been free for all to see for decades anyway. Rory picks up a piece of paper that lies face-down in front of her. It’s a copy of the widely quoted speech John F Kennedy made when he announced at Rice University that America would endeavour to land a man on the moon. She reads it aloud. “He was tapping into the best of humankind,” she says afterwards, clearly proud of her uncle. “That’s leadership – where we expand our knowledge and become our better selves. We don’t have that right now in our country. Trump is tapping into the worst of us, our fears and anxieties.” At 13 she put her liberty on the line for a cause – would she get arrested to protest Trump today? Again, the Kennedy smile: “Absolutely. I would welcome it.” Above and Beyond: Nasa’s Journey to Tomorrow airs at 8pm on Sunday 14 October on the Discovery Channel