Anyone who has smelled durian will be able to tell you why it is banned from public transport across south-east Asia. The distinct aroma of the fruit, an alleged aphrodisiac, has been likened to rotting meat, gym socks, sewage and ripe cheese. Likewise, those who have had fermented Icelandic shark – a delicacy Anthony Bourdain claimed was the most disgusting thing he had ever eaten – will tell of its acquired taste: an unlikely marriage of fish, blue cheese and ammonia. Durian and fermented shark are two of the 80 exhibits on display at the new Museum of Disgusting Food in Malmö, Sweden, alongside fermented horse milk from Russia, a Sardinian cheese that harbours flies’ larvae, as well as Jell-O salad, fruitbat and mouse wine. And let us not linger too long on the bull’s penis. Working with the anthropology department at Lund University, the museum devised two strict criteria for its exhibits. First, they had to be actual foods, not novelty flavoured concoctions. Second, each needed to disgust many people. So, while there are plenty of rare delicacies, there are also more commercially available items, such as pork and liquorice. It was Charles Darwin who first made a scientific study of disgust in 1872 in The Expression of the Emotions in Man and Animals, tethering this biological response, even then, to the foods we like or that repel us. “In Tierra del Fuego a native touched with his fingers some cold preserved meat which I was eating at our bivouac and plainly showed utter disgust at its softness,” he wrote. Darwin himself felt disgust at his food being touched by “a naked savage”. Paul Rozin, a professor of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, explores factors associated with food disgust. While our disgust of certain foods is rooted in fears that they might not be safe to eat, there may also, he has suggested, be an element of neophobia – that is, the disgust we experience when faced with something new. After all, if we have never tasted natto or root beer or spicy rabbit heads, our brains might not be sure that we will like them. Texture, too, can play an important role, whether it be unfamiliar sensations or those we associate with other substances. And our ingrained associations can also be off-putting. The knowledge that kopi luwak is coffee made from the coffee cherries eaten and then defecated by the Asian palm civet hardly makes it enticing. Likewise, the waft of ammonia from fermented shark comes from urine secreted through the beast’s skin. We also bring a cultural moral system to the foods we consume – whether it is acceptable to eat invertebrates, pigs or squirrels, whether anyone should eat meat at all, whether food is high in sugar, E numbers, saturated fat, and of course, as durian-eaters of Asia will tell you, whether or not that food should ever be eaten in close proximity to others.