Lizzo didn’t sleep well last night: too much coffee. “I don’t normally drink it, but I love London coffee!” she exclaims. “It’s just, like, frothy and delicious.” You can’t detect the lack of rest, though. Clad in a leopard-print mini-dress accessorised with fluffy pink earrings and matching eyeshadow, the singer-rapper vibrates with energy and cheer. One of the most promising talents to emerge out of Minneapolis’s music scene, Lizzo is poised for international recognition with the release of her third studio album. We meet in a London hotel, and I’ve been following her stay on her Instagram feed, where she shares pictures of her extravagantly colourful outfits, promotes a body-positivity message and posts clips of herself rapping in studio sessions or twerking in her apartment and tour bus. Born into a “big musical family”, Lizzo – real name Melissa Jefferson – listened to a diverse range of musical genres growing up. “My sister was into indie,” she reminisces, “like Björk or Radiohead. Dad liked classic rock: Elton John or Queen. We also listened to a lot of gospel.” It’s reflected in her output: Lizzo’s musical style skirts multiple genres, from pop (Good as Hell), through to R&B (Scuse Me) and neosoul (Coconut Oil). She has recorded a trap album in Atlanta (her debut, Lizzobangers) and a pop record in LA (recent EP and her only major-label offering, Coconut Oil). But when it came to her upcoming album, Lizzo’s genre-hopping started to feel like a curse. “I make all different types of music,” Lizzo explains, gesturing expansively to a buffet laid before us. “You see here, we got pineapples, we got croissants, we got sausages – which one you like? I feel like when you’re good at doing a lot of different styles, it hard to stick with one.” After working on the album for three years, this summer she finally laid down the songs that will make the cut. “I hit my stride. It was about embracing my singing voice.” As a plus-size woman of colour, Lizzo’s success is a respite in an often grimly misogynistic music industry. Her message is straightforward: love your body, have faith in your abilities, don’t let people treat you like shit. “I don’t need a crown to know that I’m a queen,” she croons on Scuse Me, her ode to masturbation – a topic she returns to on Ride. “I swear there should be support groups for men without Lizzo,” she raps. “Meet once a week and deal with y’all issues. Google me and jack off in a tissue!” Lizzo insists she is not political: “My job is to emote and communicate and bop.” That said, her message of positivity feels especially necessary in Trump’s America; in Scuse Me, she relishes her weight in a way that gladdens the soul. “Slapping on that ass,” she raps triumphantly. “Getting thicker and thicker.” How does she feel about the current co-opting of self-love and self-care by brands? Adidas markets its pilates leggings by saying “a better world starts with a better you”, and L’Oreal champions “self-care routines”. “Shit is being exploited!” Lizzo exclaims. “It’s a blessing and a curse.” She’s happy that women are being told to love themselves. But she’s scathing about how late capitalism leverages social movements for profit. “It’s unfair for us to assume that people know how to love themselves ... [corporations have] spent decades telling people they weren’t good enough and selling them an ideal of beauty. All of a sudden you’re selling them self-love? People don’t know how to love themselves, because they were trying to look like the motherfucker you were selling them!” When Lizzo was 21, she spent a year living in her car, as she tried to break into the music industry in the wake of the death of her father. She found herself over-exercising and dieting obsessively. Can she relate to that woman now? “That bitch is still here, bro!” she says. “I started going to therapy and thought she was gone, but she pops up.” She’s sanguine about it. “You can’t just ignore the person you were. You have to embrace her.” She’s keenly aware of the women who fought their way into the industry and left a breadcrumb trail for her to follow, and eulogises about a recent session recording with Missy Elliot. But she chafes at being called a female rapper. “It compartmentalises us,” she says. “Women who rap have been around for ever! But we never gave them the platform, because the industry controlled who made it through. The industry doesn’t control that any more. The people do.” On the night she arrived in London, she uploaded an Instagram story from the back of a black cab. She’s filming her crew while they laugh and throw poses, hiding their faces. Off-screen, you hear Lizzo’s voice chiding them, before she faces the camera squarely. “I’m not posing for anyone!” she says. “This is just me.”