Chris Wood and Kirsty Linnett remember vividly the day the reality of life as a professional football couple became far removed from the dream. It was Friday 21 April 2017 and the two strikers, then of Leeds United and Notts County Ladies, were settling into the first home they had bought together two months earlier. As was their new puppy, Luna. It was also two days before the Women’s Super League Spring Series was due to start for Linnett with a trip to Arsenal. “Kirsty came home and said: ‘Our club is no more,’” recalls Wood. “I said: ‘That can’t be possible. Notts County has folded?’ And she said: ‘No, just our side of it.’” Linnett elaborates: “I don’t know how you can liquidate one side of a club and not the other. No one got a penny after that day but the PFA were really helpful. We had just got a house together and a puppy, and within two months I had to move to Reading and straight into a club house with four other girls. I can see the business side of it, our debt was half a million, but a lot of men’s teams are losing millions at every level of the game so that wasn’t a valid excuse to me. There are girls I know from that team who had no family support in the area and never found a team again.” Both players have moved on since their planned life near Sheffield was brought to an abrupt halt. Four months later Wood joined Burnley for a club record £15m and Linnett, following her spell at Reading, signed for Liverpool Women during August. The north-west is home at last for the couple – and Luna – after the best part of three years living apart and six-hour round trips to see each other on occasional days off. The liquidation of Notts County Ladies – relaunched as Notts County Women at a lower level this season – “would never happen in the men’s game”, Wood insists. “Things happen in the women’s game that should not happen.” He is in a good position to judge and to act. As New Zealand’s vice-captain and a board member of the New Zealand Professional Footballers’ Association, the 26-year-old helped broker a historic deal in May that gave the national women’s team – the Football Ferns – the same pay, prize money, image rights and travel conditions as the men. His partner’s experience with Notts County had a direct impact on Wood’s home life but was not the first “eye opener”, as he calls it. From the age of four to 12 the Burnley centre-forward played in the same teams as his older sister, Chelsey, who competed at World Cups for New Zealand at under-17 and under-20 level. The sacrifices his sister made and the struggles Linnett faces have made Wood a committed advocate of better conditions in the women’s game. “Once my eyes were opened it was a no-brainer,” he says. “It wasn’t about having a girlfriend who plays football or a sister who plays football, it was about doing what is right. These people are professional athletes. They give up just as much time and effort, if not more, than we do as men. In New Zealand if you want to be in the national team you have to give up your lifestyle and move to Auckland. If you live in Christchurch or Wellington you have to move to Auckland to train and play, and off your own bat. You weren’t subsidised, you weren’t given anything to start with, you just had to move. “The coaches and the head of New Zealand football are based in Auckland. They want them to train together as a team regularly to improve and I am all for that, but they were not getting the help they needed to set up in new jobs or new housing or anything like that to help with the transition. They have given up their livelihoods to train three or four times a week and play at the weekend in Auckland. Once my eyes were opened to that I saw the way it should be and that it should change around.” It was a massive step in history but it was right. They should be on exactly the same as us. It is the same life Wood says there was no resistance when, having been asked by the Ferns to help negotiate improved terms, he discussed equal conditions with PFA board members and his international teammates. He explains: “As soon as I opened their eyes to what the Football Ferns are going through their reaction was the same as mine: what can we do to help? It was perfect timing because the negotiations for the next four-year campaign were coming up. “It was a case of, ‘Look boys, we take what we are on and don’t push for any more but we ask for the Ferns to be on exactly the same as us.’ It was a massive step in history but it was the right thing to do. They should be on exactly the same as us. It’s the same life.” Linnett, an England Under-23 international, admits the women’s game in this country has come a long way since she started at youth level with Leicester City and Arsenal. “But there is a long way to go,” she adds. Wood claims only 40% of players in WSL1, the top tier of women’s football in England, make a “normal wage”. He adds: “The other 60% are on less than that. You are talking minimum wage.” How to close the gap is a topic of regular and passionate debate between Linnett and Wood. “A player could be given the opportunity to coach to top up their wage to a reasonable, living standard,” proposes Linnett. “Caps on minimum contracts would be helpful as well. If someone offered you those wages in a normal job you would say no, certainly the younger girls, but this job is a person’s dream.” Both players stress during the interview, which took place at the back of a Costa Coffee in Cheshire, that the good of a professional life in football together far outweighs the bad. Wood came to England at 16 for a trial with West Bromwich Albion and had six loan moves before establishing himself at Leicester, Leeds and in the Premier League with Burnley. Linnett lost two years of her career to two cruciate injuries before coming back at the highest level with Birmingham City, Reading and Liverpool. They view the short-lived house move and difficult starts to the season with their respective clubs as part of the job; better conditions for women as a common and necessary cause. “Football always comes first,” says Linnett, who admits the couple are “harsh on each other sometimes” but know when to offer constructive criticism or just say nothing about the other’s performance. They also never argue over the remote control as football is always on television at home. “That’s what all the lads say to me at training – you get to watch football all the time,” Wood says. Linnett adds: “We grew up wanting to be professional footballers and it is amazing we have that opportunity. It will be great to look back when we are older and say we were both professional footballers and got to live our dreams.”