The Saudi crown prince Mohammed bin Salman has called the son of Jamal Khashoggi to express condolences on the death of the journalist, who was killed at the Saudi consulate in Istanbul in disputed circumstances. King Salman made a similar condolence call, the kingdom said early on Monday, as international pressure on the Saudis to provide an satisfactory account of what happened to Khashoggi continued to rise. The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, has said details of the Washington Post journalist’s killing “will be revealed in all its nakedness” in parliament on Tuesday, the same day a glitzy investment forum in Riyadh spearheaded by the crown prince is to take place. Saudi Arabia’s admission on Friday – after weeks of denials – that Khashoggi was killed in a “fistfight” and that 18 Saudis have been detained – has been met with widespread scepticism and allegations of a cover-up designed to absolve Prince Mohammed of direct responsibility. Turkish media reports and officials say a 15-member Saudi team flew to Istanbul, lay in wait for Khashoggi at the consulate and then killed and dismembered him. A pro-government Turkish newspaper reported on Monday that a member of Prince Mohammed’s entourage made four calls to the royal’s office from the consulate on the day of Khoshaggi’s death. The report by Yeni Safak cited no source for the information. The newspaper said the calls went to the head of the crown prince’s office, as well as a number in the US. Five Turkish employees at the Istanbul consulate are giving statements as part of the investigation into the death, the Turkish broadcaster NTV reported. Twenty consulate workers, including the consul’s driver, gave statements to prosecutors in relation to the incident, NTV has reported previously. Prosecutors are seeking statements from a total of 45 employees, CNN Turk said. The Turkish news agency Anadolu said on Sunday that Khashoggi’s fiancée, Hatice Cengiz, has been given 24-hour police protection. Khashoggi had gone to the consulate to arrange paperwork for their marriage.  Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman tells Bloomberg he understands Khashoggi left the consulate after “a few minutes or one hour”. Turkish authorities are welcome to search the diplomatic mission because “we have nothing to hide”, he says. The Saudi consulate in Istanbul tweets that is following up on reports of Khashoggi’s disappearance “after he left the building”. Saudi ambassador Walid bin Abdul Karim El Khereiji denies any knowledge of Khashoggi’s whereabouts, Turkish media says. Riyadh sends investigators to cooperate with Turkey. Consul general Mohammed al-Otaibi tells Reuters all talk of kidnapping is baseless. Otaibi gives Reuters a tour of the consulate. Around midnight, Turkish officials say Khashoggi was killed there. A Saudi statement describes the Turkish allegations as baseless. US ambassador Prince Khaled bin Salman tells Axios the kingdom had nothing to do with the case. Prince Khalid describes allegations against the kingdom as “malicious leaks and grim rumours”. Turkey and Saudi Arabia form a joint working group. Saudi Arabia’s interior minister describes claims in the media that there were “orders to kill [Khashoggi]” as “lies and baseless allegations”. Later, Turkish officials leak details and say he was dismembered with a bone saw. Donald Trump tweets that he had spoken with King Salman, who “denies any knowledge of whatever may have happened”. Saudi-owned al Arabiya TV says 15 men identified by Turkish media on 10 October as part of a hit squad were misidentified “tourists”. Turkish investigators are allowed to search the consulate building. Trump speaks with Mohammed bin Salman, then tweets that the crown prince “totally denied” any knowledge of what happened and Riyadh was launching a thorough investigation. The US secretary of state, Mike Pompeo, says Saudi Arabia has made a “serious commitment” to hold anyone responsible accountable. Saudi Arabia’s public prosecutor says investigations show a fistfight led to Khashoggi’s death. Eighteen people have been arrested and two officials close to bin Salman fired. A Saudi official tells Reuters 15 officials travelled to Istanbul to meet Khashoggi, who had expressed interest in returning home. They threatened to kidnap him; Khashoggi resisted, and was accidentally choked to death during attempts to stop him shouting. An official dressed in Khashoggi’s clothes to make it appear as if he had left the consulate. The body was given to a “local collaborator” who disposed of it. The team then lied to Riyadh to cover up the fact Khashoggi had died. In a joint statement released on Sunday, the UK, France and Germany said: “There remains an urgent need for clarification of exactly what happened on 2 October – beyond the hypotheses that have been raised so far in the Saudi investigation, which need to be backed by facts to be considered credible.” The UK foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, spoke to the Saudi foreign minister, Adel al-Jubeir, on Sunday to convey the British view that the explanation provided was not entirely credible. And in his strongest comments to date on the case, the US president, Donald Trump, accused Saudi Arabia of lying about the death. Jubeir said in a Fox News interview that Prince Mohammed knew nothing of any plan to kill Khashoggi and that the whereabouts of his body remained a mystery to Riyadh. “This was an operation that was a rogue operation. This was an operation where individuals ended up exceeding the authorities and responsibilities they had,” Jubeir told Fox. “They made the mistake when they killed Jamal Khashoggi in the consulate and they tried to cover up for it.” The phonecalls followed the publication of a leaked photograph apparently taken from surveillance footage showing Maher Abdulaziz Mutreb, a member of Prince Mohammed’s entourage on trips to the US, France and Spain this year, at the consulate, just ahead of Khashoggi’s arrival. Mutreb’s name also matches that of a first secretary who once served as a diplomat at the Saudi Embassy in London, according to a 2007 list compiled by the British Foreign Office. Saudi Arabia so far has not acknowledged or explained Mutreb’s presence in Istanbul nor that of a forensics and autopsy expert, also on hand for Khashoggi’s arrival at the consulate on 2 October. In another development on Sunday, images obtained by TRT World, a Turkish news channel that broadcasts in English, showed Khashoggi as he arrived at a police barrier before entering the consulate. The images, taken from security camera video, and not previously published, show the writer being searched before continuing toward the building. Associated Press contributed to this report