Another week, another podcast getting a TV remake: this time around it’s Dr Death, the smash hit series from Wondery about a two-year-long spree of medical malpractice committed by US spinal surgeon Christopher Duntsch, to which Universal Cable Productions – makers of Mr Robot and The Sinner – have snapped up the rights. Given the gruesomeness of the subject matter, the adaptation might make for challenging viewing, though that has hardly hindered the original podcast, which has been downloaded more than 8m times since launching last month, according to Hot Pod. Universal are also remaking another popular Wondery effort – the true crime series Dirty John – starring Connie Britton and Eric Bana. GM Heavyweight Jonathan Goldstein’s touching and surprising podcast about life-changing decisions and regrets returns for a very welcome third series. If you haven’t already listened, start with the story of Gregor, a man who lent some old CDs to Moby, which he sampled on Play (and didn’t return). This season begins with Goldstein challenging his movie star friend Rob Corddry about whether he did really break his arm when he was a child. It’s full of warmth and a style that’s part Louis Theroux and part This American Life. HV The Ratline Philippe Sands presents a finely rendered 10-part documentary, with Stephen Fry and Laura Linney reading the letters of Otto von Wächter and his wife, Charlotte. Otto, a senior Nazi responsible for mass murder in Poland, escaped justice and fled to Rome. What befell him there is the meat of an investigation that, in order to illuminate a dark corner of postwar Europe, gives its protagonist such detailed attention it nearly feels like sympathy. The result is an unpredictable curio. JS The Guardian’s Brexit Means ... podcast is back after a break with European correspondent Jon Henley at the helm. Yes, we know you’ve been missing it, and in this month’s show Jon recaps on all that has (and hasn’t) happened to move us closer to a deal. Can the government’s plan for Brexit happen? How can the issue of the Irish border be resolved and what will happen with the customs union? In a week when Theresa May was dancing around the issues at the Conservative party conference, this is required listening for anyone interested in the debates surrounding all these key issues. Joining Jon in this episode is professor of EU law Catherine Barnard, the Guardian’s Jennifer Rankin and Jonathan Lis from the British Influence thinktank. The Cinemile Presenters (and married couple) Dave and Cathy walk to and from the cinema, recording their thoughts about films in The Cinemile. They don’t always agree, which gives the pod the pleasing flavour of debating a film you’ve just seen with your mates in the pub. If discussing movies is a huge part of your cinema-going experience, then The Cinemile is a must-subscribe! Recommended by Jack Croxall Open Source Open Source is an exquisitely produced show on current affairs, music and literature. The subjects go everywhere: an hour with Vijay Iyar’s phenomenal jazz piano, an hour with Noam Chomsky. I come away feeling nourished in some way, often inspired and thinking more deeply. Recommended by Suzanne Petrucci