“The statistics may sound worrying when you first hear them but they’ve got to be interpreted as a positive,” says the Professional Footballers’ Association’s head of welfare, Michael Bennett, as he reflects on what has been achieved and what is still to be done. A record number of players are likely to approach the PFA for support with mental health problems this year. From 160 cases in 2016, the total rose to 403 last year and figures revealed to the Guardian show more than 250 players used the service during the first six months of 2018. For current and former players in need of help, the support chains Bennett oversees with the help of 100 counsellors are becoming an increasingly important lifeline. With the cooperation of the Sporting Chance Clinic the PFA operates a 24-hour phone line. “There are also wellbeing email campaigns they can use, they can go to their clubs, we have the helpline – but we also can get face-to-face support for those who want it,” Bennett says. It is world mental health day on Wednesday. At a time when the world is tackling, and talking about, mental health more than ever, those at the heart of the fight stress the sharply rising numbers should be regarded as a positive. “We just want players to know there is an avenue to use if they are struggling with any sort of issue,” Bennett says. When initial contact is made, the PFA’s relationship with Sporting Chance enables the clinic, cofounded by Tony Adams in 2000, to offer support for each individual. “It’s very much a left-hand, right-hand partnership with the PFA,” says Colin Bland, the chief executive of Sporting Chance. “Of the 403 that reached out last year, we worked with every one of them in conjunction with the PFA. We do that to make sure the needs of the player are met entirely.” Bland, like Bennett, is encouraged by the spike in numbers. “I don’t particularly think the problem of mental health has got any worse – I truly believe people have more trust in the pathways,” he says. “If a player picks up the phone today, they’ll speak to someone immediately and they’ll be in front of someone within 24 hours to assess their needs.” Bennett’s promising career was affected by a serious knee injury from which he says he never recovered mentally in 1991 and his past has inspired him to make a difference. He believes one particular tragedy has contributed to the increase in player welfare awareness. “The Gary Speed death was the catalyst for everything,” Bennett says. We don’t wanting players getting to the end-game scenario – which is where I got to and many others got to in the past “I had a serious career-ending injury in the 1990s and nobody really spoke about those kinds of things then. When what happened with Gary happened, it rocked the football world. How could it get to the point where he’d take his own life? I don’t think footballers realised they had an avenue to explore if they were getting to that point before that happened.” Bennett is not the only former professional tackling mental health in football – nor the only one who wants more players to share their struggles. “It sounds strange, but even if a thousand players were to pick the phone up, then fantastic,” says Jeff Whitley, whose clubs included Manchester City and Sunderland. Addiction ruined Whitley’s career and he delivers seminars to clubs across the Premier League and Football League about the importance of talking. “We don’t want players getting to the endgame scenario – which is where I got to and many others have got to in the past,” he says. “They obviously have a decent career and earn decent money but they can be bankrupt emotionally by the end. At the depths of their despair they can be suicidal and that’s where Sporting Chance and the PFA can step in. It’s OK not to be OK and more and more people are realising that around the world now, not just in football.” Bennett and Whitley are keen to emphasise they are not seeking sympathy from the public for a profession widely regarded as one of the most luxurious and extravagant. They do, though, want to make people aware of how each case is individual. “I can’t stop what people think of footballers,” Bennett says. “My priority is educating those within the game on what’s important. “Clearly, not everyone is earning £100,000 a week. But there are things you don’t see; players could suffer an untimely death in the family or suffer a serious injury. Money isn’t going to stop emotional feelings surfacing. Then there are guys in League Two who go on rolling contracts and are constantly worrying when their next deal is coming. There are dozens of different issues which can materialise but we are your union, and we’re here to help. If those words make one more player reach out, that can only be a good thing.” In the UK, Samaritans can be contacted on 116 123 or email jo@samaritans.org. In the US, the National Suicide Prevention Lifeline is 1-800-273-8255. In Australia, the crisis support service Lifeline is 13 11 14. Other international suicide helplines can be found at www.befrienders.org.