Brett Kavanaugh took his seat on the supreme court on Tuesday after one of the most divisive fights in recent American history. Democrats were ready to convict him of sexual assault. Republicans almost canonized him. The president himself hailed Kavanaugh as “flawless”. On his first day in the job, all that seemed quickly to fade into silence. Kavanaugh’s elevation was briefly acknowledged by Chief Justice John Roberts, who expressed his “great pleasure” in welcoming the new man on to the court and wished him “a long and happy career”. But those remarks were immediately forgotten amid the mundane business of the court. Lawyers stood up by the half-dozen. As they were sworn in, Kavanaugh talked quietly with Justice Elena Kagan, sitting to his right. Both laughed at the other’s remarks. The first case Kavanaugh heard did not come freighted with high stakes or tremble with grave import. It was a question of whether a 1997 conviction for robbery in Florida had to have involved “physical force” to become a violent felony conviction, under a federal law that imposed a mandatory minimum sentence on those with three prior convictions for violent felonies convicted of illegal firearm possession. The issue did not arise in Kavanaugh’s confirmation hearings. There was no bearing on executive power, on the constitutionality of Obamacare or on abortion rights. Instead, it was the kind of nettlesome piece of statutory interpretation that makes up much of the supreme court’s work. The justices handled it with brio. They badgered the lawyers and made jokes and Justice Sonia Sotomayor even gave Justice Neil Gorsuch a pinch, illustrating a hypothetical question about said physical force. Eventually, Kavanaugh joined in. His first question prompted a slight hush: it was about supreme court precedent. He asked three others. By the end of the session, his interventions seemed about as surprising as the sips he took from a silver cup or the occasional moments in which he slipped on a pair of reading glasses, then pulled them off. Although there were a handful of protesters outside the court before its session began – dressed as characters from The Handmaid’s Tale, they shouted “Believe women” – they had dispersed by the end of the first case. There were still some television cameras outside but they weren’t broadcasting. Tourists strolled around the grounds. Disruptions on sidewalk came not from partisan vitriol but passersby, riding scooters. The political and cultural impact of the Kavanaugh fight will resonate for months if not years. But around the court, on day one, it was as if it never happened. It was time for oral arguments for Kavanaugh’s second case. At issue? “Whether burglary of a nonpermanent or mobile structure that is adapted or used for overnight accommodation can qualify as ‘burglary’ under the Armed Career Criminal Act of 1984.”