The Staunch prize, for a thriller “in which no woman is beaten, stalked, sexually exploited, raped or murdered”, is about to announce its first shortlist. The new prize has attracted the anger invariably raised by public mention of violence against women. Writers object to the implication that someone is telling us what to write about; some men object to the implication that violence against men is less problematic. We all know that abused female bodies sell books. I wanted to write about violence in my new book. I’ve often written about family dysfunction and damage, but avoided describing physical harm. I thought about it carefully in Bodies of Light, where a girl is hurt between paragraphs. I didn’t want a poetics of pain, didn’t want to distract my readers from accumulating psychological pain by the bruises and screaming that are there for the taking on any screen near you. Unless you’re a doctor, it’s not the biology of violence that’s important but the structures that allow physical harm and the intergenerational trauma it creates. There would be much less interest in a film or story about a woman painting her bedroom wall, falling off the ladder and hitting her head than in the same woman in the same room suffering the same injury at the hands of a man with a baseball bat: the story we find most interesting is about power and abuse more than physiology. The reading and writing of violence are always to some extent egregious, unnecessary for the plot. I can write: “The bat bounced on her head, her honey hair, with a sound that surprised him. He looked for blood, for red spray on her new blue paint, but instead she and the ladder swayed, tilted, fell, and it was the paint that spread across the wooden floor. Spilt milk, he thought, and since he still wanted to see the blood he pulled the knife from his belt.” I give you the imagined aesthetics of assault, the soiling of domesticity with violence, from the assailant’s point of view so that you see through the eyes of the man with the baseball bat. You look at, and not with, his victim. In this scene, the woman in danger and pain is part of the decor, an elaboration of the man’s psychology. I might rather say: “She turned, saw his raised arm, saw its shadow lift and swing under the bare bulb she’d switched on to see streaks in her Robin’s Egg paint. Club, she thought, cosh. Baseball bat. Oh, too late.” You will understand the same event, but you don’t get to watch. It’s less exciting because the reader is denied the fantasy of power. From the victim’s point of view, being hit is unpleasant, but knowing that you’re the one who can be hit, that someone who is supposed to love you, perhaps does love you, also wants to hurt you and has given himself permission to do so when he feels like it, is far more damaging. That was what I wanted to write about: the coming of age of a daughter whose father shows love through control and believes that real men use real force. My working title for the book was “Pharmakos”, the human incarnation of evil expelled from Ancient Greek communities at moments of crisis. I knew I couldn’t publish a book with a Greek name that people might at best associate with chemistry, but as I wrote I wanted to keep my gaze with the scapegoat, the sacrificial victim, bearer of sin. Many families have one, and so do communities and so, as we see at the moment, do nation states. Someone has to take the blame. Someone is the one who starts all the arguments or commits all the crimes or tells tales of abuse we can’t bear to believe or somehow simultaneously takes all the jobs and all the benefits, and it can’t be one of us because then we’d share responsibility. We choose someone to blame, and we don’t kill her or exile her because that would create a vacancy, but we keep her nearby so we know where to go when we’re angry. And it’s hard to be that person, the scapegoat, not because you get hurt (though you do) but because you know that everything is your fault. And it’s hard (though less hard) to be the one who does the hurting because you know that nothing can be your fault, that everything you say and think and do must be perfect and final because otherwise the whole system will explode. In practice, fiction does not deal in structures. You don’t write a novel “about national identity” or “about domestic violence”, though you could and should read them that way. You write a novel about Jane and Rochester or Ifemelu and Obinze or, in this case, Silvie and her dad Bill, and that means that if you’re writing about scapegoats and violence, you write about Bill hurting Silvie and leave the reader to think about class war and toxic masculinity. It’s a literary version of the dilemma of Sally Wainwright’s TV series Happy Valley: how does a feminist represent the pain of the violated body? How can one write about men hurting women without opening yet another space for sadistic voyeurism? Wainwright, working in a visual medium where the gaze is everything, did it by refusing to give violence visual appeal and insisting on the real duration of physical trauma. Wainwright’s violence is hard to watch, as it should be. I, not obliged by my writer’s medium to gaze at my subject, tried to keep my reader behind Silvie’s eyes, between her ears, rising with her thoughts above the scene of pain, gaze averted. The reader has to know what happens and you don’t get to watch or listen. Our discomfort with the theatre of violence gave me and my editor, Max Porter, interesting discussions about the cover copy. The first draft mentioned a “terrifying climax” and I, well aware of the bloodbath that some readers would feel they’d bought, quibbled. What about “disturbing” or “alarming”, I said. Well, Max said: “I think calling it ‘terrifying’ is to take a position in relation to the billion-dollar industry for books about women being tortured and killed that challenges a reader to consider what is truly frightening, and where women’s pain becomes entertainment.” He’s right, Silvie’s experience is frightening, and it’s more frightening that she’s not particularly scared because she’s used to the dynamic. Still, I thought, some people will be waiting for the blood and screaming and will be annoyed when it’s not delivered. We went for “harrowing”. Even so, there are online reader reviews complaining that there’s not enough brutality, as if readers paid good money for gladiatorial combat and found themselves at the opera. We need to read and write about terror and trauma, and we need to imagine the perpetrators as well as the victims. Abusers are also humans with stories, just like us. The excess of literary violence can be playful, part of the return of the repressed, and, from its 18th‑century beginnings, this is one way of reading the gothic: if a small number of men own everything and have almost absolute power over others, let’s imagine the worst they could do, let’s play in the attic with the madwomen and dare each other to go into the cellar. Let’s burn it all down when the party’s over. Women’s gothic writing, always exploring the relationship between domesticity and violence, has known for centuries that the true horrors are structural rather than theatrical. In Northanger Abbey, teenage Catherine is distracted from the real danger of General Tilney’s interest in the money he believes her to have by her obsession with the ghouls and murderers of popular gothic fiction. There is a monster, but he’s at the head of the table, not behind the curtain. The demon posing the true threat to the young Jane Eyre when she sees a ghost in the Red Room is the orphan’s absolute vulnerability to the loathing of her rich aunt and her cousins, not any supernatural presence. Spookiness can be fun and I like the odd ghost to move in the trees. The new tradition of feminist, often queer, gothic sends up the violence of patriarchy, taking misogyny and homophobia to their (il)logical conclusions; I think of Fiona Mozley’s Elmet and Sophie Mackintosh’s The Water Cure as well as the dark tales of Angela Carter, but it can be hard to tell stories of hate without colluding in the fetish of young beauty in pain. I found Hanya Yanagihara’s A Little Life unreadable partly because extreme violence visited on a child works as a structural device to keep the reader’s attention, a reward for perseverance. As long as children are hurt, writers must describe their harm, but there are ways of closing the space for voyeurism. I will be intrigued to see the winner of the Staunch prize, but for me the question is not whether to write about patriarchal violence but how to do so • • Sarah Moss is the author of Ghost Wall (Granta). The Staunch prize shortlist will be announced on Thursday. Details: staunchbookprize.com.