This was Manchester United’s best display this season and a second win in eight matches was much needed. While there was another error from Paul Pogba, which led to Everton’s consolation, there were further spells of the quick and slick play United are showing more of as the season progresses. José Mourinho praised the performance but still bemoaned a lack of ruthlessness before goal – blaming Romelu Lukaku and Marcus Rashford – and a leaky defence. Those failings have resulted in only 17 league goals and 17 conceded in 10 outings. “This [display] was complete,” he said. “But the result was in doubt until the last second. That was the consequence of a goal we conceded and some chances we miss. The performance was solid and in some moments beautiful with creative possession. “We are not as rock solid as I would like. We don’t have the killer instinct I would like. Some teams with three chances they score three goals. For us it is almost an impossible mission to keep a clean sheet even with the phenomenal goalkeeper [David de Gea] we have and to score goals is really difficult for us. In the last nine matches between [Marcus] Rashford and [Romelu] Lukaku we score one goal. “In terms of the philosophy and the mentality yes [it was a good display] but I would like a better Man United than we have.” Lukaku was dropped for the first time in his United career, with Fred’s inclusion the sole change from the defeat by Juventus, as Marco Silva fielded the same Everton XI who beat Crystal Palace last weekend. Before kick-off there was a minute’s silence to mark Remembrance Sunday and the helicopter crash at Leicester City’s stadium. This was a pacy contest throughout. Rashford took Lukaku’s berth up front but his opening contributions did not augur well. The ball bounced away from him and one attempted back‑heel found no one. Martial showed how to contribute when skipping past Idrissa Gueye, who stuck out a leg, and over went Martial. Jonathan Moss awarded a penalty – a debatable decision, and Silva was left unhappy, while Gueye, already booked, was lucky not to be sent to the changing rooms. United’s designated taker is Pogba and, after his stuttering run-up, Pickford saved mid-height to his right but the Frenchman rolled home the rebound. This was his second miss of the season from the spot while Pogba has scored four in all for United. Mourinho said: “The thing I like is the desire to take it. I don’t like Mickey Mouses, fragile, afraid to go, saying, ‘I don’t take penalties.’ I like the player that says, ‘I want to take it.’ Maybe he has to change his approach but I don’t want him to change his mental approach.” Pogba agreed, saying: “Maybe I should practise to change it, if the keepers know my step [routine].” United were going at the visitors in a near-irresistible red wave with Fred taking aim from afar and Martial and Rashford threatening from close range. Yet sloppiness can be costly and, when Nemanja Matic was outmuscled by Gylfi Sigurdsson and the Icelander passed and continued his run to connect with a header, De Gea was grateful the ball was directed at him. When the second half started Richarlison came close to capitalising on a typical Pogba error. From Luke Shaw’s throw-in the midfielder’s pass in-field went to Gueye. He hit the ball to the Brazilian forward and De Gea, yet again, saved superbly to his left. Shortly afterwards United doubled the lead, this time via a peach from the outstanding Martial. Pogba swept the ball left and the attacker hit a right-foot shot that bent inside Pickford’s left post – a fifth in 11 games. To explain Martial’s upturn in form Mourinho said: “When the players are playing bad, it is my fault. When they are playing well, it is my responsibility. Or we [should] go to the middle and when the player plays bad it is half me, half the player and when he plays well, it is half me and half the player. “He took quite a long time to understand what we want, quite a long time for his brain and body to be ready for how we want him to play. At the moment he is playing very well. Even if he doesn’t score, to create what he is creating [at the moment in games] it is a solid performance for the team.” Rashford’s low confidence was illustrated when presented with a simpler chance. A clumsy touch made the angle difficult and his effort was too close to Pickford. On 65 minutes he was replaced by Lukaku. Mourinho’s teams this season have been criticised for their ponderousness but there was a sweet rhythm to a sequence that took in Juan Mata, Matic, Shaw, Martial and Ashley Young and ended in a corner. Pogba’s tendency to make pivotal mistakes – he also made one here against Wolves – showed itself when Everton pulled one back. A fancy, flicked reverse pass aimed at Mata was pounced on and an incisive move by Everton ended with Chris Smalling conceding a penalty for a late tackle on Richarlison. Up stepped Sigurdsson to make it 2-1. Lukaku fluffed a chance to register for the first time since mid-September before Martial spurned a one-on-one. Though hanging on a little, United did at the final whistle deserve victory.