The 11 people shot dead at a Pittsburgh synagogue were named on Sunday. The gunman railed about genocide and killing Jews as he mowed them down, on what Mayor Bill Peduto called the “darkest day of Pittsburgh’s history”. Those who died at the Tree of Life synagogue in Squirrel Hill on Saturday ranged in age from 54 to 97, and included a husband and wife and two brothers. They came from all three congregations that were meeting at the synagogue that morning. Authorities were treating the attack as a hate crime but not domestic terrorism, US attorney Scott Brady said at a press conference on Sunday morning, though he added: “We continue to see where that line is.” The suspect, Robert Bowers, was charged with 29 federal crimes including 11 counts of murdering victims exercising their religious beliefs. He faces the death penalty. “During the course of his deadly assault on the people of the synagogue, Bowers made statements regarding genocide and his desire to kill Jewish people,” Brady said. Social media accounts linked to Bowers carried antisemitic statements. According to a criminal complaint, Bowers told a police officer: “They’re committing genocide to my people. I just want to kill Jews.” Bowers used three Glock 357 handguns and an AR-15 assault rifle, said Robert Jones, FBI special agent in charge of the Pittsburgh office. Citing an anonymous source, the Associated Press reported the guns were legally owned. There is no indication the shooter had any accomplices, authorities said. He spent about 20 minutes in the synagogue and shot at police when they arrived. He was wounded before he surrendered. “Had Bowers made it out of that facility, there is a strong possibility that additional violence would have occurred,” Jones said. Four police officers were wounded, three by gunfire. One was released from hospital and another could be released on Sunday. The other two were expected to remain hospitalized for longer. The officers were not immediately named. Among those in the synagogue who were wounded, two were in critical condition and one was stable. Dr Karl Williams, chief medical examiner of Allegheny County, listed the victims. They were: Joyce Fienberg, 75; Richard Gottfried, 65, Rose Mallinger, 97; Jerry Rabinowitz, 66; Cecil Rosenthal, 59, and his brother David Rosenthal, 54; married couple Bernice Simon, 84, and Sylvan Simon, 86; Daniel Stein, 71; Melvin Wax, 88; and Irving Younger, 69. Williams said he notified the victims’ families on Saturday. “They are in shock and grieving,” he said. Bowers was being treated for gunshot wounds and is due in court Monday. “This was an attack upon our neighbors and upon our friends and one that we felt very deeply,” Brady said. “The fact that this attack took place during a worship service makes it even more heinous. We will spare no effort or resource in ensuring that the defendant is held fully accountable for this unspeakable and hateful crime.” The suspect lived in the working class suburb of South Baldwin. On Sunday, reporters outnumbered residents on the streets. Bowers resided in a multiunit building next door to a hall rented out for weddings and other celebrations. A wedding reception was in progress on Saturday when news broke of the killings and reporters and police converged. Neighbors said the festivities continued. On Sunday, FBI agent Jones said the home and Bowers’ vehicle had been searched. He would not comment on what was found. Just down the street from Bowers’ residence, one home flew a large American flag as a well as the colors of the US Marine Corps. Two doors down, at a volunteer fire hall, a fireman lowered the flag to half-mast. He declined to comment. What appeared to be a mother and daughter entered the building where Bowers lived. They also declined to answer questions. Across the street, Sharon Lopez was walking her dog. “He may have walked the street and said ‘Hi’ to me,” said Lopez, 29. “But I didn’t know him.” None of her other neighbors seemed to know Bowers, she said, an oddity in a community where people exchange pleasantries and take notice of their neighbors. Dan Hall, a landscaper who never knew Bowers, stood on a front porch hanging Halloween decorations. “I guess this can happen anywhere now,” he said. Eventually, Bowers’ neighbour spoke to the Guardian. Kerri Owens said she had lived in the area for eight years and Bowers had lived next door for two. But, she said: “I didn’t know him that well. I almost forgot his name.” Owens said she had seen no indication this was something Bowers might do. He was quiet, she said, she barely knew he was there other than occasionally hearing his TV. He had no visitors she was aware of. When they did see each other he was cordial enough, she said, always saying hello. He told her he worked for a trucking company. Owens was interviewed extensively by the FBI on Saturday, she said. Peduto, the Pittsburgh mayor, said the neighborhood where the shooting happened, Squirrel Hill, is the most diverse in western Pennsylvania. The Jewish community is its “backbone”, he said. “People choose to live there because of the diversity of the community,” Peduto said. “Pittsburgh is a strong town. We are a resilient city. We have been knocked down, and we’ve found ways to stand back up.” Peduto rejected calls from Donald Trump to use armed guards in houses of worship, to combat mass shooters. “We’re dealing with irrational behavior,” he said. “There is no way you can rationalize a person walking into a synagogue during services and taking the lives of 11 people. “The approach we need to be looking at is how we take the guns – which is the common denominator of every mass shooting in America – out of the hands of those that are looking to express hatred through murder.”