Mike Pompeo, the US secretary of state, has landed in Ankara for crisis talks with the Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, over the journalist Jamal Khashoggi as pro-government Turkish press published what it said were leaked gory details of his alleged murder in the Saudi consulate. The dissident journalist was killed minutes after he arrived at the building in Istanbul to pick up marriage paperwork on 2 October, according to US and Turkish press reports of what the officials said were audio recordings that prove he was beaten and drugged, then brutally killed and dismembered. On Tuesday, Donald Trump defended Saudi Arabia in the face of mounting allegations that Riyadh was involved in the Saudi journalist’s alleged killing. The Wall Street Journal, citing Turkish official who had heard the recording, said Khashoggi was allegedly killed and dismembered in the office of the Saudi consul general, Mohammad al-Otaibi, who was in the room at the time. A voice on the recording can be heard inviting him to leave, the report said. Salah Muhammad al-Tubaigy, a Saudi military forensics official,is reportedly heard putting on headphones to listen to music as he begins to dismember the body, and encourages other people in the room to do the same. According to Middle East Eye, Khashoggi was dragged from the office to Otaibi’s study next door, where Tubaigy began cutting up his body on a table while he was still alive. Pompeo met Erdoğan and the Turkish foreign minister, Mevlüt Çavuşoğlu, within the confines of Ankara’s Esenboga airport on Wednesday morning, a day after Erdoğan had said police had found freshly painted walls and “toxic” substances during a search of the consulate, where Khashoggi was last seen alive two weeks ago. Turkish media said on Wednesday that Pompeo was expected to bring answers with him from Riyadh, his previous stop, where he met with King Salman, Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman and the foreign minister, Adel al-Jubeir. Pompeo described the visit as “highly successful” and said the Saudis had promised to carry out a “thorough, complete and transparent investigation”. The US secretary of state’s faith in the Saudi authorities to cooperate with the investigation into Khashoggi’s fate was echoed by Trump, who said in an interview with the Associated Press on Tuesday night that Riyadh had again denied it had anything to do with the journalist’s disappearance and remained “innocent until proven guilty”. The US’s defence of its most important Arab ally may become harder to maintain as further details into Khashoggi’s alleged murder emerge and its links to the powerful crown prince. On Tuesday, the New York Times reported that four of the men identified by Turkish media as part of a 15-man hit squad sent from Riyadh to silence Khashoggi were members of Bin Salman’s personal security detail. Another, Tubaigy, holds a senior position in the Saudi interior ministry. The suspects’ direct links to the Saudi establishment weakens the suggestion made by Trump that the alleged murder could have been carried out by “rogue killers” in an unauthorised operation. Investigators believe Khashoggi’s body was then taken to the consul general’s house nearby, where it was disposed of. Police set up barricades outside on Tuesday evening in order to carry out a planned search of the premises, but Turkey is waiting for a joint agreement with Saudi Arabia to do so. Under the Vienna convention, diplomatic missions are considered foreign soil. The consul general, who has not been seen in public since the scandal erupted, left Turkey on a commercial flight to Riyadh hours before his residence became part of the criminal investigation. A search of the house and some diplomatic vehicles was planned for Wednesday evening, as well as a second sweep of the consulate. The G7 foreign ministers said in a statement on Wednesday that they remained “very troubled” by Khashoggi’s disappearance. “We, the G7 foreign ministers, of Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the United Kingdom, the United States of America, and the high representative of the European Union, affirm our commitment to defending freedom of expression and protection of a free press. “Those bearing responsibility for his disappearance must be held to account. We encourage Turkish-Saudi collaboration and look forward to the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia conducting a thorough, credible, transparent, and prompt investigation, as announced.”