Hello, I’m Warren Murray and it’s the last Briefing of the week so let’s leave it all out there on the pitch. More than a million people in the UK live in “food deserts” with limited access to affordable fresh food, it is claimed. Public health experts are concerned these neighbourhoods – often full of fast-food outlets – are helping to fuel a rise in conditions such as obesity and diabetes, as well as harbouring food poverty. Food deserts are defined as neighbourhoods of between 5,000 and 15,000 people with two or fewer big supermarkets where there would ideally be from three to seven. They are typically large out-of-town housing estates and deprived inner-city wards served by a handful of small, relatively expensive corner shops. They include Marfleet in Hull, Hattersley in Greater Manchester, Everton in Liverpool, Sparkbrook in Birmingham, and areas of Glasgow and Cardiff. In Hartcliffe, a food desert on the very southern fringes of Bristol, just 54% of people eat their five a day while 60% consume too much sugar. A community group tries to fill the gap, selling local fruit and veg, and runs classes on healthy eating and cookery. “A lot of people don’t have cars and it can be difficult for older people to get to the shops,” says co-ordinator Sue Walker. ‘You made a Superman cape for me’ – Cursing, a hug, an urgent and wildly discursive monologue that felt like it would never end. Donald Trump and rapper Kanye West have displayed their celebrity bromance in a very verbally one-sided encounter that contends strongly for the title of strangest thing ever to happen in the Oval Office. “Trump is on his hero’s journey right now and he might not have expected to have a crazy motherfucker like Kanye West run up and support but, best believe, we are going to make America great,” the rapper told the assembled press, seated across from the president. There was much, much more – multiple universes, “male energy” and a hydrogen-powered Air Force One. “That was quite something,” said Trump. When you listen to West, you are in his own words “tasting a fine wine that has multiple notes to it”. So get your best four-dimensional spittoon ready because here is a longer version of what he had to say. Inquiry over detention abuses – The Home Office has agreed to allow an inquiry into alleged abusive treatment of immigrants in detention. Lawsuits were launched against the Home Office after BBC Panorama exposed abuses at Brook House immigration removal centre near Gatwick. The Home Office says in a letter seen by the Guardian that if the lawsuits are dropped it will commission an investigation by the prisons and probation ombudsman. An average of two suicide attempts a day have been happening in Britain’s deportation prisons, according to figures obtained under freedom of information. Meanwhile the government is also deporting people to countries that at the same time the Foreign Office deems too dangerous for Britons to visit. Yvette Cooper, the Labour MP who chairs the Commons home affairs committee, said the detention system was “causing huge and often irreparable damage to peoples’ lives” and needed urgent reform. Tailback control – The M26 motorway in Kent is being prepared for use as a lorry park in case Brexit creates huge traffic jams at the ports. Theresa May intends to keep on trucking with her Chequers plan but Conservative MPs are worried she might sign Britain up to staying indefinitely in a customs union with the EU to keep the Irish border open. There are fears that more ministers will head for the door if there is no time limit. But at least we’ll still have Irish cheddar at a good price. Britain’s tax chief says he received death threats after disclosing that a customs option preferred by Brexiters would cost the UK up to £20bn. Nicky Morgan, chair of the Treasury committee, told PoliticsHome: “As someone who has also been threatened, it is deeply concerning that this is what Brexit seems to have done to public life.” Soyuz came back – First, there was the hole in a Soyuz module docked at the International Space Station. Now, another of the Russian spacecraft has made a hard emergency landing because its second rocket stage failed minutes after launch. Would-be ISS crew American Nick Hague and Alexey Ovchinin from Russia are safe and well after Soyuz flight MS-10 went into abort mode and parachuted back to Earth in Kazakhstan. Russia has launched an investigation – it complicates the future of the ISS because Soyuz launches are grounded in the meantime. Currently there is no other way for humans to get there and back, though supplies can be ferried by SpaceX and the current crew have a capsule to get them down. “It depends on how serious the problem is,” said Professor Martin Barstow, a space scientist at the University of Leicester. “But it could be months before they are ready to fly again. There’s a lot of work to do.” Is it still art? The buyer of Banksy’s self-shredding Girl With Balloon says she will still stump up £1.04m for it. “When the hammer came down last week and the work was shredded, I was at first shocked, but gradually I began to realise that I would end up with my own piece of art history,” said the anonymous collector. The transformed work has been given a new title, Love Is in the Bin, and has been granted a certificate by Pest Control, Banksy’s authentication body. The Briefing is neither artsy-fartsy nor guerrilla-subversive enough to understand who has had the last laugh here. Camila Cabello rose to fame as a member of the American X Factor-created girl group Fifth Harmony. With pop groups there is usually one you can’t take your eyes off. Cabello was that one. When she was little, Cabello wanted to be on the Disney Channel; her parents said she could audition for something, but only once she turned 15. That something was X-Factor and now, at 21, she has won four American Music Awards as a solo performer. “I always hear stories of people who became singers and musicians who put on shows for their families when they were very young or were the class clown or always singing in class, and people saw it coming for them. I don’t think people saw this coming for me.” Rebecca Nicholson meets the star behind the inescapable single Havana. England meet Croatia in a re-run of the World Cup semi-final tonight, but the atmosphere inside the Stadion HNK Rijeka won’t quite be the same as on that epic night in Moscow, with the two teams to play out their Nations League encounter behind closed doors. In Cardiff, Wales were outplayed and outclassed by Spain as Ryan Giggs’s side were comprehensively beaten 4-1 on a night when the only saving grace was that the scoreline was not more emphatic. The Nevada Athletic Commission has suspended Conor McGregor and Khabib Nurmagomedov for at least 10 days after their fight at UFC 229 ended with brawls spreading into the crowd, with Nurmagomedov saying he will quit the UFC if one of his fellow fighters is punished for his role in the ugly scenes. As Sam Tomkins prepares to bow out of the Super League after more than 200 games across two spells, the full-back says he is keen to leave with a bang and another title for his beloved Wigan. And Olympic sports such as badminton, basketball and surfing, which do not receive elite funding by UK Sport, will be able to apply for up to £500,000 of financial help from a new “aspiration fund” set up by the government. Asian stocks have staged something of a fightback with no repeat of Thursday’s bloodbath after Donald Trump blasted the Federal Reserve over interest rates. Shares were up in Hong Kong and Seoul, but were down in Tokyo (0.45%) and Sydney (0.12%). The pound has been trading at $1.323 and €1.140 overnight. The Guardian’s splash today is “Motorway closing to prepare for lorry parking in no-deal Brexit”. Our front page also features a story about a transgender inmate being jailed for assaulting female prisoners and the Home Office inquiry into alleged abuse of migrants in detention. The i’s lead story is “Tory welfare revolt after minister says families will lose out”. The Express says “Millions to get income tax cut” but the splash in the Telegraph is “Promised tax cuts dropped to fund welfare” – the latter says the chancellor is under pressure to do so, but the former pours cold water on it. The Times reports “Charities gagged by ministers” – they can’t disparage the work and pensions secretary if they want contracts under universal credit. The Mail asks “Where is the justice in that?” as Theresa May plans to give judges a £60,000 pay rise “while the rest of us watch every penny”. The FT has “Trump blames ‘out of control’ Fed as investors dump equity”. Front pages also feature pictures of Princess Eugenie, who gets married today. The Mirror tenuously links a story to the wedding, by calling it a “royal wedding day shock”. The headline is: “Meghan’s dad: I snorted cocaine”. The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. For more news: www.theguardian.com