Ten years ago, my husband was diagnosed with prostate cancer. Up to that point, we had a very loving marriage. Post-op, it took us seven difficult months to get back to having penetrative sex, the only way I can achieve orgasm. Two years later, my husband’s cancer returned. He had radiotherapy and then a heart operation. He got back on his feet and we resumed a regular sex life, but there was no spontaneity any more due to the medication he was taking. Then, last autumn, he got bladder cancer. Two operations later, he is still recovering. We are now in our 60s and he has suddenly aged. He has many good days, but if he does too much, it becomes a struggle for him to control his bladder. We struggle on with sex about once a week, but the occasions when he loses his erection are more frequent, and difficult. I no longer have orgasms, and although I recognise that sex makes us feel closer, it also fills me with dread. At the same time, I am afraid of what an absence of sex would do to our perception of ourselves as a couple. I feel bitterly sorry for my husband. He is a dynamic, intelligent and caring man who didn’t deserve this. We used to explore and travel; now we have to be sure there is a toilet close by. We have a wide circle of friends, are active in the community, have no money problems and two great, successful children. My husband serves on several boards and we are designing a new home. This should have been the best time of our lives. I feel really sorry for you both and admire you for wanting to keep your sex life going. But I wonder how you would feel if this were your husband writing in about you: if you had battled three bouts of cancer and a heart condition; if you had had multiple operations and treatments, and he were lamenting a lack of sex life. I wonder if this is not just about sex, but also about loss – of your identities as this vibrant, sexual couple and of your youth; and fear of old age and infirmity, which is understandable, and readjusting to this new landscape in which you now find yourself in a relatively short space of time. I consulted Krystal Woodbridge, a sexual and relationship counsellor (cosrt.org.uk) and former urology nurse. “You mention that you dread sex,” she said, “which leaves me wondering whether you want to reignite the sexual side of your relationship for yourself, or whether you feel you are trying for your husband’s sake. “There was a lot of focus on vaginal penetration [in your longer letter],” Woodbridge added, “which you might now be finding rather limiting. Could this be an opportunity to experiment with different ways of being intimate – using sex toys, for example? Is it that you don’t want to, or that your husband isn’t interested?” It wasn’t clear, though, how much you have talked to your husband about this. I’m sure you know that intimacy is about more than sex. “Regardless of the sexual difficulties, communication is key,” Woodbridge said. “Make sure you leave as much space for him to express how he feels, as you do for yourself.” She also wondered if there was “a wider issue here, beyond the orgasm?” Is sex how you felt cherished and looked after in your relationship in the past? There wasn’t really any other mention of “communion” between you and your husband and, now that the sex has almost gone, I wonder if you’re thinking, “What’s in it for me?” Almost everything you mention about your husband concerns his sexual performance, or lack of it. “You’ve lost a lot and so has your husband,” Woodbridge said. “There’s nothing wrong with being angry and admitting the loss. But you also need to adjust your expectations and to change what you do sexually.” You mention the other things going on in your life almost in passing: the social side, building a house together, your children. You have a lot going for you. I think you need to refocus on what you do have while you also try to build up something of what you’ve lost – if that’s possible. Would you consider seeing a relationship and sexual therapist? I don’t think you live in the UK, but if you do, the Cosrt link above can help you to find one. • Send your problem to annalisa.barbieri@mac.com. Annalisa regrets she cannot enter into personal correspondence. Comments on this piece are premoderated to ensure the discussion remains on the topics raised by the article.