Hello, I’m Warren Murray and here are Wednesday’s need-to-know stories. Donald Trump is to lose one of his seemingly more capable appointees after Nikki Haley announced her resignation as US ambassador to the United Nations. The timing caught Washington and diplomats at the UN by surprise. Haley, a former governor of South Carolina, is to leave in January. Haley has largely acted as the international face of the Trump administration but pursued an outspoken policy direction that was sometimes at odds with the White House, including on Russia and human rights. Her resignation comes just ahead of US midterm elections that Republicans are dreading. Haley has rejected speculation that she is leaving to run for the presidency in 2020. However, writes Julian Borger, she was seen at the UN as a politician doing a brief stint there in service of her eventual presidential ambitions. In terms of successors, Donald Trump has suggested his former White House adviser Dina Powell is a frontrunner. Ivanka Trump was moved to rule out that she was in the running for the job, despite her father saying she’d be “dynamite” at it. Richard Wolffe’s verdict on Haley: another Trump enabler trying to go while the going’s good. And because it’s hard to keep track, here is our running tally of resignations and firings from the Trump administration. ‘Cancel universal credit’ – Gordon Brown is to call for Theresa May to scrap the full national rollout of the government’s flagship welfare reform. If she goes ahead with universal credit “a return to poll tax-style chaos in a summer of discontent lies ahead”, the ex-PM will declare in an Edinburgh speech, as he warns of a million more children being plunged into poverty. Brown will say that in his home town of Kirkcaldy in Fife, food bank demand has doubled in a year because of universal credit and the benefit changes associated with it: “The online application process is so difficult that only 38% who try to complete the identity check succeed.” There are concerns in Whitehall at the hardship the new system will cause, and signs that the national rollout next year will cause fresh problems for May after she promised at the Conservative party conference to end austerity. Midweek catch-up – There are a few irons in the fire, let’s give them a jostle. > CCTV footage was removed from the Saudi consulate in Istanbul on the day journalist Jamal Khashoggi was possibly killed there, Turkish authorities say. Emma Graham-Harrison reminds us the Saudi regime has previously held Lebanon’s prime minister against his will and abducted other targets from abroad. > The Shell CEO, Ben van Beurden, says that to limit global warming to the IPCC target of 1.5C, Earth will need huge reforestation and not just “a little bit more solar, a bit more wind”. Van Beurden argues gas has a role to play in a 1.5C world. > Pret a Manger has been urged to take action to prevent future food allergy deaths by a coroner after Natasha Ednan-Laperouse died when she unknowingly ate sesame seeds. Pret says it will put a full list of ingredients on products from its kitchens. > The UK foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, has said the banning by Hong Kong of British journalist Victor Mallet appears to be politically motivated. Mallet was denied a visa renewal after chairing a function where an independence activist spoke. > The novichok suspect Alexander Mishkin was personally decorated by President Vladimir Putin as a “hero of Russia”, according to investigative website Bellingcat. His grandmother, who showed friends a photo of the event, has gone missing. Job of a lifetime – Civil emergency workers called “resilience advisers” are being recruited on salaries of up to £50,000 a year to help cope with any fallout from Brexit. If this sounds like you, pre-requisites include proficiency in “strategic thinking” and the able to communicate effectively with audiences including ministers. Pressure is mounting on Theresa May from senior Tories to change her Chequers plan to something with more of a Canadian feel – ministers have been told to expect extensive discussion of Brexit at next week’s cabinet meeting. The IMF, meanwhile, has delivered a bleak picture of Britain’s public finances, saying the 2008 crash has left them among the worst in the world. Stir over Tommy Robinson photo – The army is investigating how soldiers or cadets came to appear in a photograph with far-right figure Tommy Robinson. The former English Defence League (EDL) leader, 35, posed with a group of young men in camouflage uniform. An army spokeswoman said: “Far-right ideology is completely at odds with the values and ethos of the armed forces. The armed forces have robust measures in place to ensure those exhibiting extremist views are neither tolerated nor permitted to serve.” The Muslim Council of Britain said it welcomed the army’s swift disavowal of Robinson and his ilk. Don’t I know you? – The average person can remember up to 5,000 faces, psychologists have determined. A team at the University of York came up with the number after putting volunteers through a series of tests, including getting them to remember as many faces as they could – first from their private lives, then famous faces. Professor Mike Burton says the team can not yet explain why we evolved with the ability to remember so many, or the “huge difference” in our ability to recognise familiar versus unfamiliar faces. “People are surprisingly bad at checking a real face against a photo ID, and yet we recognise friends and colleagues over a huge range of conditions. The brain is doing something different with familiar and unfamiliar faces and that has been at the heart of our science for a long time.” The slicing and dicing of housing is redefining the idea of home, in a country where even renting a decent place has become unaffordable for so many. “You feel it – oh my God, the air is so … heavy,” says Jenny, 35, who crams her life into a Bristol flat that would fit 14 times into a tennis court. It is one of nine flats carved out of a Victorian terraced house on a busy road. Rogue landlords have worked out they can line their pockets at taxpayers’ expense by converting family homes into tiny studio flats, while calling them flat-shares for planning purposes, and reaping a tenancy who receive the higher self-contained rate of housing allowance. “It’s basically the warehousing of homelessness,” says Jon Knowles, who has recorded hundreds of such developments. Those forced to live in ever smaller spaces tell Simon Usborne how it has blighted their lives. England’s Lionesses have been denied by a late Clare Polkinghorne goal and the referee’s flag, to leave coach Phil Neville fuming after the 1-1 draw with Australia. “I won’t talk about the referee,” said Neville. “We should have won that 4-0.” Australia has succumbed to another spectacular batting collapse in the first Test against Pakistan, losing 10 for 60 after a 142-run opening stand. Meanwhile, England prepare for their forthcoming tour of Sri Lanka with an eye on the hosts’ tricky spinners, writes Ali Martin. Roger Federer has called for players to respect ballboys and ballgirls, saying they represent “the future of the game”, after Fernando Verdasco’s recent tirade. The Swiss 20-times Grand Slam winner was a former ballboy. And the New York Yankees have suffered a record 16-1 rout at the hands of rivals the Boston Red Sox, with their season now on the line, down 2-1 in a five game series. After two days of selling and drama around Italy’s deteriorating relationship with the EU, investors have taken a breather in overnight Asia-Pacific trade. The main markets are fairly flat and that signals a subdued opening for the FTSE 100 this morning. In Australia, concerns continue to mount about the state of the country’s once soaring housing market with a survey of property professionals warning that confidence is “collapsing”. The pound held up at $1.315 and €1.143. The Guardian leads today with a warning from former prime minister Gordon Brown: “Tory benefit cuts will spark poll tax-style chaos” and a large picture of Nikki Haley who has resigned as US ambassador to the UN. Stories about young people feature on several front pages. The Express has news of soaring property prices: “3.4m young adults stuck at home”, the Times reports “A third of under-25s now drink no alcohol” and the Mail’s splash is about “Mental health checks for all pupils”. The i’s splash is: “The NHS needs you”, as health service chiefs calls for volunteers to support exhausted medical staff. The FT leads with “Bank of England ramps up Brexit warning over £41tn of derivatives”. The Sun finds a way to kick on the Strictly cheating story, saying it has pictures of the moment Seann Walsh phoned his girlfriend Rebecca Humphries and called her crazy for questioning his relationship with his co-star right before he was snapped kissing her: “‘Psycho’ caller”. The Mirror reports that homeless people are being told to move off the route that Eugenie’s carriage will take on her wedding day: “Clear orf”. The Telegraph reports: “Cannabis review could relax drug laws”. The Guardian morning briefing is delivered to thousands of inboxes bright and early every weekday. If you are not already receiving it by email, make sure to subscribe. For more news: www.theguardian.com