Wimbledon has finally bowed to pressure from players, coaches and pundits to introduce a final-set tie-break – but it will only kick in when the score reaches 12-12. The All England Club decided to act after this year’s men’s semi-final between Kevin Anderson and John Isner, which lasted six hours and 36 minutes, including a near three-hour fifth set which Anderson eventually took 26-24. The South African had little energy left for the final, played less than 48 hours later, and was pummelled in straight sets by Novak Djokovic. As Anderson admitted afterwards: “Of course my body didn’t feel great. It’s not going to when you’ve played so much tennis.” Wimbledon said its decision was informed by talking to players and conducting a “thorough review” of match data from the past two decades. That included the longest match in tennis history in 2010 when Isner defeated Nicolas Mahut 70-68 in the final set of match that took 11 hours over three days to complete. The AELTC chairman, Philip Brook, defended the decision not to introduce a final-set tie-break at 6-6, which happens in most tournaments, saying: “While we know the instances of matches extending deep into the final set are rare, we feel that a tie-break at 12-12 strikes an equitable balance between allowing players ample opportunity to complete the match to advantage, while also providing certainty that the match will reach a conclusion in an acceptable timeframe.” 2010, Men’s Singles first round, 11 hours and five minutes John Isner (USA) beat Nicolas Mahut (FRA) 6–4, 3–6, 6–7(9), 7–6(7), 70-68 “The Endless Match” lasted three days with its epic 8hr 11min fifth set, alone, eclipsing the second-longest in history. 2018, Men’s Singles semi-final, six hours and 36 minutes Kevin Anderson (RSA) beat John Isner (USA) 7–6(8), 6–7(7), 6–7(11), 6–4, 26–24 Eight years later, Isner was back for even more pain as he was denied a first grand slam final. 2009, Men’s Singles final, four hours and 17 minutes Roger Federer (SUI) beat Andy Roddick (USA) 5-7, 7-6(8), 7-6(7), 3-6, 16-14 The Swiss Master brought up grand slam win No 15 and a hat-trick of victories over Roddick in “the one that got away” for the American. 1995, Women’s Singles second round, three hours and 45 minutes Chanda Rubin (USA) beat Patricia Hy-Boulais (CAN) 7-6(7), 6-7(7), 17-15 "I think we were both just happy to sit down," said Hy-Boulais after losing to 19-year-old Rubin in the longest women’s singles match in Wimbledon history. 1992, Men’s Doubles final, five hours and one minute John McEnroe (USA)/Michael Stich (GER) beat Jim Grabb (USA)/Richey Reneberg (USA) 5-7, 7-6(7), 3-6, 7-6(7), 19-17 A year after claiming the men’s singles title, Stich teamed up with a 33-year-old McEnroe in the American’s last ever grand slam success. Scheduling complexities also played a part in Wimbledon’s decision. This year’s women’s final between Serena Williams and Angelique Kerber was delayed by more than two hours because the second men’s semi-final between Djokovic and Rafael Nadal had to be completed first. Williams called it a “necessary evil” but many felt at the time that it was not a great look for Wimbledon to start the women’s final so late. The move is likely to be supported by Roger Federer, who said after a 13-11 final-set defeat to Anderson this year that long matches were “rough on the players playing and also the players that follow that court.” Jamie Murray said at last month’s US Open he was “a big fan” of final-set tie-breaks. “I think tennis is long enough,” the six-times doubles grand slam champion said. “By 6-6 in the fifth set ... the players have played enough tennis, the fans have seen enough tennis, TV’s seen enough of that match, a tie-break is enough, so it doesn’t get out of control and mess up schedules, mess up players’ next rounds, mess up draws and things like that.” Wimbledon’s decision means it joins the US Open as the second of the four grand slams to use a final-set decider. The All England Club confirmed the new rule will apply to all events across the Championships – including men’s and women’s singles, junior events and doubles matches – except for wheelchair and quad wheelchair, which remain the best of three tie-break sets.