Before the royals arrived in Dubbo the rain came in, hard. Schoolchildren started screaming, people were running out of the park, picnics were kicked over. The rain was sharp and cold and … it hurt. Soggy crusts of half-eaten sandwiches floated down past the police barricades, along with plastic cups and broken plastic tiaras. The Australian flags, thousands of them handed out in Anzac Park, were destroyed on first contact with moisture. People in plastic ponchos looked down and discovered they were waving bare sticks. All the while, the Moorambilla Voices – a children’s choir – were implored to do “just one more”. The duke and duchess of Sussex were running late. “Central western New South Wales time,” the MC joked. But really, people here are quite punctual. They arrived as early as 7am to stake out a place close to the stage where the royals would be. More than 30,000 turned up to the picnic in the park at Dubbo. The visit of the duke and duchess of Sussex was intended to highlight the plight of an area in drought. The irony then, of all this rain. Was this sudden downpour testament to the power of royal blood? Meghan held an umbrella over Harry’s head as he spoke of how drought-affected communities can also be vulnerable to mental health issues. “We know that suicide rates in rural and remote areas are greater than in urban populations and this may be especially true among young men in remote regions,” he said. “But, outside all of that, here’s what I also know. You are one huge community and with that comes an unparalleled level of internal support and understanding.” Many in the crowd were farmers from nearby regions. In this part of the world, that means they might have travelled 400km to be there. The Henley family farm cattle and sheep but have diversified into emu farming. For the past two years, their farm has been in drought and they haven’t been able to source feed. “It’s so widespread, it’s brought everyone unstuck,” Penny Henley said. The royal visit and community picnic “is a break for us. It’s good to have a day where you go into town and catch up with people. We just sold 350 cows to survive. We have 50 left. We haven’t had a cotton crop in three years. Her son Daniel said many of his colleagues from Daly Irrigation were at the picnic, even though it was a work day. “We have nothing to do with the royal tour, yet people are here,” he said. “Lots of local business are here.” Farmers Judy and Peter Middlebrook got up at 5.30am and drove 250km from their farm in Piallaway in north-west NSW to attend the picnic. “We’ve always been royal fans,” Judy said. “It’s great to have the day off and come in here. It’s been a very hard time for all the country towns around here. We just sold 350 cows to survive. We have 50 left. We haven’t had a cotton crop in three years.” There was also a strong Indigenous turnout for Meghan and Harry. Susan Williams travelled from Lightning Ridge and her friend Valerie came from Walgett. “I love the royals, all of them,” she said. “I was in my kitchen at 4am, having a cup of tea, and I thought, ‘What am I doing today? I’ll get the bus down.’” Her friend was not so fussed about the Sussexes but enjoyed the picnic. “It’s just the mob getting together.” On Sunday, Dubbo’s council workers were out in force, repainting the markings on the road near the park. Buses were taking thousands of people from surrounding townships – some of them four or more hours aways – and every single hotel room in town was taken. “It’s the Markle debacle” said one harried motel operator, checking people in on Tuesday night. But it wasn’t really a debacle. Dubbo put on a great picnic. The royals were just an excuse to get together and catch up after a hard couple of years. And the rain topped the lot.