Big news out of Hollywood, as Deadline reports that Jennifer Lawrence’s production company Excellent Cadaver has just signed a first-look development deal with … Hang on, Jennifer Lawrence’s production company is called what? Excellent Cadaver? Where the hell did that come from? Either Jennifer Lawrence is inexplicably the world’s biggest fan of the made-for-TV 1999 Chazz Palminteri-starring HBO mob movie Excellent Cadavers – which, given that reviews from the time called it “mundane” and “pedantic”, doesn’t seem particularly likely – or she’s secretly been some kind of expert-grade corpse connoisseur all these years without telling anybody. Maybe we’ll never know. However, if nothing else Excellent Cadaver puts Lawrence up in the big league of actors with bizarrely named production companies. Jen, meet your new peers. (Films include The Rum Diary, The Lone Ranger and Mortdecai) Of course Johnny Depp named his production company Infinitum Nihil. Of course he did. Infinitum Nihil is such a singularly terrible name that only Johnny Depp could have chosen it. It sounds like a tattoo your emo cousin would get on his neck after a reasonably bad break-up. It sounds like a privately educated death metal band. It sounds like the sort of thing that Jacob Rees-Mogg chanted at his children on the night of the Brexit vote. It is woeful. (Films include All About Steve, Miss Congeniality 2 and The Blind Side) It’s handy that Bullock added the word “films” to the end of her banner, because “Fortis” is such a perfectly generic non-word that several other businesses have also picked it as a name. There’s a Fortis optician. There’s a Fortis healthcare company. There’s a Fortis building development company. There’s a Fortis mixed merchant buying group. You sense that every team ever to appear on any season of The Apprentice has suggested Fortis as a team name, only to have it shot down for being too nothingy. (Films include Straight Outta Compton, Barbershop and Janky Promoters) Cube Vision is not the name of a production company. It is the name of an autobiographical superhero that Ice Cube invented as a eight-year-old boy. His powers, if you’re wondering, include not being able to discern curves of any kind and nothing else. (Films include The Shaggy Dog, Jungle 2 Jungle, The Santa Clause trilogy) Boxing Cat is not the name of a production company. It is the name of about 15 different YouTube videos that initially sound amusing but then quickly become depressing and then traumatising. Which, in a sense, also sums up most of Tim Allen’s cinematic output. Fun fact: if you want to dress your toddler in pyjamas imprinted with the logo of Tim Allen’s production company, Tim Allen’s official CafePress site still allows you to do that. A steal at $15.99. (Films include Riddick, The Last Witch Hunter and five Fast and Furious installments) It’s weird to think that One Race Films is responsible for such enormous box office success. This is partly because it goes by the acronym ORF, which is possibly the sound that Vin Diesel’s mouth makes whenever he ejaculates, but mainly because “One Race” sounds like the sort of thing that the worst people shout at the worst kind of Trump rallies. (Films potentially include Tron 3) I guarantee that Jared Leto chose the name of his own company. Seriously, I just had to check that he didn’t have the word paradox somewhere in his Twitter bio. Because paradox means complicated, doesn’t it. It means contradictory and illogical, doesn’t it. And Jared Leto is all of those things, because he keeps making films and then being the worst thing in all of them. (Films include That Awkward Moment) It’s hard to figure out the saddest part of this. Is it the overt juvenilia of the name? The fact that nobody has ever been able to say it out loud without rolling their eyes? Or is it the Ninjas Runnin’ Wild Twitter account, which in March 2011 posted a forlorn “What’s up, guys? Everyone’s still running wild?” before disappearing forever? It’s probably all of them, isn’t it. (Films include Nancy) An all-female production company and not, as you may have thought, a brand of breast pump that really exists. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.