Human remains have been discovered at a property in Rome owned by the Vatican in a potential breakthrough for police investigating one of Italy’s darkest mysteries. Fragments of human bone were found during restoration work on the property next to the diplomatic office of the Holy See in Rome, the Vatican said in a statement on Tuesday. Citing sources close to the investigation, the Italian news agency Ansa reported on Wednesday that the remains found during restoration work on the floor of the property could belong to two people. Workers are reported to have found an almost complete skeleton in one area and bone fragments in another. A police investigation was under way to establish the age and gender of the remains and date of death. Media reports said the remains were discovered on Monday. “Above all we need to established the period [of death] before we jump to conclusions,” Greg Burke, the Vatican’s spokesperson, told the Guardian. “The [outcome of the investigation] isn’t anything that will be known in a few days, it will take some time.” Detectives will be looking in particular at whether they are a DNA match for Emanuela Orlandi or Mirella Gregori, both of whom were aged 15 when they went missing separately in Rome within the space of 40 days in 1983. Orlandi was the daughter of a member of the Vatican’s police, and was last seen on 22 June 1983 when leaving a music class. Theories have circulated that the then 15-year-old was kidnapped by an organised crime gang to put pressure on Vatican officials to recover a loan. Another claim was that she was taken to force the release from prison of Mehmet Ali Agca, the Turk who attempted to assassinate Pope John Paul II in 1981. Her brother Pietro has been leading a decades-long campaign to find out what happened to her and has accused the Vatican of silence and even complicity in the case. The Vatican has said on several occasions that it has cooperated with Italian police over the case. However, Pietro Orlandi organised a sit-in manifestation in June, accusing the Vatican of “raising the wall even higher”. “A few days after Emanuela disappeared, Monsignor Giovanni Battista Morandini told my dad that the State was concerned about the incident. and that it was suggested to plug the leak before it was too late. I think the decision to drop the investigation was a consequence of those words,” he said at the time. The family’s lawyer, Laura Sgrò, said on Wednesday: “We’re waiting to understand the details of the discovery, such as when the bones were found, who found them…gradually we should understand better what happened. “The family’s hope is that [the remains belong to Emanuela], for so long we have fought a battle to bring her home.” Gregori disappeared exactly 40 days before Orlandi. Her mother says Gregori answered the intercom at the family apartment before telling her parents it was a school friend and she was going out to speak to him. She never returned. Investigators have not ruled out that the cases could be connected. 