It was just before 9pm local time when an almighty thunderstorm struck the R Premadasa Stadium in Colombo but by this stage England had long since been washed away. Coming into this fifth and final one-day international against Sri Lanka with an unassailable 3-0 lead, the tourists had felt emboldened enough to make three changes to their XI – including the captain, Eoin Morgan, leaving himself out – in an attempt to give some of the reserves exposure. But as the rain lashed down one last time in this ill-scheduled series, the unbalanced team that resulted from the tinkering did not look too clever. England were a sorry 132 for nine from 26.1 overs, having earlier shipped 366 for six on a bounteous pitch, and thus under the stand-in leadership of Jos Buttler had been hammered by 219 runs on DLS. Morgan’s step aside had granted Sam Curran a second cap but in doing so reduced the number of outright specialist batsmen by one. The captain was characteristically unrepentant but what he could not abide was the overall team performance that resulted. “We didn’t take our game forward,” said Morgan. “Actually, there are areas where it went backwards. Our fielding was extremely poor, our attitude very poor and that has to be addressed. We will break it down and find an answer, otherwise we are just papering over the cracks.” Needing their highest ever successful run chase, it was pretty much game over for England just 10 balls in as Jason Roy, Alex Hales and Jos Buttler all departed amid a surge from Sri Lanka’s opening bowlers that left the scorecard a sorry four for three. Roy was bowled by a sparkling yorker from Kasun Rajitha for four, before Alex Hales and Jos Buttler both nicked off to Dushmantha Chameera for ducks. When Joe Root slapped the same man to point in the eighth over, it was 28 for four and only two batsmen of established ODI pedigree remained. Ben Stokes and Moeen Ali did briefly offer defiance, with the former battling cramp to crack 67 and the latter feeling bat on ball for the first time this tour with 37. But the need to go hard played into the hands of Sri Lanka and Akila Dananjaya, their mystery spinner, returned figures of four for 19 as the extended lower order buckled. Morgan’s chief frustration stemmed from the first innings, however, as Sri Lanka topped their previous ODI best against England (324 for two at Headingley in 2006) through each of the top four bludgeoning half-centuries. With Mark Wood and Liam Plunkett both given a chance to play, Sam and Tom Curran installed as England’s first brothers since Adam and Ben Hollioake in 1999, as well as regulars Stokes, Moeen and Adil Rashid, Buttler had seven bowlers at his disposal. But bar Rashid, whose one for 52 from 10 overs felt a triumph in the circumstances, the punishment that followed was heavy for all, with 32 fours and 11 sixes struck by Sri Lanka on a heartbreaker of a flat pitch. Morgan popped on as sub at times but this could not inspire his charges. Three catches went down – Wood and Tom Curran handed Dinesh Chandimal early lives en route to a bristling 80 from 73 balls – and in the sapping humidity, sloppy errors saw close relationships become frayed, summed up by Stokes hurling a ball into the turf in anger. Niroshan Dickwella and Sadeera Samarawickrama flew out of the traps for an opening stand of 137 from 19.1 overs. So head-spinning was their flurry of carves, whips, scoops and pulls that when finally separated – the latter bowled by Moeen Ali for 54 – it took an umpire review to confirm ball had brushed stump, with bowler and wicketkeeper oblivious. When a seemingly drained Dickwella edged Moeen to short third man on 95 in the 26th over, this previously callow Sri Lanka side could easily have lost their way. But Chandimal and Kusal Mendis stepped on the gas again, sharing a stand of 102 from just 77 balls. Mendis was in a particularly incendiary mood, blazing 56 from just 33, including six sixes, off the back of three ducks and five from his last four ODIs. Though finally picking out deep midwicket to give Plunkett some cheer on an otherwise chastening return, at 285 for three with 10 overs to go, Sri Lanka were on for 400. Rashid’s removal of Dasun Shanaka in the deep and two wickets in two balls from Tom Curran – Chandimal and Perra both holing out to slower balls – stemmed the bleeding somewhat but with a final catch going down from Moeen, the next and final ball smashed for six by Dhanajaya de Silva, the hosts were buzzing and did not look back thereafter.