Eoin Morgan expects that with Alex Hales kicking his heels in reserve, and the back-up bowlers watching Olly Stone’s encouraging first outing, picking England’s squad for next year’s World Cup could provide the most welcome of headaches. Speaking after England took a 1-0 lead over Sri Lanka, the captain cited the depth of options as cause for optimism come next summer’s 50-over showpiece at home – one he has already said could lead to his own demotion should the runs dry up. With Morgan top-scoring on 91 in the second ODI, that scenario looks fanciful at present. But with the returning Chris Woakes picking up three wickets and Stone’s pace shining through, the bowling spots could soon become as logjammed as the batting. “When a side is doing well it tends to be the case that guys are sitting out who would be in any other team,” Morgan said. “[Managing the reserves] is a big part of the job. I get a lot of help from the backroom staff with that. Hales is a prime example of someone who would be in most teams in the world. [Mark Wood], the two Curran brothers, it’s the same thing. They are devastated, they all want to play, but that can’t be the case.” Morgan views the possible emergence of Stone, who struck with his seventh ball in international cricket, as competition for the role usually performed by Liam Plunkett. The Yorkshireman, absent because a switch in fixtures came too late for his wedding plans, should return to the squad after Wednesday’s third match. “The bowlers did a great job,” Morgan said. “Woakes goes overlooked a lot of the time. He really set the tone, he made a relaxing impression early on for Olly to come in and do exactly what he does. Olly bowled exactly like he has in the nets and that’s a really good sign: pace, he got the ball moving and all done with a very calm head. That’s a good sign. “Liam has been phenomenal for us for the last few years and when he went down injured in Australia and we found it very difficult to get a bowler with the same attributes, to bowl quick and change the pace of the game at any stage of the 50 overs. “There were signs today suggest Olly could be one of those guys. Even taking the new ball gives him a new string to his bow, Liam doesn’t really do that. I don’t think you can disregard Olly from the World Cup based on today.”