Theresa May launched a stinging attack on what she called the “Jeremy Corbyn party”, as she issued a strong call for Conservative unity on the final day of her party’s conference in Birmingham. Closing the gathering of party faithful, which has been marked by divisions over Brexit, the prime minister claimed today’s Labour party had abandoned the principles of Gaitskell, Callaghan and Attlee, calling the recent antisemitism row a “national tragedy”. In a self-deprecating move, she appeared on stage dancing to Abba’s Dancing Queen. May then opened her speech by commemorating the centenary of the first world war, and urged her party to “recapture that spirit of common purpose”, that followed the conflict. “The lesson of that remarkable generation is clear – if we come together there is no limit to what we can achieve. Our future is in our hands,” she said. She sought to exploit divisions in the Labour party, claiming she could see “the heirs of Hugh Gaitskell and Barbara Castle, Denis Healey and John Smith”, in today’s Labour party – but not on the frontbench. “Instead their faces stare blankly out from the rows behind, while another party occupies prime position: the Jeremy Corbyn party,” she said, claiming the Labour frontbench “rejects the common values that once bridged our political divide”. Corbyn was criticised repeatedly from the podium, underlining the fact that senior Conservatives now regard Labour as a serious electoral threat. In another striking riposte to Labour, May promised that 10 years after the banking crisis, “austerity is over”. “There must be no return to the uncontrolled borrowing of the past. No undoing all the progress of the last eight years. No taking Britain back to square one. But the British people need to know that the end is in sight. And our message to them must be this: we get it,” she said. “A decade after the financial crash, people need to know that the austerity it led to is over an that their hard work has paid off.” May set out a series of measures aimed at reforming free markets. “We cannot make the case of capitalism if ordinary working people have no chance of owning capital,” she said. In particular, highlighting what she has repeatedly called her “personal mission” to tackle the housing crisis, May announced she would scrap the cap on how much local authorities can borrow to build new social housing. “Solving the housing crisis is the biggest domestic policy challenge of our generation. It doesn’t make sense to stop councils from playing their part in solving it. So today I can announce that we are scrapping that cap,” she said. She highlighted the government’s response to the Salisbury nerve agent poisoning, and contrast it with Corbyn’s approach of demanding international action, sanctioned by the UN security council, on which Russia has a veto. “We cannot outsource our conscience to the Kremlin,” she said. May highlighted the government’s recent pledge to pour an extra £20bn into the NHS, and announced a new “cancer strategy”, aimed at improving early detection rates, as an indication of the Tories’ commitment to tackling domestic challenges after Brexit. And she bemoaned the toxic nature of public debate, citing murdered MP Jo Cox’s argument that political opponents have “more in common than divides us”. “Rigorous debate between political opponents is becoming more like a confrontation between enemies,” she said. “You don’t have to believe in a word Diane Abbott says to believe in her right to say it, free of abuse.” The former foreign secretary Boris Johnson drew an enthusiastic crowd to a rally in Birmingham on Tuesday, at which he claimed May’s Chequers plan was a “betrayal”, and urged his supporters to persuade her to abandon it. May hit back – without mentioning Johnson by name – insisting: “Leadership is doing what you believe to be right, and having the courage and determination to see it through, and that’s what I’ve been doing on Brexit.”