In 1920, Roman Vishniac and his new bride Luta arrived in Berlin. Having fled the turmoil of post-revolutionary Moscow, the couple had hastily been married by a station master in a Latvian border town, before traveling to Riga and on to the German capital. There, Vishniac was reunited with his wealthy parents, who had left Russia three years earlier, and he and Luta were married again in a register office before their union was blessed by a traditional Jewish ceremony. So began their new life in a city that an excited Vishniac described as “a living whole … the centre of western Europe”. The story of their flight is emblematic of Vishniac’s extraordinary life, which was lived out, in part, against Europe’s turbulent early-to-mid 20th-century history. As a child he had experimented with scientific photography, attaching a microscope to a camera in order to produce magnified images of insects and plants. Having gone on to train as a biologist, he found work hard to come by in Berlin. Intrigued by the cosmopolitan nature of the city, he became a keen amateur photographer, strolling the city night and day with a Rolleiflex camera dangling from his neck. In the early 1930s, his eye was drawn to the play of light and shadow on passing people, on workers tarmacking a street, on wide empty vistas and narrow doorways. As he grew in confidence and aptitude, his style became more formal. A shot of Leipzig station, sunlight falling from the glass roof on waiting commuters, recalls the cool American modernism of Paul Strand or Edward Steichen. More often, though, he caught the quotidian ebb and flow of the German capital, his ever-curious outsider’s eye picking out the tiny details that tell a bigger story – and one that was taking an increasingly ominous turn. In a photograph from 1935, a smartly dressed woman on a sunny street turns in mid-step to look over her shoulder as if called by someone just out of the frame. It is a curious image, a stilled moment that is both ordinary and, as one registers the background detail, foreboding. Just to the left of the girl walking behind her, a swastika flag hangs from a shop. In another photograph from the same year, a painted swastika adorns a doorway to the left of a man who is staring into the window of the Silesian Homeland clubhouse, one of many such establishments that celebrated the glory – and ethnic purity – of the German “fatherland”. Vishniac’s photographs of everyday Berlin in the early 30s are a rare portrait of a society in which ordinary life is giving way to a kind of normalised extremism in the lead-up to Nazi rule. They are one of the many revelations in an exhibition curated by American photography scholar Maya Benton, that is spread across two London spaces: the Photographers’ Gallery and the Jewish Museum. Culled from the extensive archive of Vishniac’s work, it is a radical reappraisal of a photographer who, since the publication in 1983 of his most famous book, A Vanished World, has been primarily known for his extensive documentation of life and culture in the shtetl (Jewish villages) of eastern Europe between 1935 and 1939, before the Holocaust. As this thought-provoking exhibition shows, Vishniac’s life and work were inextricably intertwined, both driven by a relentless curiosity that was coupled with an ability to adapt and thrive under often extreme circumstances. In Berlin, his move to street photography and on to social documentary seemed effortless. In 1935, he was commissioned by the Jewish Joint Distribution Committee to document impoverished Jewish communities across eastern Europe. Ironically, though, Vishniac’s epic undertaking – dozens of trips to eastern Europe over four years – would come to define his creative reputation for years afterwards, but also, as this exhibition shows, to misrepresent him somewhat as solely a chronicler of Jewish life before the Holocaust. “One of the prime reasons for this exhibition is to show that Vishniac is not just a great Jewish photographer, but a great photographer of the 20th century,” elaborates Benton. “His photographs from eastern Europe first appeared in a book called The Vanished World: Jewish Cities, Jewish People, in 1947, and almost immediately became part of the collective memory of what had been destroyed. So important were those images and the uses they were put to, that his other work remained overlooked for decades.” The legacy of Vishniac’s eastern European shtetl photographs remains complex, both in terms of his creative reputation and, as Benton diplomatically puts it, “the uses they were put to”. As she notes in the accompanying book, “The resulting images were used by the JDC to raise funds, promote awareness, and assist in a wide range of relief efforts.” By 1983, though, when the similarly titled A Vanished World was published with an essay by Elie Wiesel, esteemed writer, Nobel Laureate and Holocaust survivor, the photographs had attained almost sacred status, seemingly unchallengeable as a historic record of Jewish life in eastern Europe. Of late though, some critics have argued that they idealise that lost world to the point of sentimentality, the abiding sense of melancholic poverty they imbue – overcrowded houses and streets, sad children and wise rabbis - not quite fitting with the reality of a much more economically diverse population. More problematically, Vishniac himself was not averse to manipulating the facts – and his images – to serve a story. His captions were often inaccurate or made-up, the context of the images blurred. In 2010, Alana Newhouse, editor-in-chief of Tablet, a magazine about Jewish life and culture, wrote a feature for the New York Times entitled A Closer Reading of Roman Vishniac. She cited the final spread in A Vanished World, in which two images are juxtaposed: a man hiding behind a metal door alongside a small child who is clandestinely signalling to him with a finger pointing across his eyeline. The caption reads: “The father is hiding from the Endecy (members of the National Democratic Party). His son signals him that they are approaching. Warsaw, 1938.” Newhouse writes: “It is a poignant scene – haunting and full of narrative pathos. But it almost certainly did not happen. The pictures in that spread, it turns out, came from different rolls of film, probably shot in different towns – which means, of course, that its characters were presumably not only unrelated but also most likely did not even know each other.” The ambiguities surrounding the uses to which Vishniac’s vanished world pictures were put, and his role in that now contested narrative, are explored rather than avoided in this endlessly fascinating exhibition. They form part of a bigger, tangled tale of a creative life often marked by its contradictions – Vishniac had an equally elastic attitude to truth in the recounting of his own life story – but even more so by a relentless curiosity forged in those childhood experiments with microscopes and cameras. Having settled in New York in the 1940s, where he made another extended series of street photographs, established himself as a portrait photographer and even documented burlesque shows, it was to science that he returned in the 1950s and 60s. The images he produced then are as wondrous as they are unexpected: abstract microscopic images of gastric juice enzymes, slime mould and a cross section of the skin of his thumb. This is just one of several series here that almost deserve an exhibition of their own, so rich and inventive was Vishniac’s creative journey. Somehow, it all hangs together and, in the process, an overlooked, contradictory maverick of 20th-century photography is finally revealed in all his complexity. Roman Vishniac Rediscovered is at the Photographers’ Gallery and Jewish Museum, London, until 24 November.