The fairytale finale – but unlike any other fairytale you are likely to have experienced before. There was blood, there was sweat and there were certainly plenty of tears. And, in a week where the word “emotion” has perhaps been thrown around more than ever before in rugby league, on the game’s biggest stage of all, there was an outpouring of which anyone of a Wigan association could only have dreamed this summer. When it was announced that Shaun Wane’s 35-year association with his hometown club would end this year, it was clear then that Wigan’s season was going to go one of two ways. For a few weeks, as the announcements followed about players such as John Bateman and Sam Tomkins following him out of the door, it looked as though it would be costly. In the end, though, perhaps it was fitting that Wane’s Wigan did exactly what they have become renowned for under the guidance of one of the town’s favourite sons: rise to the occasion. This final incarnation of Wigan Warriors under Wane are not glitzy. They are not glamorous. But they are determined, resolute and, for the fifth time in the Super League era, they are champions. It was a double, too: earlier, a stoppage-time penalty by Charlotte Foley gave Wigan Warriors Women their first Grand Final triumph with an 18-16 victory over Leeds Rhinos at the Manchester Regional Arena. At Old Trafford, when Dom Manfredi crossed with three minutes remaining to finally secure the farewell Wane and his players were craving, it was difficult to know where to look first. On the field, Tomkins almost immediately burst into tears. On the sidelines, there were hugs aplenty for Wane and the granite-tough Wiganer, like his players, was unable to hide his emotions as the full-time hooter sounded and the celebrations began. “Losing wouldn’t have defined my career but I’ve made a difference here. I’ll miss everything about the place,” he said. There have been a plethora of highs during Wane’s journey from 16-year-old apprentice to first-team coach. This one will be tough to top whatever happens next as he embarks on a new journey in Scottish rugby union. League surely hasn’t seen the last of him, though. A man with his track record is too big a loss for the sport. On any other night Manfredi’s story – this was only his fifth game back from over two years out injured – would have grabbed the headlines. In the end, it was his two tries that proved to be the difference here. “I’m hoping he’s the story – I’ve a place in my heart for him,” Wane said of the winger. A stoppage-time penalty by Charlotte Foley gave Wigan Warriors women their first Super League triumph with an 18-16 Grand Final victory over Leeds Rhinos at the Manchester Regional Arena on Saturday. Wigan's female team, who were only established last year, stopped Leeds adding to their Challenge Cup and League Leaders' wins with tries from Rachel Thompson (3) and Georgia Wilson. Leeds were 10 points down after an hour but pulled level at 16-16 with minutes remaining. However, a missed conversion from Courtney Hill proved crucial as Foley wrapped up the Wigan win. But for every winner, there is a loser, and as in the Challenge Cup final this year, Warrington will look back on this as a night on which there were more than enough chances to win. It means their wait for the title will go into a 64th year in 2019, and just as at Wembley, Warrington’s profligacy would come back to haunt them here. “It could have gone either way up until the 77th minute,” their coach, Steve Price, reflected. “It was hard, and it was ferocious, but I’m super proud of them. We’ve come a long way.” This, Warrington’s fourth Grand Final defeat in six years, could have easily had a different outcome had they built on Josh Charnley’s early try which broke the deadlock. Wigan quickly replied when Manfredi finished Oliver Gildart’s evasive break, but what followed thereafter was bone-crunching defensive superiority. Wane, you suspected, would have loved every minute of it – as he would have Tom Davies’s expert finish from George Williams’ kick which made it 8-4. There were plenty of flashpoints away from the tries – most notably when Tomkins’ knees caught Daryl Clark as he collected a ball. “That would have been a yellow card if it was a normal game,” Price said, but Tomkins escaped without being sent to the sin-bin. Warrington’s chances continued well into the second half. On two separate occasions Stefan Ratchford – only the second player to win the Harry Sunderland Trophy while being on the losing side – was halted by Morgan Escaré, Wigan’s French full-back who will define the success of the post-Wane era. And after standing up to Warrington’s attack time and time again, with three minutes remaining, the moment he and his players were waiting for arrived when Manfredi dived over to secure yet another title for Wane and the club he has given his all for decades. “It’s the perfect ending,” was Wane’s softly spoken, teary summation afterwards. The power of emotion, it seems, should not be underestimated after all.