Fact: Lifespan of a Fact is one of the three best new plays open on Broadway. Fact: it is early in the season; only three new plays are open. Facts, as the show seems to insist, are tricky things. Do we insist on scrupulous accuracy if that accuracy effaces larger truths? Can we call a thing true if we’ve massaged data to get there? Is truth an absolute anyway? Well, at least it’s nice to see Daniel Radcliffe on Broadway again. Fact. This slim, untrusty play, stranded in Studio 54 and credited to Jeremy Kareken, David Murrell and Gordon Farrell, has its roots in some nicely oddball source material. In 2003, the writer John D’Agata submitted an essay to Harper’s about a teen’s suicide in Las Vegas that Harper’s ultimately rejected because of factual inaccuracies. The Believer requested it and assigned an intern, Jim Fingal, to check it. He took to the job with all the fierce resolve of a pit bull clamping down on a chicken leg. It’s unclear how many years – years! – the fact-checking took, but the essay, What Happens There, wasn’t published until 2010. In 2012, the men published the book Lifespan of a Fact, which includes the essay and their arguments. The play tries not to favor either man. Jim (Radcliffe), an intern at an unnamed magazine, is a newbie and a nerd. His dedication is admirable, but he has no ability to distinguish between which facts that might be important and which might not. John (Bobby Cannavale), a reasonably famous essayist, is a blowhard and a bully. Still, craft matters to him, and the play suggests that he is driven by wounds a tech-geek like Jim has never felt. Jim is a calculator. John is a poet. Their referee is Cherry Jones’s semi-fearsome editor Emily. The actors are all elating – Cannavale especially – so if you need a reason to see it, here you go. But the show, directed fleetly by Leigh Silverman, is all John. Ninety minutes long, it plays very fast and very loose with the actual circumstances. Like John it will tell you that its fabrications are in the name of art. Or Broadway. The writers have had to gin up risk and suspense, so in this version, the fact-checking is a rush job, meant to replace a piece on congressional spouses. Jim has to finish it by Monday morning, otherwise it’s back to the spouses! And while Jim toils, people are being paid overtime! Overtime! The humanity! The tension feels fake. So does the play’s vision of journalism. Emily, an invented character, tells Jim: “I think it’s wonderful that you have standards. Just as long as you understand the compromises we have to often make between material that pushes the envelope –” “And the stuff that sells magazines,” Jim concludes. “Absolutely. And ads.“ These are the kinds of dumbed down generalizations you might use in a barn like Studio 54 when you don’t trust your audience, not in some private office at Harper’s and certainly not at the Believer. It’s terrific that a play wants to attack such intricate, thorny issues of art and authenticity, but less terrific that it wants to confront them in such phony ways. And to give too much space to D’Agata’s arguments, that facts don’t really matter, that objectivity is flimsy, that as he writes in the book if something “is believed by somebody”, he writes, “I consider it a legitimate potential history” just feels icky and enabling. We’re living through an era in which alternate facts – read, lies – have caused actual and deliberate harm. Theater is of course itself an alternative fact. We know it’s fake. We accept it. That’s a lot of the fun. And yet we can still demand more truth than this.