Nauruan authorities have arrested and ordered the removal of the senior medical officer for Australia’s immigration processing centre, an Australian doctor, according to sources on the island. According to separate sources, Dr Nicole Montana, senior medical officer for Australia’s health contractor, IHMS, was arrested on Tuesday night and ordered to leave. A spokeswoman for IHMS would not confirm the arrest but said Montana was stood down on Tuesday “for a breach of Regional Processing Centre rules”. “She is departing Nauru today. A replacement senior medical officer is already in Nauru, there has been no impact on the services provided to transferees.” It is not known why she was arrested or who gave the order. Montana had replaced Dr Christopher Jones, whose visa was suddenly cancelled by Nauru in September amid arguments over medical transfers. A spokesman for the Australian Department of Home Affairs declined to answer questions and said it was a matter for Nauru and IHMS. The Nauruan government’s behaviour has been increasingly unpredictable in recent weeks, including blocking medical transfers ordered by the federal court, and suddenly forcing Médecins Sans Frontières, which was delivering psychological and psychiatric services, off the island. After MSF went public about the conditions in Nauru and the worsening health crisis, Nauru accused it of conspiring against the country. The Nauruan government has also targeted a group of people known as the Nauru 19, individuals including former ministers and a prime minister who were charged over a protest outside parliament. Their case was dismissed by a judge who strongly criticised the government’s pursuit of the group. Members have said a blacklist – evidence of which was put before the court – continues to be used against them. At least three have had passport applications blocked, and this week one accused the government of denying critical medical treatment to a member of the group, Rutherford Jeremiah, after a diving accident. The Nauru government and police force have been contacted for comment.