Jennifer Saunders has hinted that Absolutely Fabulous could be revived, but said it would have to be “age-appropriate”. Appearing at Cheltenham literature festival she said: “I am thinking at the moment of writing a little something. “It has to be age-appropriate otherwise we’d have to be in a wheelchairs basically. I think Julia [Sawalha who plays daughter Saffy] is old enough to be my mother now.” She said another Absolutely Fabulous was “always on my mind, always”. The comments will fuel speculation that Saunders is thinking of a prequel for the sitcom, which ran on the BBC for five series and was a movie in 2016. After the film was released she declared there would be no more. “That. Is. It,” Saunders told the Daily Mail. “I can’t see the point of doing anything else with it, really.” She said it was harder to write comedy at the moment because she repeatedly hears someone “tutting” in the back of her head. Asked a question about “political correctness” Saunders admitted: “I think it is harder to write what we used to write because there is just always someone tutting in the back of your mind.” She said “every time you write a joke that might be on the edge” she can hear a voice tutting: ‘Oh what do you think? don’t you think someone might be offended?’ It is very tiring.” Saunders said you could get away with more on the stage: “On television there is a lot of tutting and it is very annoying. I do look at some of the things we’ve done in the past and think the Twitter-sphere would go mad.” Saunders was ostensibly interviewing Jon Plowman, who has produced much of the BBC’s best comedy over a long career, including both French and Saunders and Absolutely Fabulous. They both agreed that there were not enough BBC sitcoms being produced or places to make them. “To be honest there is simply not enough studio space,” said Saunders. “In London particularly most of the TV studios are being demolished to be made in to flats.” The festival discussion touched on satire and why there was not more on British television. Saunders said she never understood why a version of America’s satirical Saturday Night Live had not caught on in the UK. Plowman said: “I don’t think the people who run British television are tolerant enough. I don’t mean tolerant of the material, I mean those shows have got to be allowed to grow. They have got to be there and just become … part of the television furniture.” He said quite a lot of Saturday Night Live did not work, but that did not matter so much because few people watch it on Saturday and instead watch the funny bits on YouTube on Sunday. Plowman said he was frustrated that the UK could not not do anything as good as John Oliver’s HBO show, Last Week Tonight, and said there should be a nightly satire show on the BBC. He asked the audience of about 1,400 people to put their hands up if they watched Newsnight regularly. Perhaps a dozen went up. “That’s a very solid slot at 10.30pm on BBC Two.”