These kofte are very much Middle Eastern in influence. When I was in my early 20s, I had a favourite Persian restaurant, which served theirs with a wonderfully aromatic chickpea broth, heady with saffron and other spices. They were glorious. We often recreated them using different kinds of mince or vegetables. They make a great kebab in pittas, drizzled in chilli and garlic sauces: a simple, delicious treat. Labneh is simple to make, but it does involve some forward planning. If you have time, do make it – it is delicious and lasts a week or so in the fridge. If not, buy it without a backward thought. Prep 15 minDrain 12 hrCook 20 minServes 4 For the labneh500g Greek yoghurt1 tsp sea salt For the beef kofte500g minced beef 1 tsp sumac 1 tsp smoked paprika ½ tbsp ground cumin ½ tbsp ground coriander 1 red chilli, deseeded and very finely chopped 1 small handful each of parsley and coriander leaves, finely chopped 2 garlic cloves, finely chopped 4 wooden skewers, soaked for an hour in water, or 4 metal skewers For the braised chickpeas3 tbsp olive oil1 tsp cumin seeds1 onion, finely chopped1 garlic clove, finely chopped2 plum tomatoes, roughly chopped1 pinch saffron threads, soaked in 3 tbsp boiling water for 5 minutes (optional)2 x 400g tin chickpeas, drained and rinsedSalt and black pepperA handful of coriander leaves, roughly choppedJuice of ½ lemon, plus 4 wedges to serve If you are making your own labneh, stir together the yoghurt and salt in a bowl. Spoon into a clean tea towel or cloth, then pick up the edges and tie the top with a piece of string or a rubber band. Hang over a bowl in the fridge or somewhere cool. After 12 hours, you will have some water in the bottom of the bowl and some delicious labneh in the cloth. Make the kofte by putting all the ingredients in a bowl and mixing with your hands. Season with salt and pepper, fry a small amount, then taste for seasoning. Divide into four and squeeze around the skewers, so you have long sausages. Put on a plate in the fridge to chill while you make the chickpeas. Warm the oil in a medium saucepan over a medium heat and, when hot, add the cumin seeds. As soon as they crackle, add the onion and garlic and cook for three minutes until they begin to turn golden at the edges, then add the tomatoes, saffron (if using) and its soaking liquid, the chickpeas and three-quarters of a tin of water. Season well, then simmer for 10-15 minutes, until the chickpeas are super soft and beginning to fall apart. Stir in the chopped coriander and squeeze in the lemon. To cook the kofte, heat up a griddle pan, large frying pan or simply turn on the grill. Cook for four to five minutes, turning once, until charred on the outside and cooked but still pink and juicy in the middle. Serve on top of the chickpeas with a big dollop of labneh and a wedge of lemon. Try making vegetarian kofte – beetroot works well, as does a mixture of lentils and split peas. If you have time, cook your own chickpeas – they taste so much better, are really cheap and are especially good for bulking up warming autumnal soups. Any leftover labneh is delicious served over braised greens.