The UK, France and Germany have pressed Saudi Arabia to provide facts for its account of what happened to the journalist Jamal Khashoggi, as ministers from western governments lined up to reject the official line from Riyadh. After two weeks of denials that the kingdom was involved in Khashoggi’s disappearance on 2 October, late on Friday the Saudi regime said he had died in a fistfight inside its consulate in Istanbul. In a joint statement released on Sunday, the UK, France and Germany said: “There remains an urgent need for clarification of exactly what happened on October 2nd – beyond the hypotheses that have been raised so far in the Saudi investigation, which need to be backed by facts to be considered credible. “We thus stress that more efforts are needed and expected towards establishing the truth in a comprehensive, transparent and credible manner.” The Turkish president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, meanwhile said he would announce details of the Turkish investigation into Khashoggi’s death at a meeting with members of his ruling AK party in parliament on Tuesday. Up to now, Erdoğan and other top government figures have remained cautious in their public statements, stopping short of pinning the blame on Saudi Arabia and referring instead to the prosecutors’ investigation. Instead pro-government Turkish newspapers have released information detailing how a 15-member team was sent to Istanbul to confront Khashoggi at the consulate. Western governments have rejected the official Saudi explanation and said they would wait for the full report from Turkish authorities before deciding on what punishment – if any – to impose on Riyadh. Ministers from France, Germany, the UK and Canada have all criticised the Saudi version of events, which have changed over time, starting with the assertion that Khashoggi had in fact left the consulate unharmed. On Sunday a senior Saudi official told Reuters that Khashoggi had been accidentally killed in a chokehold after resisting an attempt at extradition. Turkish investigators allege an audio recording from the consulate proves the journalist was tortured and his body dismembered with a bone saw, charges Riyadh denies. The UK’s Brexit secretary, Dominic Raab, was asked in an interview on BBC TV if he believed the Saudi explanation. “No, I don’t think it is credible,” he said. “We support the Turkish investigation into it and the British government will want to see people held to account for that death.” The French finance minister, Bruno Le Maire, said earlier on Sunday that full light needed to be shed. “I note that the Saudi authorities have changed tack, admitted the facts and accepted some responsibility, so we’re making progress,” he said. The German chancellor, Angela Merkel, and her foreign minster, Heiko Maas, said in a joint statement issued on Saturday that information provided by Riyadh was insufficient and that more transparency was needed. The EU’s foreign policy chief, Federica Mogherini, described Khashoggi’s death as a shocking violation of international conventions. The Canadian foreign minister, Chrsytia Freeland, said in a statement on Saturday that “the explanations offered to date lack consistency and credibility”. Australia’s prime minister, Scott Morrison, said: “We deplore the killing of Jamal Khashoggi. We expect the Saudi government to cooperate fully with Turkish authorities regarding the investigation of this matter.” Opinion against Saudi Arabia was also hardening in the US, but differences remain on the form of sanctions that should be imposed. The treasury secretary, Steve Mnuchin, added to an increasingly stern tone from Washington on Sunday, echoing an earlier statement from Donald Trump that the Saudi explanation of the dissident’s death was a “good first step” but “obviously not enough”. Mnuchin has bowed out of a major international investment conference in Riyadh next week, as have several leading US business figures and international officials. He said, however, that he would still travel to Riyadh this week in an effort to reinforce ties. “We have an important relationship with Saudi, focused on combating terrorist financing and focused on our common interests of stopping Iran’s spread of both terrorism and other issues,” he said. “I am going to go there and meet with my counterparts and continue to focus on what’s in the treasury’s domain, as it relates to this issue.” Trump initially said he found Saudi Arabia’s explanation of Khashoggi’s death credible and described it as an “important first step”. Asked on Saturday if he was satisfied that Saudi officials had been fired over the death, however, he said: “No, I am not satisfied until we find the answer. But it was a big first step, it was a good first step. But I want to get to the answer.” The controversy has put the kingdom, for decades a key ally in western efforts to contain Iran, under unprecedented pressure. It has also evolved into a major crisis for Crown Prince Mohammed Bin Salman, a Trump administration favourite widely known as MBS, whose image as a modernising Arab reformer has been gravely undermined.