There’s no way to play down how extraordinary this was. The longest time spent batting by any Australian in the fourth innings of a Test. Two sessions of the fourth day, three of the fifth. On an Asian pitch in relentless heat, with seamers bowling reverse swing and spinners targeting footmarks and catchers clustered around the bat. This is what Usman Khawaja produced in Dubai. A cricketing performance at the highest tier of any the game has seen, to save a Test from what should have been an impossible position after losing all 10 wickets for 60 runs during Australia’s first turn with the bat. Instead, his team drew and will enter the second Test in Abu Dhabi at parity. In that first innings, Khawaja had made 85 and batted for 243 minutes. In the second, it was 141 from a staggering 524 minutes, a total of 767 minutes in the match. Twelve and three quarter hours at the crease. Between times, Khawaja mostly fielded at gully while Pakistan did their half of the batting. Until his dismissal late in the final session, he had been on the field for all but 21 overs of 430 bowled, or an hour and a half of five full days. This in air that never moved and temperatures close to 40 degrees. Khawaja hasn’t previously appreciated the suggestion that he has trouble batting away from home. Nor the suggestion he has trouble in Asia, or against spin. Nor the suggestion that the reverse sweep isn’t a prudent option for him as a player. “No, no you guys need to sell your papers,” he said snippily in South Africa earlier this year when asked about his away record, as though reporters had invented his numbers. “I’m not trying to prove anything.” As for having got out to a reverse sweep in Durban, “it’s not that big of a deal, you play it in one day and T20 cricket all the time. It’s just about having the confidence in Test cricket to execute it.” No one had invented the fact that Khawaja at the time averaged 25.57 outside Australia versus 59.38 at home. Nor that he had a high score of 26 in Asia and an average of 14.62. Nor that his average against spin at home was 90.42 while away it was 16.2. The issues were real. So in Dubai, in foreign climes and Asian conditions against Pakistan’s raft of spinners, Khawaja obliterated all those hoodoos at once in an innings of barely believable concentration and endurance, one that proved his abilities to others even if he never felt he needed to prove them to himself. Of course, it wasn’t just about spin. Khawaja’s battle with Mohammad Abbas was the highlight of the match. Even as Abbas beat the edge several times with an outstanding final-day spell of reverse, Khawaja started walking metres out of his crease to reduce the lateral movement. Wicketkeeper Sarfraz Ahmed came up to the stumps to keep Khawaja still, but that risked missing an outside edge. When Sarfraz dropped back, Khawaja charged again. “Khawaja has been a picture of concentration in this innings, and Abbas has been a picture of skill,” were the admiring words of commentator and former fast bowler Louis Cameron on the Wisden radio coverage. Against the premier leg-spinner Yasir Shah, bombing the ball into the footmarks outside the left-hander’s off stump, Khawaja pulled out that maligned reverse sweep time and again, and nailed it time and again. Initially he scored boundaries, then singles as Pakistan had to position a permanent third man. He played the shot 24 times and mistimed it twice. His orthodox sweep was more dicey, several times risking an lbw decision or a catch off the glove. You could call the reverse sweep unnecessary, but it let him get off strike against the leg-spinner, breaking Yasir’s rhythm, and it let Khawaja convince himself this was a normal batting day. That was his focus throughout, to put all thought of the draw out of his mind and simply bat. He defended with great effectiveness against spin, often stepping across outside off or leg stump depending on the type of bowler and the line of delivery, stabbing the ball away while keeping his pads well out of the area. It was unorthodox, it was idiosyncratic, and it worked. It worked through the whole first session of the final day with Travis Head, who made 72. It worked under pressure when Head and Marnus Labuschagne (13) fell in the hour after lunch. It worked with his captain, Tim Paine, who stayed until tea. All the way, Khawaja’s concentration held. And at that point, suddenly the impossible seemed less so. At five wickets down, one wicket would still all but give Pakistan the win, with Australia’s bowlers no chance to bat out a session in such conditions. But if that wicket didn’t fall, the match could be saved. Now that it has been, they’re calling it the Great Escape. But with 14 overs to go it seemed like the moment when Steve McQueen snarls his motorbike in a fence of barbed wire. Finally, to his 302nd delivery, Khawaja missed a sweep from Yasir. Despite a broad stride, umpire Richard Illingworth with preternatural accuracy assessed that it had struck within the line of the stumps. An epic was over. It had included some luck: Paine had nearly run Khawaja out at the non-striker’s end except that Azhar Ali’s throw missed from mid-off, and Khawaja could have been caught at short leg had a screamer been held. But it had spanned nearly five sessions, and had got Paine close enough to shepherd his team to safety. There were 14 overs to survive when Khawaja was out, 12 when Mitchell Starc was held in a brilliant close catch by Babar Azam, and still 12 when Peter Siddle was utterly dead-to-rights lbw in the same over. After a wicketless match until the final day, Yasir had roared back to life, finishing with 4 for 114 and bounding up to the crease until the final ball. But through an enthralling finale, Paine and Nathan Lyon poked and padded and defended. Chances came and went, including a Yasir delivery that Paine left to shave his off stump, and a swinging Abbas ball that took the inside edge and missed leg by a similar margin. Finally, in the long shadows of the shade sails around Dubai International Cricket Stadium, Australia’s captain blocked the last of his 194 deliveries, two balls short of his personal best, and walked off the field with 61 runs to his name. On each of the four prior days, in the final session, Australia had dragged themselves back into the game after being all but played out of it. On the fifth day, they dragged themselves to safety. But no one in that side had turned things around more comprehensively than Usman Khawaja. In a team sorely lacking in proven top-class batsmen, one had reverse-swept aside each of the final doubts to his claim.