Letters from a Lost Generation by Vera Brittain There’s no war before or since that evoked so many voices from the arts as did the first world war. Until then the great empires had shaped the world and the ruling classes were close to each other. There was a sense of order. Then came huge social, as well as artistic, change. If you look at later wars, there’s a great inclination from the children of the rich and famous not to be involved at all. I think Al Gore was the only son of a senator who served on a front in the Vietnam War. All the others were given study extensions – bluntly, to stop them being killed. In WW1 the suffering and death was universal; you had a sense of colossal loss. My mother’s book Letters from a Lost Generation reflects the sense of this generation being destroyed. Some of the great military contributors were artists in regiments who painted the fronts. Works done on the Asiago front, where my uncle was killed, include some of the first ever drawings of planes; the biplane, in particular, emerged in that campaign because it was fought in the mountains. That use of technology was strikingly different from traditional warfare, and those paintings capture it. Sunderland war memorial Sunderland sent many men to war – it still does, for recruiting fares well in a post-industrial city, long bereft of its shipyards and pits. As a small child I toddled happily around the park in the town centre, staring at Victorian statues, the fanciful bandstand and the exotic drinking fountain. But I wanted always to get to the war memorial and stand as near as possible, and lean back to gaze to the very top without falling over. It’s a huge memorial, a granite column with an angel of victory, fabulous bronze wings stretched high. I had no understanding then what it meant. In the years since, I’ve seen every kind of memorial on my travels: triumphal, brooding, sentimental, often reinforcing the horrors of war. But the angel of victory is said to bring goodness and kindness. Elegant, with powerful wings, she presides over unusually large gatherings on Remembrance Sunday. Her column is now ringed with a new memorial wall, entirely funded by local people, to remember those who have died in conflicts since the second world war. So this lovely memorial always reminds me to remember – and that goodness and kindness should also be always in our minds. Blood Swept Lands and Seas of Red by Paul Cummins and Tom Piper In 2014 the world’s attention was grabbed by a sea of red sweeping through the moat of the Tower of London. Blood Swept Lands and Seas of Red was an installation of 888,246 ceramic poppies, each representing a British or colonial life lost at the Front. The poppies, planted by volunteers, gradually filled the Tower’s moat between 17 July and 11 November. What was just as moving as the artwork was people’s response to it. They came, they stayed, they listened to the nightly calling of the roll of the dead, they purchased poppies, raising money for Forces charities. And now the centenary of the end of the first world war will be commemorated with a new installation, which will fill the moat with thousands of individual flames. Running for eight nights, leading up to and including Armistice Day, flames will be lit to create a lake of light. Beyond the Deepening Shadow, its title taken from the war poet Mary Borden, will commemorate the dead but hint at the hope of peace to come. Imperialism, the Highest State of Capitalism by Vladimir LeninI first read this when I was about 22 when I was becoming active in politics. It was the late 1970s and there was a surge of racist attacks and the NF were marching. I’d never come across anything that explained the nature of the war so sharply. As we commemorate the centenary, all sorts of things are said – that it was a war to defend western civilisation or to preserve Belgian neutrality. Lenin says it was a predatory annexationist, imperialist war, a war between two gangs of robbers to redivide the world. Once you hear that, you never think about it, or war in general, in the same way again. For me, it was a way of explaining this contention between the big powers and the danger of war arising then and today too, not because of particular politicians, but because of the international system that exists. It also explains that, in Lenin’s view, imperialism is the last stage of capitalism. That’s important because it suggests there are alternatives and today we’re often told there are none – this analysis shows something else is possible. War Horse by Michael MorpurgoI did an event with Michael Morpurgo in Durham Cathedral in 2016: I talked about Regeneration and he about War Horse. There were hundreds of children, quiet and utterly enthralled. I was very impressed by Morpurgo and the gentle, courteous way he has of treating children as equals. This story being passed on to young children, to whom you could not really talk in any other way about the horrors of that war. They went away clutching copies of War Horse and with it the whole tradition of remembering the first world war. We were photographed against a backdrop of the Warlencourt crosses: these were erected on the Somme battlefield, brought back to England in 1926 and reunited for this occasion. The Ypres rose is also in Durham. It was brought back to England in 1917 and moved from place to place until 1978 when it was put in the memorial garden at Durham cathedral. It’s a very beautiful mauve rose, and a complete link back to the battlefield at Ypres. Remembering the first world war is one of the ways we can keep the horror fresh in our minds, and not drift down the passage to war as an instrument of policy again. Each generation can look at the suffering of those battlefields and identify with the very young men who died on them. The Regeneration Trilogy by Pat BarkerThis may be some of the greatest British writing about the human consequences of the “war to end all wars”. That it features three of the most significant poets of that time (Siegfried Sassoon, Wilfrid Owen and Robert Graves) only adds to the reader’s joy, and the passages where Siegfried helps Wilfred perfect the legendary Anthem for Doomed Youth should be required reading for any school student having war poetry forced upon them like green vegetables. Students beginning literature courses this autumn should also notice how Pat Barker uses the least flowery language and structure to produce a work of so much class, sex and geo-political depth. For there are even more lessons for students of history, politics and human nature. As we listen to the military marching bands commemorate the dead of the trenches and slick-suited politicians advocating a new proxy world war in the former imperial mandates of the Middle East, we would be wise to read and re-read Barker’s masterpiece. The Last Post by Carol Ann DuffyI’ve always followed Carol Ann Duffy’s work; my two daughters do, too. She’s part of my life and their upbringing. This poem was commissioned specifically in 2009 for the deaths of first world war veterans Harry Patch and Henry Allingham. Poetry in the first world war was such an extraordinary art form. Here was this group of artists who confronted the home population and future possible combatants with the truth, rather than a belief in duty and service. So for a modern poet to take that on is quite a thing. I love how it reverses time – the wish to reverse history lies in all of us, I think, and for a poet to distil it like that is very moving. It’s an embodiment of our wishes. Poems are so cinematic, they’re like an intense screenplay. They burn visual imagery in your eyes and brand on your mind. When she writes about the soldiers shaking dried mud from their hair, you can see it. And she connects umbilically with the war poet and the war poem itself: Wilfred Owen and Dulce et Decorum est. Archive photo of first world war soldiers This picture, above, right, shows three men in 1916 from the Canadian army. I’ve chosen it as the men look so proud, their faces filled with hope. Looking at them, I’m reminded that men like me went to war, with hopes, dreams, family, friends. It features in my work Mimesis: African Soldier at the Imperial War Museum, London. This image reflects the narrative of all the African and colonial soldiers; they are part of a marginalised and often hidden history of who fought in the first world war. Nearly three million African and colonial soldiers and auxiliaries served in Europe, mostly on the Western Front. I have no further information on the men in the picture, except that they were probably part of the Canadian segregated No 2 Construction Battalion. Some 634 set sail for Liverpool through submarine-infested waters en route to France and the Swiss border, serving mainly in Lajoux, Péronne and Alençon, providing lumber to maintain thousands of miles of frontline trenches. They dug trenches, constructed roads and railways, and were often targeted by German air raids. And Quiet Flows the Don by Mikhail SholokhovMy grandfather, who fought in WW1, used to sing to me the trenches song – And when they ask us, how dangerous it was, oh we’ll never tell them – which was adapted by the soldiers from a love song in hit Broadway musical The Girl From Utah. Nothing quite catches the hopeless horror of the war that was beyond the comprehension of civilians. This made a huge impression on me as a little boy, especially because when my grandfather died, my mother always sang it. I adored the war poets, too – and my favourite is Dulce et Decorum Est by Wilfred Owen. Less slick than Rupert Brooke, Owen’s language, dripping in hatred and contempt for the mindless patriotism (“The old lie”) is wrought with muscular physicality: “Bent double, like old beggars under sacks; Knock-kneed, coughing like hags, we cursed through sludge.” One can almost feel it. There are many great memoirs (Goodbye to All That by Robert Graves) and novels like Erich Maria Remarque’s All Quiet on the Western Front, but my favourite is from a less-known front: Mikhail Sholokhov’s And Quiet Flows the Don that tells of ▶ another war in which his Cossack horsemen, raised in the old tsarist world of the Volga, charge the Germans disastrously and, in the blood and gunpowder, encounter a new, ghastly modernity of killing and steel. War Against War by Ernst Friedrich Six years ago someone showed this to me in an old art bookshop and it was on display at Tate Britain’s excellent Aftermath exhibition recently. The book shows war veterans with terrible facial injuries who are living, but almost unrecognisable as humans. Underneath each is written patriotic statements about the glory of war. I found it a very shocking book. Imagery from the second world war of the injured tends to be people who look OK, who’ve undergone pioneering plastic surgery, but for the men in Friedrich’s book there is no hope. There’s no before and after, there’s just the forever that they’re going to look like this. As a conceptual artwork, it’s incredible. Art may be used as propaganda, but sometimes an artist can articulate something about a war in a way that would be impossible in another environment. Der Krieg – the Dresden Triptych by Otto Dix All my life I’ve carried a contradiction in me: a deep-rooted fear of military conflict and an attraction to men in uniform. Otto Dix’s Der Krieg (1929–1932), and John Singer Sargent’s Gassed (c March 1919) force reality on any fantasy. There is nothing attractive here. It’s the disability and death that comes from war. Not beautiful strong bodies, just cold, hard reality. The destruction of young lives has nothing positive whatsoever going for it. These men were barely 20 years old – they had lives of hopes and dreams ahead of them, and a sick brew of nationalism pitted them against each other. They were innocent, but destroyed by the “heroic” deed. They were sent to fight by those who felt safe from the fall-out of war. It’s old men that send young men to war. Then nationalism forced them to believe in a difference that wasn’t actually there. All humans are born equal. Let’s not forget this, as we are in the process of carving up Europe again. Aunties by Raymond Briggs At the beginning of the first world war commemoration I put together a collection of songs and verse and pictures called Only Remembered. I wrote to people I thought would be interesting to contribute. Raymond Briggs, whom I respect hugely, said he’d like to write a poem, but the problem was that it wasn’t about the war, it was about the consequences of war, so if I didn’t like it, not to worry. It’s the most amazing thing in the book. It’s wonderfully tender and full of memory and so important on the wake of destruction in people’s lives. As someone who writes about distant wars for children, it seems to be so important that they have a sense of the past that has made them. War is unbelievably present and relevant in our lives now, not in the way of the world wars, but it is beamed on to our telephones and our tablets. Children know about Yemen and Syria; not the political situations, but the sense of how children are suffering. They identify with them. I think we’re duty bound to pass on what we feel and know about what war does to people. I can certainly tell them about the history of it. That men who were their great-great grandfathers, or who came from their towns or villages, fought, so children will have a sense that they’re part of the history of the war. It’s not history with a big H, dusty from long ago, it’s about people like them. Slightly older – but not much. Winged Victory by VM YeatesTom Neil, a Battle of Britain fighter pilot who maintained a ramrod back and meticulous dress until his death at 98, once fixed me with a stare and told me that the best book ever written about aerial combat was Winged Victory. A genre emerged following the war in which veterans wrote novels closely based on their own experience. Perhaps that generation found it easier to describe their trauma by slightly detaching themselves. Perhaps the fiction that it was fiction allowed them to disavow some of the more troubling realities. Families and former comrades could comfort themselves that this was made up, while the authors avoided the appearance that they were sharing their deepest and most private selves with the world. The dialogue between pilots, the descriptions of fighting are unique. The grinding attrition of the narrator’s squadron, the struggle to maintain his sanity, the drinking, the comradeship, the loss. It is another voice from a generation that found itself helpless, pulverised by an industrial war over which they had no control and in which their survival was arbitrary. The best men could be snatched at any time by a weakened wing strut or a piece of shrapnel, their only epitaph an empty seat in the mess.