The sponsors of a major Saudi investor event to be held in Riyadh later this month are facing calls to end their involvement in the conference after allegations were made about the kingdom’s connection to the disappearance and possible death of the dissident journalist Jamal Khashoggi. On Wednesday the New York Times pulled out as media sponsor of the conference, known by participants as “Davos in the Desert”, to be held at the same Ritz-Carlton hotel where crown prince Mohammed bin Salman last year jailed dozens of wealthy Saudis in what he said was an anti-corruption campaign. The Economist’s editor-in-chief, Zanny Minton Beddoes, who had been due to speak, also pulled out of the event. In an editorial published on Thursday, the magazine said that Bin Salman’s regime had started to resemble an Arab nationalist dictatorship – “socially liberal but centralised, paranoid and built on fear”. The US Treasury secretary, Steven Mnuchin, will represent the Trump administration, while other prominent figures scheduled to take part are Jamie Dimon, the chief executive of JPMorgan Chase, Stephen Schwarzman, the chief executive of the Blackstone Group, and Dara Khosrowshahi, the chief executive of Uber. Other media sponsors of the Future Investment Initiative, scheduled to take place between 23 and 25 October, include the Financial Times, CNN, CNBC and Bloomberg. A range of consultants including Deloitte and McKinsey are also acting as conference partners. The New York Times’s decision to pull out was announced late on Wednesday by Eileen Murphy, a spokeswoman for the paper. The Washington Post has challenged US media groups to explain whether they wished to be associated with a country accused of killing a prominent journalist. Many media firms responded to say they were monitoring their position. The Bahrain human rights group Bird said in a statement: “The New York Times pulled its sponsorship to the Riyadh conference. It’s time for business and the Financial Times to follow suit. An attack on one journalist should be considered an attack on all.” Bird has also called on the trustees of the Natural History Museum in London not to provide the museum as a venue for the Saudi Arabia annual national day celebration, organised by the Saudi embassy, and called for a protest outside the building. The museum said no member of staff would be speaking at the event and the decision was a commercial one that would gain valuable income for the museum. The pressure to pull out of the conference could grow in the days ahead if Saudi Arabia fails to provide convincing answers on Khashoggi’s disappearance. Turkey has accused Saudi Arabia of killing Khashoggi or transporting him against his will back to Saudi Arabia. Intelligence reports, largely sourced from the US, suggest Bin Salman had been seeking to lure Khashoggi back to Riyadh. The Saudi ambassador in London, Mohammed bin Nawwaf bin Abdulaziz, has so far declined invitations by the BBC to give an explanation on behalf of the Saudi government for Khashoggi’s disappearance since 2 October. Tony Blair, a supporter of the Saudi modernisation programme, said the Saudis needed to offer credible explanations for what had happened to Khashoggi. He described the situation as very serious. The Financial Times has taken a critical line on the Khashoggi affair, saying the crown prince needs to provide the world with answers.