Sleep is absolutely integral to my positivity and creativity. I’m one-tenth of my person if I am tired. I like to be in bed by about 11pm and up at 7am, so that I have eight hours’ sleep. As I travel so much and am often on different time frames, I need to prioritise it. When I’m stressed, I have to be careful, because I walk straight towards sugar and wine. I’m quite strict about taking my lunch to work because I never have time to go out and then never know what I want. Usually I’ll make something like a cheese souffle and soup at home, and bring it with me. I’m frequently eating in meetings. As chief creative officer and founder, I’m responsible for all aspects of my brand, but last year I appointed a CEO so that I could focus more on the creative side of things. I started the brand when I was 18 and still get super-excited when I have a product that I can’t wait to show people, or see something through from a little idea to a fully fledged experience, like our Chubby Cloud at last month’s London fashion week (where we created the world’s largest bean bag). My husband James and I have five children, aged between 15 and 30. One week, we’ll have all of them at home and the next none of them, but we are always close. I don’t think you ever get a work-home balance – I think of it a bit like sailing, you have to tack a bit left and tack a bit right to move forward. Mostly, it’s about good communication. As long as you have that, you find your way. I find my work really fun because I work with my best friends. My ideal Friday night would be around the kitchen table with wine, a roast chicken and whoever wants to drop in. Maybe we’ll head to our local pub, the Nag’s Head, first. My idea of fun is not the red carpet; in fact, I hate that world. I always think of it like giving blood: tiring. Family and friends come first. • See Anya Hindmarch’s AW18 collection at anyahindmarch.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.