The UK’s first school for children who have experienced early-life trauma such as neglect or abuse and are currently being failed by the education system could open within two years. The short-stay school would provide children aged four to seven with therapy and education to prepare them to rejoin mainstream schooling. The proposed Your Place academy in Norwich has had input from leading psychiatrists and psychologists and aims to create a template that could be copied elsewhere. Harmful early experiences including physical, sexual or emotional abuse, loss of a parent or exposure to drugs or alcohol in the womb can have a significant impact on a child’s social and emotional development. Schools often respond with behaviour management approaches such as isolation booths or, if those fail, expulsion. Existing alternative provision tends to be for older children and of variable quality. Daniel Thrower, an executive headteacher with the Wensum Trust, the academy chain behind the proposal, said: “Children experiencing significant early-life trauma have been typically failed in UK schools. This is not the school’s fault. “We wish to use and build on the knowledge we have gained through a two-year pilot project and combine this with the findings of the latest brain-based research, to support those children more effectively and, through the training arm of the school, educate and support fellow professionals.” News doesn't always have to be bad – indeed, the relentless focus on confrontation, disaster, antagonism and blame risks convincing the public that the world is hopeless and there is nothing we can do. This series is an antidote, an attempt to show that there is plenty of hope, as our journalists scour the planet looking for pioneers, trailblazers, best practice, unsung heroes, ideas that work, ideas that might and innovations whose time might have come. Readers can recommend other projects, people and progress that we should report on by contacting us at theupside@theguardian.com The pilot project, funded by Norfolk county council, resulted in 83% of children with the highest level of need avoiding exclusion. However, the pilot – an outreach project – also demonstrated the need for a permanent facility. Anne Oakley, who works with children with developmental trauma and attachment difficulties in Norfolk schools and is part of the Your Place team, said: “The work we do has to be repetitive because you’re altering the structure of the brain, so it has to be really regular. Rather than the bolted-on once-a-week session it has to be many times a day. That’s the real difference.” As well as helping troubled children and their families by preventing exclusions, the Your Place team estimates it can deliver £8.7m of savings within five years. If one were opened in each of the 152 local education authorities in England and Wales, this would translate to £1.3bn over the same period. The benefit over the longer term would be far greater as the figures do not take account of potential costs such as demands on the health, welfare and criminal justice systems. The proposal is for a school with 32 places, half of which would be full-time, with referrals from social workers, teachers or parents. Pupils would be accompanied by a key person from their mainstream school, most commonly a teaching assistant, who would help them transition smoothly between the two sites. Thrower anticipates most children would attend for a term or two before being ready to rejoin their mainstream school. The school would work with families to ensure the home environment is stable and outreach provision would continue, including with former pupils. The academy is waiting for the backing of Norfolk county council to submit an application to the Department for Education next month. If successful, it could open in the 2019-20 school year. Peter Fonagy, the chief executive of the Anna Freud National Centre for Children and Families (AFNCCF), said at least 50 years’ worth of research had shown the impact of early life trauma on subsequent development. “School is probably the most important and appropriate platform for intervention available to us in society,” he said. “So making a school for these children therapeutic is, to me, the only logical solution we can offer these children to rescue them and ensure they have the life they deserve to have.” Fonagy has advised the project and, if it comes to fruition, the AFNCCF and University College London, where he is head of psychology, will carry out research on the outcomes for its pupils. Other backers include Adoption UK – adopted children have typically had adverse early experiences and are disproportionately excluded from school – and Dr Bruce Perry, a psychiatrist at the Child Trauma Academy in Houston. Thrower said responses from parents had been positive, with some even wanting to move to Norwich so their children could attend. Chloe Smith, the Conservative MP for Norwich North, who helped secure the backing of all Norfolk MPs for the project, said: “Unfortunately in Norfolk we have a disproportionately high number of excluded children and this is the kind of solution I think can be good for our county but also revolutionary nationwide.” Norman Lamb, the Liberal Democrat MP for North Norfolk and a health minister in the coalition government until 2015, said the trailblazing nature of the proposed school meant it did not fit neatly into the current education framework, particularly for funding, but he hoped it would get the go-ahead. “Norfolk, through a gap analysis, identified the need for more provision for trauma children,” he said. “The resulting pilot study funded by the local authority was so successful and cited the need for the school. I am sure the successes Norfolk have had will help them overcome the funding challenge and use the savings already generated to support the school.” This article is part of a series on possible solutions to some of the world’s most stubborn problems. What else should we cover? Email us at theupside@theguardian.com