Even mild-mannered Theresa May admitted to feeling “cross” at Boris Johnson’s all-guns-blazing appearance at his party’s conference in Birmingham. Some of her cabinet colleagues resorted to considerably stronger language in private. One minister, shown the headline-grabbing photo of the ex-foreign secretary jogging through a farmer’s field, simply said “tosser”. Johnson may not do detail, as the chancellor damningly said earlier this week, but he can deliver political theatre. His speech on Tuesday to a packed hall, against a bare black backdrop, did not disappoint on that measure at least. All the Johnsonian ingredients were there: a smattering of classical allusions, a generous sprinkling of anecdote, and a background hum of patriotic verve. But this was also Johnson trying to do serious: there were fewer gags and self-deprecating jabs – and also fewer nods to the party’s populist wing – than of late. Throughout this week in Birmingham, the Tories have felt compelled to respond to the challenge laid down by Labour’s broadly successful conference last week. Philip Hammond used his chancellor’s speech to suggest that, while Labour’s solutions were the wrong ones, their questions deserved answers. Johnson offered his own prescription, marrying a full-throated attack on Labour with a call for his party to return to its “one nation” roots, not least by helping families on to the housing ladder, an aspiration widely repeated at this conference. He also called for the Tories to promise not to raise taxes – a pledge that might sit oddly alongside the £20bn his party has just promised to pour into the creaking NHS. At the heart of the speech, though, was Johnson’s most visceral attack yet on the prime minister’s Chequers plan, rejecting the idea – mooted by Ruth Davidson on Monday – that May’s is a pragmatic, sensible approach to the challenge of delivering Brexit. He said: “This is not pragmatic. This is not a compromise. It is dangerous and unstable – politically and economically,” adding that it risks alienating voters and stoking the rise of the far right. And he took a sideswipe his leaver colleagues who hope that, if the political declaration about Britain’s future relationship with the EU27 can be kept sufficiently broad, they can rejoin the battle for a harder Brexit later. This “bodge it now, fix it later” argument is most associated with Michael Gove, the environment secretary, who remained inside the cabinet when David Davis and Johnson walked away, and who ended Johnson’s short-lived leadership campaign almost before it began in 2016. And there was an echo of that frenzied few days in Tuesday’s speech. Much of Johnson’s rhetoric was devoted to skewering Chequers. Yet having effectively accused May of seeking to “cheat” the electorate, he ended not with a call to arms, but an insistence that his supporters should “back the prime minister in the best way possible”. He said they should urge her to “softly, quietly and sensibly” return to the plan set out in her Lancaster House speech, which Johnson’s backers believe was closer to a free-trade agreement. For all the buildup, Johnson is not pitching for the leadership now. Boris-watchers believe his speech was aimed at establishing his “Super Canada” plan as the only alternative to Chequers, and laying down a marker. There is no immediate vacancy; but, if some voters – and party members – ultimately reject Chequers as a betrayal, they have a readymade champion to hand. Yet it is the prime minister’s privilege at party conference to have the last word, and on Wednesday it will be May’s turn to rouse the party faithful. She doesn’t have Johnson’s popular touch, however, unlike the former foreign secretary – now merely MP for Uxbridge – May is in a position to deliver. The new immigration regime Sajid Javid announced on Tuesday is the Conservatives’ answer to what May believes was one of the key drivers of the Brexit vote – the desire to stem the flow of low-paid workers joining Britain’s labour market. And her team remain cautiously optimistic that, despite the latest outbreak of disquiet from the DUP over the Irish border issue, they can secure a deal with Brussels. They are also increasingly hopeful they can win the debate in parliament. If they are right, and May can triumph over the odds, Johnson’s “chuck Chequers” act may appear with hindsight to be little more than disloyal noises off. And, crucially, while his pitch on Tuesday was undoubtedly laying the groundwork for a potential future run at the top job, Downing Street believes he doesn’t have the numbers. Graham Brady, chair of the backbench 1922 committee, the man who keeps a running total of letters of no confidence in May – the magic number is 48 – hinted that for the time being they may be right, despite bullish talk from Johnson fans. “The distance between what some of my colleagues say they might have done and what they actually have done can be considerable,” he said. Chequers“This is not democracy. This is not what we voted for. This is an outrage. This is not taking back control: this is forfeiting control.” Labour“I know that we can’t use too many references from the 1970s or 1980s, but surely to goodness we can take this Tony Benn tribute act and wallop it for six.” Law and order“Let’s bring back stop-and-search incidentally, and end this politically correct nonsense that has endangered the lives of young people in our capital.” Capitalism“We must on no account follow Corbyn, and start to treat capitalism as a kind of boo word. We can’t lose our faith in competition and choice and markets.” Taxes“We should have as our objective – as soon as possible – to cut taxes for those on low and modest incomes, because it is Conservative to give people back control of their money.”