Karen Carney praised Chelsea’s “magnificent attitude and response” after her penalty against Fiorentina saw them shake off a crushing defeat by Arsenal and put one foot in the Champions League quarter-finals. “It was humiliating,” said Carney of the 5-0 defeat by Arsenal, “and when you’re rock bottom the only way is up. You have to go back to basics and face things with humility.” Emma Hayes said it had not been hard to lift her team. “I’m a mother,” she said. “So it’s really easy for me to show my maternal side and remind them that it’s really not that grim. That is the reality. “Of course they’re disappointed, they’re competitors and they don’t like to lose like that. But they are an experienced group and you have to credit the senior leaders they’ve come together this week taken the responsibility to help the younger players.” Only superb goalkeeping from Stephanie Öhrström kept the scoreline low. Hayes made seven changes to the side humbled by Arsenal. Among them were Carney, the former Liverpool captain Sophie Ingle and the New Zealand captain Ali Riley. The idea was to supply the leadership and grit sorely lacking on Sunday. With eight minutes on the clock Chelsea were rewarded when Erin Cuthbert raced in from the right and saw her cross hit Stephanie Breitner on the arm as she slid in attempting to block. The referee Stéphanie Frappart pointed to the spot and Carney fired low to Öhrström’s right. Fiorentina looked happy to soak up the pressure and catch Chelsea on the break. With Alia Guagni and Ilaria Mauro combining well on the right, they always posed a threat and had their first chance when gifted a free-kick on the edge of the area. Davina Philtjens whipped it in and Heleen Jaques, unmarked, headed over Hedvig Lindahl’s crossbar. Chelsea began to push forward and it was Kirby who had the best chance of doubling their lead. Cuthbert swung in a low cross which the forward let run across her body before swivelling and firing from close range only for Öhrström to smother the shot. Close to half-time Ramona Bachmann was fouled and the free-kick from 25 yards went to Millie Bright but her header went straight at the goalkeeper. Fiorentina raced away on the counter and Mauro laid the ball off to Sofia Kongouli but Bright was back to make a last-ditch tackle. Fiorentina saw off the Danish champions Fortuna Hjørring with two 2-0 wins to set up this last-16 showdown and, unlike Chelsea, came into the match with heads held high after beating Juventus in the Italian Women’s Super Cup at the weekend. Chelsea picked up where they left off in the second half, playing a high line but looking defensively assured against Fiorentina’s infrequent breaks. With their forwards nullified, Antonio Cincotta substituted his front two, bringing in Tatiana Bonetti and Scotland’s Lana Clelland, who joined from Tavagnacco in the summer having scored 13 goals last season Chelsea continued to have the better chances. Beth England raced through and her cross found Cuthbert but the her shot was stopped by the legs of Öhrström. The Swede then kept Fiorentina in the tie with 11 minutes to go. Bachmann, dancing to the touchline, cut back through three defenders only for Carney’s shot to be saved. Kirby’s double follow-up was also heroically blocked by the keeper. Fiorentina upped the pressure in the closing minutes to keep Kingsmeadow sweating. Clelland broke down the right and beat Hannah Blundell but her tame shot was easily saved by Lindahl. Did Hayes rue Chelsea’s missed chances? “One goal will do. You only need one to win a match. We all know if they score one away it’s virtually worth two so to not concede was more important than getting the second goal. Let’s see what it’s like when they’re chasing a result and give us a bit more space.” Chelsea will hope to take their resilient European form into their domestic campaign when they undertake a tricky trip to second-placed Birmingham in the Women’s Super League on Sunday.