Nikki Waller, a Wall Street Journal editor recently did something extremely brave and incredibly difficult. She went a month – an entire month! – without using exclamation marks in email. The point of this sadomasochistic experiment was to investigate why the perky punctuation mark has become such a ubiquitous part of office communication and why so many people, particularly women, are self-conscious about their exclamation mark habit. Female bosses, Waller notes, “tread a thin line”. To be taken seriously in the workplace, women have to project gravitas and authority but also not come across as too tough and unfeeling. “Routine emails can become complex calculations about warmth, likability and authority,” she writes, with exclamation marks offered like olive branches. Like me! But respect me. But like me! While freeing herself from her exclamation addiction, Waller says, was tricky, it “felt great”. No longer weighing the emotional impact of every sentence, she felt like “just another manager, making sure work gets done”. There has been much written, in recent years, about whether women should cut down on exclamation marks in the office. Just as there has been much written about how women should stop saying sorry so much. And how they should be more assertive. And how they should speak up more. The upshot of all this advice is that if you want to get ahead in the corporate world, you should act a lot more like a “man”. Sorry, but I find that infuriating! Women are socialized to be people-pleasers, sure, but there’s nothing wrong with that. Trying to make other people feel comfortable is a good thing. It should be encouraged! Rather than telling women to lean in to obnoxious behavior, we should be encouraging a corporate world that isn’t governed by stereotypically male values. We should be teaching men to act more like women. We should also stop complaining about the proliferation of exclamation marks. Grammar snobs may love to hate them, but the reason we are so fond of them is that they’re an incredibly efficient way of conveying tone in electronic communication. It’s time we just got over exclamation inflation and embraced the much-maligned form of punctuation once and for all! He seems to think so. In any case, he thinks if the Democrats have a chance of winning the 2020 election they’d better nominate a guy like him. “[The nominee] better be a white male,” he told Time in a recent interview. “When you have a white male making the arguments, they carry more weight,” he says. “Should they carry more weight?” he quickly asked. “Absolutely not. But do they? Yes.” Should Avenatti, whose narcissism seems to rival Trump’s, stop trying to put himself forward as the next president? Absolute. But will he? Unfortunately, I doubt it very much. Sahle-Work Zewde, a seasoned UN diplomat, has become the only female head of state in Africa. Her unanimous appointment comes a week after Ethiopia reorganized the government so women had half of all cabinet posts. While the role of president is largely ceremonial in Ethiopia, Sahle-Work’s ascension is still hugely significant. “In a patriarchal society such as ours, the appointment of a female head of state not only sets the standard for the future,” Fitsum Arega, the chief of staff for the prime minister, Abiy Ahmed, said on Twitter. “But also normalizes women as decision-makers in public life.” On Thursday the New York Times published a report alleging Google protected a former employee, Andy Rubin, from sexual misconduct charges. After Rubin, who created Android, was accused of coercing a female colleague into a sex act, Google allegedly investigated and found the claim credible. The New York Times say that he was asked to resign but given “a hero’s farewell” and a $90mn exit passage to soften the blow. After the story was published Google’s CEO sent an email to all employees saying it had been “difficult to read” and the company was “dead serious about making sure we provide a safe and inclusive workplace”. Randa Siniora, general director of the Women’s Centre for Legal Aid and Counselling in Palestine, recently became the first female Palestinian campaigner to address the UN security council. “The Israeli occupation and the resulting humanitarian crisis are deeply gendered and exacerbate existing gender inequalities,” she said. “Women disproportionately endure the violence of occupation borne by all Palestinians, and often with gender-specific consequences.” But women are overlooked in the political debate. The plight of Palestinian women is also frequently overlooked by western feminists, I would add. Then again, there are so many more important things to write about. Such as: are exclamation points sexist? Yeah, I know penguins have nothing to do with the patriarchy, but it’s been a tough week. Cheer yourself up by looking at cute pics of baby Sphengic.