Cardi B has accused Nicki Minaj of leaking her phone number to the public, which led to death threats against her daughter. In one of a series of Instagram videos, Cardi B accuses Minaj of the leak following an altercation at a New York fashion week party that left Cardi B with a bruised forehead after she reportedly threw one of her shoes at Minaj. “How come my phone number got leaked one hour after that altercation at the Harper’s Bazaar party?” Cardi B says. “How come everybody that y’all have issues with, y’all have the numbers in your camp and they numbers got leaked?” She goes on to show text messages she received after the number became public, including one that reads: “We coming to find you and your daughter. We ain’t resting till we kill Kulture”, her daughter with rapper Offset. She describes Minaj as “sick in the head”. Since you wanna talk about it A post shared by  CARDIVENOM (@iamcardib) on Oct 29, 2018 at 3:46pm PDT Minaj has denied leaking the phone number, saying: “I’ve never leaked a number in my life and y’all continue to lie on me to make me look like a bad person.” Minaj has since tried to move on from the dispute, tweeting: “Let’s focus on positive things only from here on out”, with Cardi B agreeing, saying on Instagram: “Alright then! Let’s keep it positive and keep it pushing!” Elsewhere in the Instagram videos, Cardi B moots legal action after Minaj accused her of using payola, the illegal practice of paying radio stations or other outlets to play music. “Maybe I should sue you for defamation of character since you wanna claim that I’m using something called payola, because you don’t understand why I’m so fucking successful,” Cardi said. This week, Minaj distanced herself from the fashion week altercation, claiming that Cardi B’s injuries from the party came from an attack by reality TV star and friend Rah Ali, who “held her head and punched her like eight to nine times. The punches was so hard in your head, I was like mad at Rah … but Rah didn’t like [Cardi’s] attitude, the way she came at me.” Ali has not commented on the accusation. Minaj said the altercation was “something so mortifying and so humiliating to go through in front of a bunch upper-echelon people who have their life together”, and on Twitter described Cardi B as a “fraud” who doesn’t write her own lyrics – an accusation that Cardi B has not responded to.