A few short years ago, Snapchat was the messaging app on everyone’s filler-heavy lips, a place where Gen Y and Z alike shared ephemeral selfies and collections of pictures and videos that made up the “stories” of their everyday lives. However, a much-hated redesign, an offensive poll about Rihanna, and Instagram competing with its trademark disappearing posts has left it teetering on the precipice of MySpace-circa-2009 status. Indeed, the company’s stock reached an all-time low earlier this week, with shares down 74% on their March 2017 peak. As such, the company’s latest venture – a slate of original TV shows hosted on the platform – doesn’t seem to be so much a fun new feature as a last-ditch attempt to claw back some users. Its two launch shows are a thriller, Class of Lies, and a college-set comedy, Co-Ed, while the content planned for the coming months includes an adaptation of YA novel the Dead Girl Detective Agency, a documentary on viral rapper Bhad Bhabie, and a horror anthology, V/H/S. But will they be worth making space on your phone for? If you’re the sort of person who likes to get stuck into a meaty hour of telly, then the answer is probably not: each episode is just five minutes long. Moreover, the app doesn’t make for the best interface for watching shows; during Co-Ed – produced by indie directors the Duplass brothers – I accidentally clicked the screen, replaying the current section, before hitting another button which looped the same line – “Chris, do you have a penis?” – about 60 times before I worked out how to stop it. In the process, I almost sent the clip to all my contacts. I ended up rewinding the whole thing. Elsewhere, Class of Lies, a Pretty Little Liars-ish crime drama from Riverdale writer Tessa Leigh Williams, boasts a vertical split screen view that quickly made my eyes ache, and induced a vague seasick feeling. Besides, it’s pretty transparent in its use of current trends, opening with the two main characters recording their own true-crime podcast (incidentally, a plot device also used in the last series of MTV’s Scream reboot). The experience isn’t all bad, though. Co-Ed is light and playful, even if it has more in common with post-mumblecore telly such as Girls and the Duplass’ own show Togetherness than your average teen series. Class of Lies, meanwhile, is a super-pacy take on the thriller genre, with evergreen potential for the sort of cliffhangers that may well make users come back each day for more. The first episode offers one, with our podcasters, Missy and Devon, realising their friend and classmate has gone missing, a development that throws their crime obsession into sharp relief. Neither show is outstanding, but nor are they horrendous. However, the main question here is whether Snapchat’s insistence on sticking with hyper-short formats will pay off. With podcasts more popular than ever – most of them half an hour plus – and long-form journalism enjoying a resurgence, it seems content-makers and audiences alike are actively trying to move away from a swipeable, easily dismissable model of culture. The brevity of Snapchat’s shows could be seen to convey a sense of accessibility, but may also reinforce the idea that young people have the attention span of gnats. Maybe giving them more credit is a better idea; Facebook’s Sorry For Your Loss, for example, is a proper longform TV show receiving proper plaudits. For all that, I haven’t deleted the app yet, and am secretly looking forward to watching Class of Lies on my lunch break. And, for this ailing platform, that’s a start.