The longer the Saudi journalist Jamal Khashoggi remains missing, the more questions his disappearance raises. Turkish officials have been drip-feeding details in the astonishing case of his alleged Saudi state-sponsored abduction and murder, but have yet to fulfil promises to release evidence relating to a black car that left the Saudi consulate in Istanbul on the same day Khashoggi vanished last week. On Monday, Ankara officially requested Riyadh’s permission to search the consulate, where Istanbul police believe Khashoggi, a prominent critic of the Saudi establishment, was killed. What investigators choose to make public over the coming days – and how – depends on behind-the-scenes negotiations between Ankara and Riyadh, whose already fragile relationship is being sorely tested. Here is how the events have unfolded: Khashoggi pays a visit to the Saudi consulate in Istanbul after lunch to pick up paperwork he needs in order to get married. Hatice Cengiz, Khashoggi’s Turkish fiancee, waits outside the building for several hours with his personal effects including his phone – these are not allowed to be taken inside the diplomatic building – and then calls the police. The Saudi government issues a statement confirming Khashoggi is missing. It says he disappeared after leaving the consulate building the day before and it is working with the Turkish authorities to find him. Turkish officials say they believe Khashoggi is still inside the building, which they cannot search without an invitation. Turkey summons the Saudi ambassador in Ankara to the foreign ministry to discuss Khashoggi’s whereabouts. Human Rights Watch says if Saudi Arabia has detained Khashoggi without acknowledging it, his detention constitutes an enforced disappearance. In Riyadh, Saudi Arabia’s crown prince, Mohammed bin Salman, says in an interview with Bloomberg that the Turkish authorities are welcome to search the consulate building in Istanbul. He declines to say whether Khashoggi is facing any charges at home, adding: “If he’s in Saudi Arabia, I would know that.” Reuters news agency is given a tour of the six-storey Saudi consulate to prove that the missing journalist is not being detained there. In the afternoon, Turkish prosecutors confirm an investigation has been opened. At about midnight local time, Reuters claims two Turkish officials have leaked that their intelligence suggests Khashoggi was killed shortly after entering the consulate. Sources confirm to the Guardian that they believe the journalist is dead, adding – without providing evidence – that he was tortured and his body removed from the premises. Saudi Arabia denies what it says are “baseless” allegations. Turkish police pledge to release evidence that supports the claim that Khashoggi is dead, including airport records and video footage of boxes being put in a black car. Officials say they believe a hit squad of 15 men arrived from Saudi Arabia on 29 September and were present in the building on the day of Khashoggi’s disappearance, leaving shortly afterwards. Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, says he is “saddened” by the case and will wait for the results of the police investigation. Turkey summons the Saudi ambassador for a second time in order to request Riyadh’s “full cooperation” in the investigation, including permission to search the Istanbul consulate.