The strongest storm to strike the United States in more than 25 years, and the most powerful on record to hit Florida’s Panhandle, has headed inland after a furious onslaught that tore apart buildings and killed two people. Michael’s 155mph winds at landfall were only 5mph short of category 5 status, making it the US’s strongest storm since Hurricane Andrew ravaged southern Florida in 1992. Michael sprang quickly from a weekend tropical depression, going from a category 2 on Tuesday to a category 4 by the time it came ashore. Landfall happened just north of Mexico Beach, Florida, a small coastal town 25 miles east of Panama City and with a population of 1,000, at about 1.30pm local time on Wednesday. According to the National Hurricane Center (NHC), the storm blew in with sustained winds of 155mph and travelling at 14mph. Television pictures showed broken and uprooted trees and downed power lines. Roofs were peeled away, sent airborne, and homes were split open by fallen trees. Twisted street signs lay on the ground. Palm trees whipped wildly in the winds. Vance Beu, 29, was staying with his mother at her home, Spring Gate Apartments, a complex of single-story wood-framed buildings, where they piled up mattresses around themselves for protection. A pine tree punched a hole in their roof and his ears even popped when the barometric pressure went lower. The roar of the winds, he said, sounded like a jet engine. “It was terrifying, honestly. There was a lot of noise. We thought the windows were going to break at any time,” Beu said. This was a very, very powerful storm,” Louis Uccellini, director of the National Weather Service, told CNN. “When people … start making their assessments they’re going to realise just how powerful a category 4 storm can be. You’re going to see a very extensive area of damaging winds all the way into central Georgia.” The storm has weakened to a tropical storm as it moved inland but is on course to hit parts of Georgia and North and South Carolina still recovering from September’s Hurricane Florence. The National Hurricane Center in Miami said the eye of Michael was about 30 miles south-south-west of Macon in central Georgia at midnight on Thursday. The storm had sustained winds of up to 70mph. Brock Long, the administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (Fema), said the storm’s effects would be far-reaching and long-lasting. “The citizens of Georgia need to wake up and pay attention,” he said. “The bottom line is it’s going to be the worst storm south-west and central Georgia has seen in many decades. “They need to be prepared, not only in Florida but Georgia as well, to see the power off for multiple weeks.” More than half a million people were either ordered or advised to evacuate as Michael, fuelled by the warm waters of the Gulf of Mexico, closed in on Panama City, bringing with it a life-threatening storm surge of up to 14ft. The storm has already been blamed for 13 deaths in Central America and the Caribbean. Michael triggered flash floods and mudslides earlier this week in mountain areas of western Cuba. Six people died in Honduras, four in Nicaragua and three in El Salvador as roofs collapsed and residents were carried away by swollen rivers. No recorded category 4 storm had ever made landfall in the Panhandle, and Michael’s vast size meant the effects would be felt along the coast from New Orleans to Tampa Bay, and inland as far as the Carolinas. The fast-moving tropical cyclone’s outer bands were already causing torrential rain and flooding in Panama City Beach and Apalachicola by mid-morning on Wednesday, with the eye of the storm 50 miles away. The two reported deaths in the US were a man in Gadsden County, Florida, killed after a tree crashed through the roof of his home and a child in Seminole County, Georgia, believed to have been killed after something fell on a home he was visiting. Authorities said details about the child’s death were still unclear because they had not been able to reach the home yet. Authorities in Florida had warned that anybody who chose not to evacuate would be on their own, with conditions already too hazardous for emergency workers to operate. “Nobody’s coming out to save your life,” the Florida governor, Rick Scott, said on CNN. “We’ve done everything we can to tell people to evacuate and some people have unfortunately chosen not to. I’m scared to death if there’s any kids who didn’t make that choice on their own.” More than 20 million people in five states remained under either a hurricane or tropical storm warning, while areas in North and South Carolina flooded by Hurricane Florence last month braced for even more rainfall. Scott, whose record on the environment has been slammed by critics, had earlier warned that a tempest of this strength had not hit the area in more than a century. Outside experts have said human-induced climate change is increasing the regularity and intensity of monster storms. “Communities are going to see unimaginable devastation,” Scott had warned. Greg Brudnicki, the mayor of Panama City, said on Wednesday that many residents had ignored warnings to evacuate. “Two-thirds of the county, 120,000 people, were told: would you please leave, and as of last night we probably had only about 25,000 leave,” he said. “So the people that are staying, it’s all built on years and years of complacency because we said it’s gonna be bad, it’s gonna be bad for years, and it never turned out to be. [But] the odds are that eventually we would get a bad one, and we’ve got a bad one.” On Tuesday, Donald Trump approved a major disaster declaration request for Florida, freeing federal resources and money for recovery efforts. In Georgia, more than 90 counties remained under a state of emergency and the governor, Nathan Deal, activated 1,500 national guard personnel.