The train leaves Sittwe, the capital of Myanmar’s western Rakhine state, and slowly begins the 11-mile journey to the village of Zaw Pu Gyar, edging across a stretch of countryside where Buddhists and Muslims once lived peacefully as neighbours. But this is a land now marked by segregation and carrying the scars of brutal clashes between the two communities. Tensions have remained high since the violent riots of 2012, when the Muslims were expelled from the capital and pushed into makeshift settlements. The red and cream engine which travels between two Buddhist enclaves, passing through Rohingya camps on the way, has become a symbol of ethnic segregation. It consists of a single carriage divided into three compartments with Muslim passengers restricted to the central section. There are no labels but, under the watch of armed guards, they quietly comply with the rules. Since August 2017, more than 700,000 Rohingya have fled the region, the vast majority seeking refuge in neighbouring Bangladesh following atrocities carried out by the Myanmar military forces and local Buddhist extremists. For the roughly 150,000 Rohingya left behind, home is now a series of flimsy constructions separated by mud paths, where children living in squalid conditions go hungry. The train, far from representing a semblance of freedom of movement, crosses through camps operating under strict state surveillance as it runs between two Buddhist enclaves from which Muslims are forbidden. As the small locomotive emerges from the monsoon forest at the rail tracks on the north side of Sittwe, just four men are on board. The driver, a mechanic and two conductors. The first passengers board after the train passes the walls and barbed wire that demarcate the border of the Rohingya settlement. The dozen or so Muslims waiting at the station – men with long beards and women wearing brightly coloured headscarves – are followed closely by three policemen wielding Kalashnikovs. “The escort is here so there aren’t any problems with the Muslims,” Than Min Ko, one of the conductors, cheerfully explains. “We have to protect the Burmese from the Bengali,” he adds, using the de facto terminology commonly employed by the Buddhist population to describe the Rohingyas. Forced to carry out a two-year mission as part of his government contract, this ethnic Bamar prefers the comfort of Yangon to a region he describes as “unfriendly to foreigners, even to Bamars Buddhists”. But that hasn’t stopped him from adopting the anti-Rohingya rhetoric. Hostility towards the Rohingya has deepened in recent years. Many Rakhine residents believe them to be illegal immigrants from Bangladesh due to the fact some Rohyingya trace their roots to Bengal, from which many people migrated during the years of British colonisation. The train, where Rohingyas are confined to the central compartment away from the Buddhist passengers, replicates the growing racial segregation across Rakhine. But the Rohingya put up with being jostled by armed police as the train gives them access to a market further down the line. The compartment has to be full before a Muslim man is allowed to stand under strict supervision in the Buddhist section. They travel through the various villages surrounded by police outposts before reaching Dar Paing, which serves as a popular meeting point. As the train slows down, the passengers line up and wait for the conductor to announce the stop before crossing the carriage to get off. Most disembark here because the village hosts a modest market where Rohingya can trade whatever small commodities they have been able to produce within the confines of the camps. However, the vast majority depend on foreign aid brought in by international NGOs whose operations run at the mercy of the Burmese authorities and their strict regulations. The Rohingya once made up 40% of the population in Sittwe but the shops they ran have been closed down or destroyed. A tourist crossing the city today would see no traces of the Muslim community were it not for the slowly decaying walled-off mosque in the city centre. The rail route that runs from the city to the Buddhist village through the Rohinghya camps is the only functioning train service in Rakhine state. Between each stop, the conductor passes through the compartment and collects the 100 kyats (5p) fare from newcomers, adding any extra fee for luggage. In keeping with the country’s bureaucratic idiosyncrasies, the small cardboard tickets are kept by the conductor before being recounted by another public servant on arrival and then sent to the capital Naypyidaw. Instead of their ticket, passengers receive a blue pen mark on their hands. As the train passes the Baw Du Pha refugee camp, a row of wooden ships can be seen beached on the fields. Once fishing boats, they now lie as derelict wrecks, forbidden from commercial use. If they are put afloat again it will most likely be to aid a desperate escape to Bangladesh or Malaysia. On the edge of the Buddhist village of Zaw Pu Gyar the train makes its final stop and the last passengers get off at the decrepit station, Buddhists and Muslims parting ways without giving each other a second glance. “This is a Rakhine village, there are no problems here,” says the conductor. “But right next to it is a Bengali one and so we have to be careful.” Asked what the future holds for the region, he shrugs, adding: “They [the Rohyingya] should leave, we should push them away. But we can’t do anything against them because of the UN and what they call ‘human rights’.” For now, all he can do is stop at the local tea shop while the train pauses for an hour and a half. “This gives enough time for everyone to finish their business before heading back,” he says, easing himself into a plastic chair as he pops a betel nut in his mouth. Up until last year, the line continued for a further five miles. But the collapse of a bridge over a stream just outside the village has blocked that last stretch. An NGO worker says the authorities don’t see the point of putting the line back into operation because there are no other Buddhist villages along the track. Others say there is simply no budget to repair the bridge. So for now the engine waits at this seemingly random terminus, a three-hour walk from any paved road, before heading back the way it came with the same passengers returning to their start point. As the pagodas of Sittwe come into view and the train makes its last stop on the return journey, the conductor, Than Min Ko, explains: “Beyond this point, there are no more Bengalis. They are forbidden in town.” The sun breaks through the clouds as the last Muslim passengers leave the train and cross the tracks as they head back to their camp, flanked by a path of barbed wire.