In two social media posts last week, the British racing driver Lewis Hamilton showed where he has come from and how far he has travelled. The first was a link to an eight-minute Blue Peter tribute, in which he appears for approximately two seconds. The feature was on radio-controlled cars and Hamilton displays a focus and determination that would prove handy in later life by thrashing presenter John Leslie. He was seven at the time, living with his mum on an estate in Stevenage. “Remember being on Blue Peter like it was yesterday,” the 33-year-old wrote on Twitter. In the next post, Hamilton is in New York, filming himself last week on his phone in front of a giant billboard on which he appears in full racing garb. “Mamma I made it,” he comments, “that’s me on the Nasdaq building in Times Square.” Hamilton certainly has made it. Already he is a four-time Formula One champion, as well as Britain’s wealthiest sportsperson (his fortune is estimated at about £130m). And on Sunday, just after 7pm, he will set out to claim his fifth title at the US Grand Prix in Austin, Texas. If Hamilton wins and Sebastian Vettel finishes in third place or lower, the crown will be his. Vettel will be stiffer competition than Leslie, no doubt, but Hamilton – with nine race wins already this season in his Mercedes – has been close to unstoppable in 2018. History appears to be on his side, too: of the six grands prix held in Austin, he has won five. One more statistic: in total, Hamilton has recorded 71 race wins in Formula One and it seems only a matter of time before he overhauls Michael Schumacher’s record of 91 career victories. If that happens, who could deny that Hamilton is a contender for the greatest Formula One driver ever? Last week, his long-time rival Fernando Alonso named him in his all-time top five. Hamilton may live in Monte Carlo these days, and his voice has a distinct Anglo-American twang, but he has clearly not forgotten where it all started. His Blue Peter experience is one example, and often in interviews he talks fondly of his early days driving karts, marvelling at how unlikely it is that someone from his background – and his ethnicity – could break into the privileged, very white world of Formula One. “I grew up seeing kids arriving in helicopters and stuff,” he recalled recently, at the launch in Tokyo of his new fashion collection with Tommy Hilfiger. “Me and my dad were in our Fiat Cinquecento and they were turning up in their Lamborghinis.” Hamilton added that he hopes it will still be possible for the “diamonds in the rough” to come through in Formula One. “You can’t beat that raw natural hunger,” he said. “If I had a kid right now he would have such an easy life, and there is no way he is going to be as hungry as me.” Seeing Hamilton showering his rivals with champagne on the podium every fortnight, it can be easy to forget what an unlikely journey he has had. His father Anthony is the child of Grenadian immigrants, his mother Carmen is white British; they separated when Lewis – named after the sprinter Carl Lewis – was two. Everyone agrees that Hamilton was a natural at karting, but his father had to take redundancy from British Rail to chaperone him to races. In the gaps, he did three jobs, including putting up “for sale” signs for a local estate agent. Hamilton first signed a deal with McLaren aged 13, but still his rise was not entirely straightforward. He was expelled from his Catholic secondary school before his GCSEs and then reinstated, a case of mistaken identity when another pupil was hospitalised after a fight. And even when his path to Formula One seemed anointed, his father made him take a summer job valeting cars at a Mercedes dealership (apparently he was excellent, reliably meticulous). Two things have been consistent since Hamilton made his Formula One debut in 2007: he has always been fast and he has never been far from controversy. Last year his name came up in the Paradise Papers data leak, accused of avoiding a £3.3m VAT bill on his candy apple-coloured Bombardier private jet by using offshore shell companies. He became embroiled in another embarrassing incident on Christmas Day when he posted a video on Instagram of a conversation with his four-year-old nephew. The boy proudly wore a frilly pink dress until Hamilton shrieked, “Why are you wearing a princess dress? Boys don’t wear princess dresses!” His nephew then ran from the room. The repercussions were swift: social media outrage from LGBTQ and anti-bullying groups; an apology from Hamilton, followed by a speedy erasing of all his social media posts, starting with a clean slate on 1 January (he has 7.6 million followers on Instagram; 5.4 million on Twitter). When he launched his menswear line with Hilfiger, called TommyXLewis, one of the key pieces was a patchwork tartan kilt. He appeared on the cover of the August issue of men’s magazine GQ pointedly wearing it, under the line, “I want to make amends”. To me he seemed like a young man blessed with good intentions and cursed with a severe lack of guidance GQ’s style director Teo van den Broeke, who wrote the story, described meeting him in a follow-up piece on the magazine’s website. “I came away from the interview feeling conflicted about Hamilton,” he noted. “Almost everyone I spoke to beforehand has some kind of opinion on him – negative, more often than not – but to me he seemed like a young man blessed with good intentions and cursed with a severe lack of guidance.” There seems more strict guidance these days: his social media posts certainly have a feelgood vibe with a sprinkling of glamour (riding a quad bike in the Dubai desert with rapper Nicki Minaj, who may or may not be his girlfriend). But for now, Hamilton is concentrating on the track; he has extended his contract with Mercedes for two more years, which pays about $50m (£38m) a year. He must have Schumacher’s record in his sights. He has also signed up to do four collections with Hilfiger. And he dipped his toe into music this summer, featuring on the Christina Aguilera track Pipe, under the pseudonym XNDA. Somehow, you can’t imagine Hamilton killing time before settling down in the commentary box. As he acknowledged at his fashion launch in Tokyo, “I’m definitely trying to build an empire.”