Saudi Arabia faces unprecedented pressure over the fate of Jamal Khashoggi, the journalist who disappeared after entering its consulate in Istanbul last week and is believed to have been murdered there. A bipartisan group of senators has forced a US investigation to determine whether sanctions should be imposed under the Magnitsky Act. Bob Corker, the Republican chair of the Senate foreign relations committee, said he believed the Saudis killed Mr Khashoggi; his colleague Lindsey Graham said there would be “hell to pay” if so. Even Donald Trump told reporters: “We can’t let this happen.” The British foreign secretary, Jeremy Hunt, has warned that “friendships depend on shared values”. But when someone shows you who they are, you should believe them the first time. Saudi Arabia’s de facto leader, Mohammed bin Salman, has done so many times. Western countries did not want to take heed. Their transactional relationships with Riyadh predated the rise of the 33-year-old, and were impervious to its appalling human rights record – arms sales, domestic security concerns and the belief that it was a force for stability in the region took priority. The crown prince’s grand economic promises and social reforms, such as allowing women to drive, won him praise internationally but were accompanied by a sharp crackdown on dissent. Saudi power is now more concentrated, more brutal, more impatient, more impetuous – and more confident that it can act as it sees fit thanks to the embrace of Mr Trump and his son-in-law, Jared Kushner. The Washington Post, citing US intelligence, said the crown prince had ordered an operation to lure Mr Khashoggi back to Saudi Arabia and detain him. If the journalist was indeed killed, it is a shocking escalation of Saudi repression and confidence in its ability to ride out the targeting of a widely respected figure, who lived in Washington and wrote for the Washington Post, while he was in Turkey. Yet it is also the culmination of a series of reckless moves by the crown prince. As defence minister he spearheaded the charge into the disastrous ongoing war in Yemen, in which tens of thousands have died. He has launched a blockade that failed to bring Qatar to its knees; ordered the detention of hundreds of powerful businessmen, including royals,  in an “anti-corruption campaign”; overseen the Lebanese prime minister Saad Hariri’s extraordinary resignation on a visit to Riyadh (later retracted); locked up female activists who campaigned for the right to drive even as it was granted; and overreacted absurdly when Canada dared to criticise those detentions. Remarkably little was done or even said in response. Such muted international reaction has emboldened him. If Turkey does not offer incontrovertible evidence of Mr Khashoggi’s killing, western allies will find it easier to continue as usual, however unconvincing Riyadh’s denials of involvement. Mr Trump has made it clear that arms sales are a priority. Yet this could still prove a turning point in the long term. Investors looking forward to the “Davos in the Desert” conference this month may be thinking again about where to put their money. And foreign allies can no longer overlook the nature of the regime, which hardly looks like a force for stability in the region. The toll in Yemen should already have halted arms sales by the US, the UK and others. But a broader rethinking of the relationship is needed. The approach of the Trump administration and others has enabled the crown prince’s abuse. What happened to Mr Khashoggi looks like one tragic result. The danger is that it will not be the last.