Heterosexual couples in England and Wales are to have the right to enter civil partnerships, the government has announced. In a statement made at the Conservative party conference in Birmingham, Theresa May said she would end discrimination against opposite-sex couples. The government was due to respond to a supreme court ruling earlier in the summer which found that it was discriminatory to restrict civil partnerships to gay couples. Justices at the UK’s highest court unanimously found in favour of Rebecca Steinfeld and Charles Keidan and declared that their human rights had been breached. In an announcement at the conference in Birmingham, May said: “This change in the law helps protect the interests of opposite-sex couples who want to commit, want to formalise their relationship, but don’t necessarily want to get married. Civil partnerships were created in 2004 as a means of allowing same sex couples to enter into a union that guarantees them similar legal rights to those who are married. Until recently they have been limited to same-sex couples. In October 2018, following a supreme court ruling declaring the existing position discriminatory, the government announced that heterosexual couples would also be entitled to enter the arrangement. There are differences between the two forms of union, partially symbolic and partially matters of substance. For a marriage, the ceremony is solemnised by the couple saying a prescribed form of words; in a civil partnership, the couple can simply sign a document. Marriages can be conducted through either a civil or religious ceremony, at a registry office, church or wherever a venue is licensed. Civil partnerships are secular events, although partners can choose to hold a religious ceremony on the day. Civil partners cannot declare, for legal purposes, that they are married. Civil partnership certificates include the names of both parents of the parties whereas marriage certificates in England and Wales include only the names of a couple's fathers – for the time being. In terms of annulment the rules are virtually identical, although the clause that permits a marriage to be dissolved if one partner is 'suffering from a venereal disease in a communicable form' does not apply to civil partnerships. Likewise, adultery can be grounds for a married couple to divorce though it cannot be relied upon to end a civil partnership. Those in civil partnerships and those who are married enjoy the same tax breaks and benefits – such as the marriage allowance and bereavement payments. Surviving civil partners are treated the same as widows or widowers in terms of rights to state pension. While those who are married and in civil partnerships enjoy extensive legal rights, those who are merely cohabiting – 3.3 million couples at the last estimate – have no legal protections or property rights if one of them dies. “As home secretary, I was proud to sponsor the legislation that created equal marriage. Now, by extending civil partnerships, we are making sure that all couples, be they same-sex or opposite-sex, are given the same choices in life.” The chair of the Equal Civil Partnerships campaign, Martin Loat, said: “It’s great news but let’s get on with it. What’s missing in the announcement is a timeline.” He suggested that while the government wanted to carry out a consultation, Tim Loughton’s private member’s bill, which originally aimed to create equal civil partnerships, could be used to make the change when it returned to the Commons on 26 October. There are about 3.3 million unmarried couples in England and Wales. None have any legal partnership rights. Even the Marriage Foundation supports extending civil partnerships to heterosexual couples, believing they are “infinitely preferable to unthinking and risky cohabitation”. Supporters believe civil partnerships, which do not carry the patriarchal associations of traditional marriage, will prove more attractive to cohabiting couples. Steinfeld and Keidan, who fought a protracted legal campaign for the right to enter a civil partnership through the London courts, welcomed the decision. They said: “This is great news and a major step in the right direction, but we will only celebrate when legislation is agreed and the government confirms the date for when the first different-sex civil partnership can take place. Change is long overdue. “We’ve been struggling for four long years to open civil partnerships to all, for the millions of couples like us who want legal recognition and financial protection for their relationship. Now we urge the government to finish the job so that couples such as Joanna and Steve, who has terminal cancer, can celebrate their love for each other in a way that is meaningful to them, before it is too late.” The human rights campaigner Peter Tatchell said: “The planned opening of civil partnerships to opposite-sex couples is wonderful news … When Labour first introduced civil partnerships but restricted them to same-sex couples we argued that this was discrimination. “We are delighted that Charles Keidan and Rebecca Steinfeld have continued this campaign and finally won this stunning result … The government’s decision was a necessary response to the judgment of the highest court in the land.”