London’s Dance Umbrella festival has a knack for programming artists who seem to inhabit genres of their own, like Le Patin Libre’s contemporary ice-skating (more of which later) and the Greek choreographer Dimitris Papaioannou’s distinctive stripped-back dance-theatre. Papaioannou made his debut at Dance Umbrella two years ago and is still relatively unfamiliar to UK audiences, but he has been making dance for 30 years and it shows. The craftsmanship is immense and this is an accomplished piece of theatre that creates so much from very little. The stage is an empty slope covered in large black tiles, and contrast is everywhere: dark versus light, black clothes versus pale naked flesh. Quite a lot of naked flesh, as it happens. (Be prepared for penises.) The Great Tamer (★★★★☆) is a work that spins its magic so slowly it seems as if barely anything is happening, but then the 10 dancers suddenly coalesce into a striking scene, a small coup de theatre, something funny or recognisable, mostly imitations of great paintings. Rembrandt’s The Anatomy Lesson appears, for example, the dancers with stiff ruffs around their necks and a body on the slab having its sausagey innards pulled out. There’s a fleeting crucifixion, a flag waver (Delacroix’s Liberty, perhaps?), a wheat-carrying Grecian goddess (Demeter?), a transcendental moment when golden arrows swoop in graceful flight and rain down on the stage. Also an astronaut – admittedly not such a popular theme for the old masters. The work often has one eyebrow raised, there’s knowing optical illusion and almost slapstick physical jokes, which makes the few disturbing moments all the more shocking: a naked woman lying on the ground, a man rolling up his sleeve pushing his fist under her ribs. It’s not at all explicit but it’s seriously uncomfortable. That scene jolts because mostly this is a stage adrift from a sense of place, character, context, judgment, relationships. It’s limbo. Wonderful things materialise and then disappear, without purpose or consequence, and yet it’s thoroughly engaging because it’s so masterfully done (although it could definitely lose 20 minutes). It is at once momentous and meaningless, everything and nothing. And that’s the power of art: you make something meaningful by committing it to canvas, by bringing it into existence, and by crafting materials you craft cultures. There is magic in Le Patin Libre’s shows, too. The French-Canadian figure skaters make a new brand of contemporary ice dance, all based on the ghostly glide, the ability to move at great speed while the body remains still. What’s so mesmerising is the way the dynamics of the movement and the group morph while maintaining the unbroken thread of the glide. They swell, flow, accelerate, stretch and contract the space between their bodies. They switch from legato to marcato. It’s hugely musical to watch. Their feet trace intricate patterns on the ice, but often it’s the simplest moments that are the most arresting, as the five skaters very beautifully just slide backwards and forwards, hypnotic as a swinging pocket watch. This latest work, Threshold (★★★★☆), brings a new level of emotion. Not a narrative but fleeting glimpses and fragments: moments of conflict between bodies clashing or dodging each other; the push-pull of a couple warily, or wearily, circling each other; a lone body left on the ice. What they’re lacking is a stronger sense of the overall shape. The second half could do with more propulsion and, musically, the moody minor string soundtrack is muted and repetitive. But this is a group doing something that no one else is, and who, like Papaioannou, make you look afresh and with wonder at bodies moving. Threshold is at Alexandra Palace Ice Rink, London, until 21 October.