Sue Gives a Fuck The UK drag community had been waiting for someone like Theresa May to come along. We had David Cameron – not camp. Gordon Brown – could not be less camp. So we were ready to take any hint of glamour we could get. Then Theresa wore a leopard-print kitten heel and we’ve been dining out on it for years. The number of queens I’ve seen singing Fields of Gold by Eva Cassidy as Fields of Wheat – I’d say it’s more than seven. My show is about Theresa going into Brexitland. It juxtaposes all the positive things she’s said about Brexit, through gritted teeth, with what Alice says when imagining what Wonderland will be like. And obviously Alice’s Wonderland turns out to be something quite different. I have performed it for politicians. The Labour MP Dawn Butler walked out. Maybe she didn’t want to be associated with something so anti-Brexit. I performed it once for the leader of Scottish Ukip. He loved it. He stayed right to the end of the night, dancing until 3am. I think a shift happened in drag just as Theresa came into power. A decade ago, British drag was 40-year-old men in sequins in pubs, lip-syncing Shirley Bassey. Nowadays, it has more serious things things to say. But part of me wonders whether the appeal with Theresa is simply the fact that she’s a woman, there being an expectation that it’s men who should occupy roles of power. Also, male politicians never have to worry about a load of drag queens doing a number on them – although there are a lot of Donald Trumps out there, because he’s so camp. After last year’s calamity, what’s your advice for her conference speech? Whenever I’m losing my voice and have to sing, I do a splits jump just before each high note so the note is drowned out by the audience whooping. Lydia L’Scabies The best job I ever had was working in a horror maze in Brighton, so I wanted my Theresa act to be terrifying. And politics at the moment is terrifying. When I come on stage, there’s a projection of a broken Union Jack and I do the first speech Theresa made as prime minister: “We will make Britain a country that works, not for the privileged few, but for every one of us.” But I slice this up with my version of the Grand High Witch, the character from Roald Dahl’s The Witches. As the act goes on, the wig comes off and everything gets darker – a bit like what happens when you delve into Theresa’s background and see what she said about Section 28. Everyone had their take on the whole Theresa versus Andrea Leadsom leadership race. Andrea was all lovely and smiley and floral, while Theresa was menacing. It reminded me a lot of The Witches, especially when Andrea dropped out, and so I started using the book in my act. Andrea had one bad headline and boom! Gone! It must have been witchcraft. The Witches starts by saying: “Real witches dress in ordinary clothes and look very much like ordinary women.” It also says they “hate children”. I don’t think the Tories care about the future of young people. I’ll never be able to buy a house – and now Brexit has happened, I might not be able to work overseas. So that was the motivation for my act: they want to destroy young people, like the Grand High Witch. It should be celebrated that we have women in power, and it could be seen as misogynistic for me to call Theresa a witch. At the same time, though, there are a lot of empowering witches – like Fiona Goode in American Horror Story, Willow in Buffy. I hope Theresa takes it on the chin. Conference advice: When in doubt, just stick to the Macarena, hun. Fagulous I had my eye on Theresa when she was home secretary but it’s only since she’s been prime minister that I’ve been doing her properly. You can have a real laugh with her. She’s a total pantomime villain – the way she carries herself is so menacing. When you see her come on TV, you just want to boo and hiss, which my audience often does. Our show’s strapline is: “A hot and sweaty Brexit.” When you sit and listen to what our politicians are saying – “a hard Brexit”, “strong and stable” – it’s such a double entendre, it’s farcical. It’s the kind of material drag queens have been waiting for. I love the idea that Theresa has this naughty side. I think: “What happens after hours with her husband, Philip?” The cabaret night I run is called Theresa May’s Legs Akimbo. I host the whole evening as Theresa, doing a few numbers myself. Last night, we did a communal singalong to Any Deal Will Do, to the tune from Joseph and the Technicolor Dreamcoat. I also do a number as Marilyn Monroe, called Brexit is a Girl’s Best Friend. People could say that me dressing up as Theresa May in fishnets with my bum out is disrespectful, but then I would say she’s not been very respectful to the LGBTQ+ community or other minorities. It feels powerful to perform as the prime minister – and it gives me the opportunity to highlight these things in a way that doesn’t make it too politically preachy. This summer, she invited quite a few LGBTQ people to No 10 for Pride. So the last time I did the performance, I gave her the line: “Oh, I love the gays.” That said, I’ll be sad when she goes. Boris Johnson’s Legs Akimbo doesn’t quite have the same ring to it. Conference advice: Theresa needs to speak with the same gusto she gives running through a field of wheat. And if all else fails, she should channel her inner drag queen and give the audience a good hard Brexit innuendo. They’ll be putty in her hands! Ripley I started doing Theresa May in my show Like a Sturgeon, in which I perform as Nicola, the leader of the SNP. I’m from Edinburgh and I love her. She’s my biggest inspiration. The indyref really galvanised people: I don’t think Scots would have ever felt this renewed sense of identity if it weren’t for the SNP. I wanted to start exploring characters who were the antithesis of everything Nicola stands for, so Theresa was the obvious baddie. It was 2016, just after Brexit and the departure of David Cameron. I thought: “We finally have a real Conservative villain.” She’s very Dickensian, there’s something of Scrooge about her. I could picture her creeping up the stairs, candle in hand, swiping coal off people. As time has gone on, I think she’s weakened, what with all the U-turns. Now I play her as a more subservient character, a very shaken woman who jumps when someone rings the doorbell. The act is her tearing herself to shreds. She’ll say something then contradict herself. The whole show is based on things she’s said and done, like allowing Boris Johnson to just walk out of the cabinet of his own accord. She does a few camp numbers – a bit of Victoria Beckham’s solo material, a bit of Sophie Ellis Bextor. I describe my show as endurance lip-syncing. I constantly change into different female political figures: Arlene Foster, Angela Merkel, Theresa May, Melania and Ivanka Trump. I think any woman who comes into a position of power – especially if they have a catchphrase and two iconic pieces in their wardrobe – will immediately become fodder for anybody on the drag scene. Theresa repeating strong and stable, strong and stable, meant she just became a parody of herself overnight. She may not have been a gift to the country, but she’s definitely been a gift for the drag community. Conference advice: If she plans on sticking anything on the wall again, double-sided tape just isn’t going to cut it. I suggest a strong spray adhesive. It will last longer, plus the fumes will make the conference a lot more interesting.