The first question for Jordan Henderson seems obvious. His club manager has just dissed the Uefa Nations League as “the most senseless competition in the world”, so what does the Liverpool captain think he is doing, playing so competitively in a match behind closed doors in Croatia that he ended up being booked? “Managers tend to see things differently,” he says. “As a player, you want to win every game. That’s what footballers do, they want to play and they want to win. For England it is important to be taking on the big nations like Croatia and Spain. If we want to get to the next level we need to be playing teams like that and hopefully beating them. It’s a good challenge for us, especially after what we did in the World Cup. International football always has a different feel to it than Premier League games, perhaps it is a bit less intense, but you know it will be physically demanding against Spain because they keep the ball so well.” Presumably the other big difference Henderson has spotted between England and Liverpool lies in the personalties of the managers. Gareth Southgate, noted for studied calm and a sensible choice in waistcoats, must be quite a contrast to the chest-beating wild man of the Anfield touchline, Jürgen Klopp being more famous for extravagant gestures as well as telling Uefa exactly what he thinks of the demands they make on his players. “Gareth gives more ownership to the players as a group.” Henderson says. “He wants the players to have their own input and speak up for themselves in meetings, to show leadership on and off the field. At Liverpool Jürgen pretty much does everything and we just follow him. Of course we’ve still got leaders within the group to implement his message, but more often than not we listen and then just do what he says. Two totally opposite approaches, if you like, but since Gareth has come in to the England set-up it has been different and we have all embraced his ideas as a team. I think the group has become a lot stronger and more together in the last couple of years. The manager has had a really positive impact and all the players have a fantastic relationship with him. If you ask any of the England players I’m sure they will say they can speak to the manager about anything.” That positivity helped England reach a World Cup semi-final in Russia, and Henderson agrees with his manager – the one who has just signed on for another four years in charge of the national side – that the aim now should be to build on that achievement. “We spoke about this before the World Cup even started,” he says. “The end goal is to win a trophy, that’s what you have to aim for. Before the World Cup we were rated about 13th or 14th, and afterwards we were up to around six. “We feel we did well in the summer but we don’t want it to be a one-off, it’s got to be a regular occurrence. We want to keep moving towards the number one spot, and to do that you have to put yourself against the best teams around.” Henderson is 28 now, the most experienced player in the present squad, even if suspension will prevent him earning cap number 48 on Monday in Spain. Recognition for Borussia Dortmund’s Jadon Sancho as the first player born this century to gain an England cap must make Henderson feel quite old, but though the emphasis is clearly on youth in Southgate’s present thinking, the midfielder disputes whether 28 counts as such. “It is easy to feel that because some of the new lads look really young now, more like 11 or 12 than 17 or 18,” he says. “I got my first cap as a 20 year old and I honestly don’t feel any older, though I suppose I must be more mature because there have been a lot of experiences in the last eight years. Some people might say I’m old at 28, but I look at someone like James Milner. He’s 32 and playing like he is 25 or something. I see him up close every week and I’m sure he could go on for another three or four years, maybe longer. Adam Lallana is 30 but I still think he has a great chance of coming back into the England squad, because he is a massive player and we have missed him. Age is not really the biggest factor, whichever end of the scale you are at. It’s how you perform, how you respond to the challenge of having good players around you competing for your place.”