Lindsey is lively and friendly, and talks about past experiences with a cheerful shrug, but the evidence is all over her body. She has no front teeth because her pimp kicked them out. She is deaf in one ear, a legacy of childhood neglect. Her nose has been broken, as has her left leg and multiple ribs. There are self-inflicted scars on her forearm. Lindsey’s learning disabilities are mild. She is able to read, but says she finds it “boring”. She only ever writes anything down “if I have to”. And she has an acute sense of how she believes people perceive her: “When I tell people I’ve got learning disabilities, they think, dumb bitch.” Born in Nottingham, the youngest of eight, Lindsey had a violent and dysfunctional childhood. Her father was an ex-miner, her mother a housewife; both were alcoholics. She rarely went to school; instead, her parents sent her out “nicking” – booze, cigarettes – and her father abused her from the age of six. Lindsey started smoking weed and taking ecstasy when she was 11, “to blank out my dad”; when she was 14, her mother died of cancer. Barely a month later, she began a relationship with Leroy, a 30-year-old man she now describes as a “proper pimp”. “He made out he loved me,” she says, “and because I’d lost my mum and wanted somebody to love, I believed him. The next minute, he was putting me out on the streets.” A psychological assessment would later highlight Lindsey’s “poor self-esteem”, her “emotional instability” and her “inappropriate ways of trying to find love and care” – illicit drugs, gambling and prostitution. “I felt if my mum and dad can’t love me, then who is supposed to love me?” she says now. Lindsey worked as a prostitute from the age of 14 to 21, eventually running away because Leroy “kept beating me up”. Her father was convicted of raping her when she was 17; he took his own life in prison soon after. From 1990 to 2006, Lindsey was in and out of prison, following convictions for burglary, theft, mail deception (“I used to nick mail for credit cards”), criminal damage and fraud. It was a self-destructive and violent period driven by her need to get money for drugs, and though the prison officers knew she had a learning disability, she says, “The screws don’t care.” The atmosphere inside was brutal. She suffered routine humiliation from the other inmates. Disproportionately higher numbers of people with learning disabilities are in prison. Around 7% of people in the criminal justice system have a learning disability, compared with around 2% of the population. Many believe the numbers are an underestimate. There is no routine screening for learning disabilities or autism when offenders are first locked up and, in prison, there is an added incentive not to appear different. “I’m not saying people with learning disabilities shouldn’t go to prison,” says Pip Hodge, a nurse who works in Bristol prison. “If they have capacity, they should face the consequences of their actions. My worry is they’re in a system that may ignore or not understand their needs.” There's no screening for learning disabilities or autism. In prison, there is an incentive not to appear different Lindsey felt trapped not only by locked doors, but by the criminal justice system’s blindness to her disability. After her release from prison, she was moved into a hostel, with little support. She felt isolated and depressed, and was soon taking drugs again. “It all fell apart,” she says. “I wasn’t washing and I was self-harming.” In 2011, she was admitted to a low-secure unit at Brooklands, a mental health and learning disabilities hospital near Birmingham, where she stayed on and off for four years. By this point, she was experiencing intense flashbacks and was considered a suicide risk. “One minute I can be all right, the next I see my dad on top of me. It tends to happen when I get stressed, and that is why I get angry and start losing it.” At Brooklands, staff imposed strict rules on her. The NHS had just introduced a smoke-free policy in all mental health inpatient facilities, which was particularly hard for Lindsey, who had been smoking since the age of seven. The turning point came in 2015, when Lindsey was referred to Elms, a secure rehabilitation unit for women with learning disabilities, near Birmingham. A private provider for NHS England, it provides free care for a maximum of 10 women. “My bedroom was cosy and clean, the staff were great and I loved it,” Lindsey says. She responded well to the therapy (CBT) and to the homely atmosphere. “Something just clicked in my head. What’s happened has happened; I can’t let it rule my life.” Lindsey was discharged from Elms in September and is now, with the help of support workers, living in her own flat; getting on with her life. One evening in the summer of 2005, John, then 19, dialled 999 from a phone box in a town in the north-east of England and told the police there was a bomb in a nearby bus station. Buildings in the area were swiftly evacuated: pubs, houses, a church centre and the bus station. Army bomb-disposal experts arrived dressed in blast suits. It was a hoax. John was caught and arrested at the scene; the other boys with him had run off. A week later, he pleaded guilty at the local magistrates court to the charge of communicating false information. John has learning disabilities. By nature gentle and trusting, he and had been coerced into making the call by a gang of local boys. He was remanded in custody and later sentenced to prison for three years and 10 months. When we meet John, 12 years on, he is still locked up, in a secure hospital unit. “I wish I’d never done it,” he says of the hoax call. When I ask if he is angry about what happened, he shakes his head. “Upset,” he replies. It’s not clear whether the magistrates knew about John’s disability; he says he didn’t tell anyone, and this made him “an easy target”. John grew up in the north-east, where his father was a security guard and his mother a housewife. The fourth of five children, John says he was happy as a boy. He liked going to football matches with his older brother and was obsessed with buses, trains – any form of public transport. He went to a special day school between the ages of six and 15. He struggled with reading and writing; today, he is proficient in both, and likes playing Scrabble. But he says he still finds it hard to process information, “listening to instructions, what people say to me”. When he was 17, he fell in with a group of local teenagers. At first, he says, they were kind and bought him a beer. But then they started threatening him. “They said they’d stab me with a knife if I didn’t do what they wanted.” Shoplifting progressed to prank calls. “They’d say, ‘Let’s go and phone the police and say there’s a fight.’” It was always John who made the calls from a phone box. By the time the police arrived, the group were long gone – John included. He admits he was eager to please the gang. He’d always felt like an outcast; afterwards he felt “brave”. In the summer of 2005, one of John’s “mates” came up with the idea of making a hoax bomb call. This was a time when the country was on high alert following the London terrorist attacks on 7 July. John was convicted and sent to Stoke Heath, a borstal for young offenders, near Market Drayton in Shropshire. His mental health deteriorated. He started slashing his arms with a blade he got from a matchstick cutter (his forearms are still scarred). He also made two attempts to kill himself. John fell in with a group of teenagers. They were kind, then ‘said they’d stab me if I didn’t do what they wanted’ Towards the end of that first year, John was moved to the hospital wing of Stoke Heath and later transferred to the medium-secure unit of a hospital for people with learning disabilities, where he stayed for eight years. Detaining him beyond his custodial sentence was felt necessary because of his precarious mental health and the need to provide care and treatment in secure conditions. In 2013, John moved to Weaver Clinic, a low-secure hospital in the north-east for men with learning disabilities and mental health problems. A few months after, he was allowed out for the first time with a member of staff. He chose to travel on a bus. Nothing else, in or out of hospital, has so engaged him as his childhood obsession. “I like sitting at the back at the top. You get more of a view.” He progressed from Unit W, the clinic’s admission unit, where tables are screwed to the floor, the television is behind Perspex and patients aren’t allowed metal cutlery, to Unit C, the pre-discharge ward. Here, patients are still monitored every hour through the night and the rooms have to be kept glass-free, but John had his own TV and stereo in his bedroom. While here, he says, he got “back to feeling more like myself”. In January, he was discharged and now lives a more independent life in the community.Names and identifying places have been changed in John’s story. Roy is now 50, but you can see the child in the man: gangly, with sticking-out ears, a freckly complexion, slender fingers and vulnerable eyes magnified by the thick lenses of his glasses. He grew up in Stourbridge, near Dudley in the West Midlands, one of six; his mother was a housewife and his father worked for the council, surfacing roads. Roy’s chief memory of his father – a violent alcoholic – is of him using “belts, fists, everything” to beat his wife and children. Roy’s learning disabilities were mild. He says he struggled with reading, writing and maths as a child. Today, he has trouble understanding train timetables and calculating how much change he should get from a £5 note. In 1978, when he was nearly 11, Roy and his siblings – two brothers and three sisters – were being subjected to such severe physical abuse from their father that social services decided the children would be safer spending weekdays either with a foster parent or in a children’s home, returning at weekends. The siblings were separated. Roy went to Saltwells, a children’s home near Dudley. But it was far from a safe haven. One member of staff was a paedophile, and Roy says the abuse started almost immediately; that he was raped in a flat on the school grounds; and that his abuser brought in other paedophiles. “Men he knew,” Roy says. The abuse went on for nearly four years. “I went to social services. I went to the police. They didn’t listen. They thought I was lying.” He never mentioned it to his mother or siblings. “I couldn’t tell them.” Roy tried running away. Each time, the police brought him back. When he was 14, Roy set fire to a pile of mattresses in the gym at Saltwells. He says he saw it as a way of ending his ordeal. He was sent to a borstal for seven months, then to a youth treatment centre in Birmingham for seven years. He says his incarceration was “very good, actually”; prison gave him a sense of security. Staff weren’t abusive or bullying. This is perhaps why, in 1988, when Roy was 21 and about to be transferred to a hostel, he started another fire, at the back of the treatment centre, again using mattresses. “I didn’t want to leave.” He was convicted of arson and given a life sentence (arson is a serious crime and judges take incidents much more seriously if a home or public buildings such as schools are attacked). Prison made Roy feel secure; staff weren't abusive or bullying. Told he had to move, he started a fire For the next 20 years, Roy moved between more than 20 different prisons. In all that time, he received no help. Prison treatment programmes are not pitched at prisoners with learning disabilities. “I did gardening, not therapy,” he says. It wasn’t until he was 30, in 1997, that he felt able to speak about the abuse he had suffered as a child. Police and social services had launched a joint investigation (Operation Cleopatra) after several victims made allegations about 66 children’s homes in the Greater Manchester area. Saltwells was just one of many institutions Roy’s abuser worked in. The police visited Roy in Gartree prison, in Market Harborough, Leicestershire. “I decided to tell them what happened,” he says. In 2005, the abuser was convicted of multiple counts of sexual assault on children, and sentenced to 14 years. But despite seven other former residents of Saltwells testifying, there was not enough evidence to convict him of the crimes they say he committed there. Roy still dreams of bringing him to justice. While in prison, Roy tried to alleviate the pain with drugs. “Cannabis, heroin, you name it, I was on it.” He was finally admitted to a secure hospital for specialist help in 2005. But the move prompted a violent outburst. He could not cope with so many men being free to wander around. “Roy distrusts people, because the people who were meant to be looking after him in the past abused him,” says Dr Nicola Murphy, a principal clinical psychologist who adapts treatment programmes for people with learning disabilities. So Roy did all he could to get sent back to prison: “I assaulted staff and smashed the unit up.” He did the same when he was admitted again in 2008. By the third time he returned to hospital, in 2009, “I was ready.” From 2010 to 2015, he was given therapy and ways of coping with flashbacks and nightmares. He was encouraged to keep a diary (using stick men) and to realise that his volatile behaviour had a root cause. “I needed the help, the support to speak about my past,” he says. Last November, he was transferred to the low-secure unit, and is now free to walk around the grounds with an escort for an hour every day. He will eventually be allowed out of the unit on his own; his consultant believes he will be ready to move back into the community next year. • This is an edited extract from Out Of The Shadows: The Untold Story Of People With Autism Or Learning Disabilities, by Polly Braden and Sally Williams, is produced by Multistory and published by Dewi Lewis Publishing at £20. An exhibition, Out Of The Shadows: the untold story of people with autism or learning disabilities, runs at Midlands Arts Centre, Birmingham, until 11 November. If you would like a comment on this piece to be considered for inclusion on Weekend magazine’s letters page in print, please email weekend@theguardian.com, including your name and address (not for publication).