If Rugby Australia is not prepared to make the tough call to remove Michael Cheika, the Wallabies coach may have to do the honourable thing and fall on his sword. Rugby Australia chief-executive Raelene Castle recently declared Cheika would see out his contract until the World Cup in Japan next year. But the Wallabies’ 23-12 loss to the Springboks in Port Elizabeth last Sunday – their eighth loss in their last 10 Tests – has dramatically increased the pressure on Rugby Australia to make a change. If the Wallabies lose to Argentina in their last Test of the Rugby Championship in Salta on Sunday, Cheika’s position will be almost untenable. Cheika’s win-loss record has fallen to an unacceptable 48 per cent with 26 wins from 54 Tests since replacing Ewen McKenzie towards the end of 2014. Since reaching the final of the 2015 World Cup, the Wallabies have made little or no progress. In fact, the team has gone backwards, dropping to seventh in the world rankings, their lowest ever position. No other Wallabies coach in the professional era could have produced such a woeful record and managed to survive. One of the main arguments for keeping Cheika, regardless of results, is that there is no one to replace him. Wallabies attack coach Stephen Larkham has been touted as a potential successor to Cheika, but if Cheika goes, his whole coaching staff should go with him. There are certainly no Australian Super Rugby coaches putting up their hand for the top job. Rugby Australia should appoint an experienced international coach – Australian or foreign – to steer the Wallabies through the World Cup in Japan. A coach who has been there and done that at a World Cup – a Jake White, Robbie Deans, John Connolly or even former All Blacks World Cup-winning assistant coach Wayne Smith. Australia’s best Super Rugby coaches could be seconded as assistants. Rugby Australia would then have the time to conduct a worldwide search for the best possible coach to take the Wallabies to the 2023 World Cup. You might argue that a new coach would have insufficient time to prepare the Wallabies for the World Cup next year, but Cheika has already proven a team can be turned around in a short period of time. The Wallabies entered the 2015 World Cup year ranked sixth in the world, but still reached the final of the World Cup, although their subsequent performances suggest that result was an aberration. At the 2015 World Cup Cheika forged a Wallabies identity similar to the one that helped the NSW Waratahs win their maiden Super Rugby title in 2014, but does anyone know what the identity of the Australian team is now? The Wallabies coaching staff seems intent on devising completely different tactics for each Test, which means they are virtually starting from scratch every week rather than creating variations on a core style of play and maintaining their identity. The way the Wallabies attacked the Springboks in Port Elizabeth bore no resemblance to their tactical approach in their loss to Argentina on the Gold Coast in their previous Test. Winger Israel Folau was used as a crash ball runner in the mid-field against Argentina, but he was hardly utilized against the Springboks. The Wallabies tried to throw long cut-out passes to beat the Springboks’ rush defence in the mid-field, but lacked the skill to execute the strategy consistently. The South Africans were alert to the tactic. Not only did the Springboks have the Wallabies’ strike players covered out wide for the most part, they invariably arrived at the wider breakdowns in numbers and turned the ball over. It was mind-boggling that the Wallabies did not try to put a kick behind the Springboks’ rush defence, particularly when fullback Willie le Roux defended in the front-line after winger Aphiwe Dyantyi was sin-binned. Or they could have used fullback Dane Haylett-Petty, who produces the most post-contact metres of any Walllabies back – at second receiver from the set-pieces to confront the rush defence headlong and get across the advantage line. And why did the Wallabies not try to capitalize on Folau’s height advantage and aerial skill over diminutive Springbok winger Cheslin Kolbe? Too obvious, I guess. Certainly, there were signs of improvement from the Wallabies, particularly in the scrum, but there was still too much going wrong and someone needs to be accountable. Cheika possesses wonderful managerial and motivational skills and it would be a great pity to lose those attributes, but the current coaching set-up is just not working. A self-made man, Cheika always says that he does not coach for the money, but for the passion and to see the Wallabies performing as best they can. If there is no sign of a turnaround against Argentina on Sunday and Rugby Australia refuses to act, Cheika should seriously consider his position and be very certain he is putting the interests of his country first.