Cabinet members held “an impassioned” discussion about the importance of time-limiting any Brexit backstop arrangements agreed with the European Union as part of the divorce negotiations. No 10 denied any row had taken place at the meeting, although ministers told Theresa May she had to ensure that any backstop arrangements designed to avoid a hard border between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland were not indefinite. Ministers also exchanged views about how any mechanism to ensure the UK can quit the backstop could be constructed, in a discussion in which several ministers weighed in on the issue at the heart of British concerns about the Brexit talks. A string of ministers have voiced concern about the importance of time-limiting the backstop in behind-the-scenes meetings, including the work and pensions secretary, Esther McVey, and the leader of the Commons, Andrea Leadsom. British officials are putting together a proposal on how the exit mechanism could work for Brussels to consider, although concerns have been repeatedly raised in Brussels and Dublin that a backstop that was not indefinite would not amount to an adequate border insurance policy. The state of the Brexit negotiations was discussed at a longer-than-normal 1hr 45min cabinet on Tuesday morning, at which ministers were also promised weekly updates on Brexit planning. A backstop is deemed necessary to prevent a hard border re-emerging in case the UK and EU are not able to conclude a free trade deal. The UK is proposing that the whole country would remain in a “temporary customs arrangement” after the transition period ends in 2021. The EU is evaluating whether it could be an acceptable alternative to the Northern Ireland-only backstop that it has proposed, under which the region would remain in the customs union and single market, but which May has repeatedly denounced as unacceptable. May also told colleagues that Donald Tusk, the president of the EU council, had advised her, that the other members of the union stood ready to hold an emergency summit to finalise a Brexit deal if officials were able to reach an agreement in principle.