Pipe bombs have been sent to prominent critics of Donald Trump, authorities said on Wednesday, spreading terror in the US less than two weeks before the midterm elections. Packages containing suspected explosives were sent to the homes of the former president Barack Obama and the former Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton but intercepted by the US Secret Service, the agency said. CNN evacuated its studios in New York after what police called a “live explosive device” was found in its mailroom. The station said the package was addressed to John Brennan, the former CIA director, who has repeatedly clashed with Trump. The new discoveries were made after a bomb was found this week at the New York home of George Soros, the billionaire liberal donor. Police in central Florida said later on Wednesday that a suspect package was around at the offices of Debbie Wasserman Schultz, a Democratic congresswoman and former party chief. James O’Neill, the New York police commissioner, said investigators suspected recipients may have been targeted because of their opposition to Trump. “It is of concern to us,” O’Neill said at a press conference. Bill de Blasio, the mayor of New York City, described the packages as “an act of terror”. Asked if he linked the incidents to Trump’s praise for the violent assault of a Guardian journalist, De Blasio said politicians must stop encouraging attacks on the media. “And that has to start at the top,” he said. Speaking at an event in Florida, Hillary Clinton said the US was in a “troubling time” and condemned divisive rhetoric by politicians. “We have to do everything we can to bring our country together,” said Clinton. “We also have to elect candidates who will try to do the same.” Trump offered no remarks of his own, instead tweeting to say that he agreed with a statement from his vice-president, Mike Pence, which said the incidents were cowardly and despicable. We condemn the attempted attacks against fmr Pres Obama, the Clintons, @CNN & others. These cowardly actions are despicable & have no place in this Country. Grateful for swift response of @SecretService, @FBI & local law enforcement. Those responsible will be brought to justice. Bryan Paarman, a senior FBI counter-terrorism official, told reporters that the packages discovered so far contained “what appeared to be pipe bombs”. The Secret Service, which continues to protect the Obama and Clinton families, said in a statement that a package addressed to Clinton, the former secretary of state, was found late on Tuesday. The FBI said in a tweet that the package was discovered “in the vicinity of the Clinton residence in Chappaqua”, about 25 miles north of New York City. A second package “addressed to the residence” of former president Obama in Washington was found early on Wednesday morning, according to the Secret Service. “The packages were immediately identified during routine mail screening procedures as potential explosive devices and were appropriately handled as such,” the agency said. “Both packages were intercepted prior to being delivered to their intended location.” Within hours, emergency responders arrived at the Time Warner Center in Manhattan late on Wednesday morning in response to an emergency call from CNN, which broadcasts from the building. A fire alarm was heard on-air at 10.09am. Soros, Clinton and Obama are three of the most prominent figures in Democratic politics and have for years been the subjects of attacks and conspiracy theories from Donald Trump and allies in the Republican party and rightwing media. Matt Gaetz, a Republican congressman from Florida, last week falsely suggested that Soros, a billionaire financier and philanthropist, was funding the “caravan” of Central Americans currently traveling through Mexico toward the US. Alexander Soros, George Soros’s son, said on Wednesday that a wave of vitriol against his father was unleashed by Trump’s 2016 presidential campaign. In an article for the New York Times, he said of the attempted bombing: “I cannot see it divorced from the new normal of political demonization that plagues us today.” CNN is frequently singled out for attacks by Trump even as he leads a campaign to discredit the media generally. In July last year, Trump tweeted an animated video of him wrestling the CNN logo to the ground. Last week, he praised a Republican congressman for physically assaulting a Guardian journalist. The station reported that the package was addressed to Brennan, who has appeared on CNN as a commentator since leaving the CIA. In August, Trump stripped Brennan of his security clearance for being sharply critical of his presidency. Brennan is accused by some Trump supporters, without evidence, of being part of an imagined “deep state” conspiracy to undermine him. The device was removed from CNN’s building and special operations officers were investigating. O’Neill, the New York police commissioner, said the package contained both what “appeared to be a live explosive device” and an envelope of white powder. Police in Sunrise, Florida, said soon after noon on Wednesday that they were investigating a suspicious package in the area of a district office of Wasserman Schultz, the former Democratic party chairwoman. The package was reportedly intended for Eric Holder, the former US attorney general, but was apparently redirected to Wasserman Schultz’s office after it could not be delivered. A photograph of the device sent to CNN showed that the office was also listed as a bogus return address on that package. Trump’s press secretary, Sarah Sanders, said on Wednesday that the White House condemned the attempted bombings. “These terrorizing acts are despicable, and anyone responsible will be held accountable to the fullest extent of the law,” said Sanders. Investigators were urgently investigating whether the suspect packages discovered were connected to an explosive device found on Monday at the home of Soros. That device, according to US officials, consisted of a six-inch length of pipe loaded with explosive black powder. It was safely detonated by investigators after being found by a domestic staff member. The Secret Service said on Wednesday it had opened “a full scope criminal investigation” with federal and local law enforcement to find the sender or senders of the packages. Following brief speculation that another suspicious package had been discovered on its way to the White House, the Secret Service said in a tweet: “Reports of a third intercepted package addressed to the WH are incorrect.”