About once a week, unless it has been one of those weeks where I am occupied with nameless dread or spending a lot of time thinking about what I’m going to ask for for my birthday this year, I think about a particular episode of Oprah that aired in 1997. This episode was promoting the movie The First Wives Club and featured the stars Goldie Hawn, Bette Midler and Diane Keaton gabbing with Winfrey about ageing, female empowerment and what it’s like to have so much money that you could dive into a pool of it like Scrooge McDuck. There’s a moment in this episode that has taken residence in a corner of my brain. It happens early on. Goldie, Bette and Oprah have just finished talking about how they deal with ageing (“If you don’t keep yourself in shape, you get osteoporosis” – Midler) when Keaton adds, “Basically, I think getting older means that you’re closer to death.” The other women try to recover from this moment of nihilism by discussing that it’s important to live your life with “no regrets” or “loose ends” and that’s the only way to make your peace with death (by the way, this is only three minutes into the episode, it would take Ellen at least 20 minutes to get her guests to discuss their own mortality). Oprah talks about why it is important to stimulate joy in yourself. Midler finds joy in dancing. Hawn finds joy in existing. “What are you doing to have fun?” Oprah asks Keaton, who is smirking at the other women. “I like watching television,” she says. Midler laughs so much that she tips to the side of her chair (towards Hawn, a happy person) and starts kicking out one of her legs in time with her cackles. “You do?” says Oprah, incredulous. “I do,” says Keaton. “And I’m not ashamed, either.” Keaton explains that when you’ve been busy working all day it’s quite nice to go home and watch some television, while the three women continue to laugh in a pitying way, as if watching a puppy fall into a puddle, lose its balance, and then fall into a puddle again. In that moment, I had never related to someone more. I would like to be the sort of person who finds joy in exercise like Midler or in a research project about happiness like Hawn. This seems to be indicative of good character. But really, I am very happy when I am at home, without interruption, watching television. And not important prestige television about drug dealers and complicated men and robots dressed as cowboys – unimportant television that I have already seen a thousand times before, television that isn’t necessarily making me a more cultured person. I would probably horrify Oprah too. What if what makes you happy isn’t productive? Keaton is happy when she’s watching television, which is judged as a concerning type of happy. Watching lots of TV is often used as a sign of someone’s laziness – particularly if you’re watching Downton Abbey again and again for no other reason than you quite like it. When Keaton says in justification that there’s just “so many channels!” to watch, I felt it in my (slovenly) bones. Being home alone and rewatching a film or series feels like the equivalent of a scented candle, a week of meditation, a jasmine oil diffuser and two Valium. But I know that divulging this makes me seem like a sad and maybe pathetic person whom the Bette Midlers and Goldie Hawns of the world would feel sympathy for (presumably before taking a run in the park and spending the afternoon planting fennel). The problem is that there is a lot of shame in doing nothing. People get mad when you like doing nothing. For many, weekends need to be production factories that include a longer to-do list than the average workday. There are workouts and brunches and runs to the market and visits to the dry cleaner and picnics and football and art galleries and dinners and drinks and Skype calls and spring cleaning and yoga. If you don’t tick off everything on the list, you’ve wasted your weekend. And if you’ve dared to do nothing, you risk looking like a drip when on Monday morning, someone asks you what you did on the weekend. You mutter “watched TV” apologetically, they look at you in pity and then they shuffle off to talk to someone who at least went on a hike. You have failed the concept of “weekend”. In an article in 1843 magazine called “The way out of burnout” the psychoanalyst Josh Cohen says people who suffer burnout at work often have a hard time with the concept of relaxing at the weekend. When they take time off from their demanding jobs, they automatically start filling up their free time with a schedule of “relaxing tasks” because the idea of being unproductive makes them feel lazy. This internalised idea that one’s worth is tied to one’s achievement means that even in their time off these victims of burnout can’t feel truly calm. Of course, some people love to be extremely busy. But if, for other people, the best way to relax is to do nothing, than the idea of finding joy in simply watching TV doesn’t seem so tragic. When Oprah collects herself after Keaton has divulged on television that she likes watching television, she asks, “Where is that on the fun meter for you?” Keaton replies with a smile, “Ten, baby!” and Oprah makes the sounds “OH HO HO!” which is close enough to the sound of a laugh to be polite. Maybe one day, Keaton and I will be able to reveal our relaxation techniques without fear of mockery. Until then, I will watch TV on Friday night, by myself, in peace. Maybe I’ll put on The First Wives Club. • Sinead Stubbins is a writer and cultural critic. She has written for Vulture, Pitchfork, Vice and Junkee 