It’s the most primal way to eat, as old as cooking itself. As long as humans have had fire, we – and it does seem to be universal – have threaded edible things on to sticks and put them in or on the heat. So, food on a stick is nothing new. And yet, scroll through pictures of the hippest party spreads or the biggest restaurant openings on Instagram and you would be forgiven for thinking skewers were some newfangled thing. It’s not exactly surprising that it should be popular, given that it combines the customisable aspect of the bowl trend, the dipping-in-and-out inherent to the small plates fad and the enduring appeal of global street food. The website Grub Street recently reported on the ubiquity of the skewer in New York dining, from Nonono’s hard-boiled egg wrapped in bacon AKA breakfast on a stick to the spiral-sliced spud on a skewer, battered and deep-fried, at Queens night market, as well a newfound love in the city’s eateries for yakitori (Japanese chicken). And the UK is no different. Recent restaurant openings in London include Vietnamese street-style BBQ joint Mam, as well as a Covent Garden branch of Dalston’s yakitori hotspot, Jidori. Sticks’n’Sushi, meanwhile, has just opened a new King’s Road flagship store, bringing its nationwide offering to eight spots. The Danish chain’s marketing project manager, Mathias Leander, believes its brand of yakitori with a Nordic touch – and Japanese fusion in general – appeals because it is easy to eat and endlessly adaptable: “Beef, fish, shellfish, chicken or vegetables – there is something for everyone.” The growing trend for skewering stuff doesn’t stop at restaurant kitchen doors, nor is it exclusive to London. Manchester’s street food offerings count waffle pops (from Lekker Eat Dutch), jackfruit adobo pops (Food Me at Hatch) and satay skewers (Nasi Lemak), to name but a few. Meanwhile, hungry punters at fashion week events this year spotted countless foodstuffs on sticks, as caterers got appropriately playful. And extravagant wedding bashes are veering in similar directions. High-end wedding caterers such as The Admirable Crichton and the Social Pantry call these “lollipop-stick canapes”. The skewer here isn’t necessarily integral to the cooking of the thing – its chief function is to keep things in place. Cubes of meat or fish on looped bamboo sticks; discs of sesame-crusted cheese standing tall on lolly legs in buckets of edible sand; mini sliders; sorbet bombes, marshmallows with chocolate … the combinations are endlessly varied. You can see why the fashion crowd is partial to a skewer. An exercise in assemblage, it allows you to play with colours and textures, flavours and consistencies. And all in perfectly formed bite-sized shapes. Moreover, it is eminently portable. It requires no cutlery, and should result in little mess. It’s just the thing to eat as you mingle, drink in hand. The skewer has always been an easy eat. As Z He, co-founder of the London drinking lounge Tea Room, points out, the Cantonese brand of skewers it serves is “a going-out kind of food, a popular late-supper thing”. “It’s accessible,” says Jidori’s Nat Lee-Joe. “We’ve paired [our yakitori] with karaoke in Covent Garden – there’s nothing better than a stick of chicken in one hand and the microphone in the other for a great night out.” You only need google “vegan skewers” to know that it’s not just chicken: vegan cheese, tofu, fake meats, a wealth of vegetables, it’s all there for the taking. Skewering affords the chef an endless variety of things to try out, and traditional grilling cuisines are certainly united by a nose-to-tail approach. Offal features heavily, as much in Tea Room’s skewers (“One of my favourites is goose intestine, so springy and chewy; it’s a texture you don’t get that often [in the UK] but it’s one we grew up with” says He) as in Peruvian anticuchos, AKA cow-heart kebabs. Martin Morales, founder of London’s Ceviche and Andina restaurants, says these Afro-Peruvian skewers were born out of ingenuity. Plantation slaves would take those bits of meat the colonial Spanish rejected, most frequently ox heart, marinate them in spices, garlic, panca chilli and vinegar, and grill them over charcoal. “It doesn’t have to be the nice, expensive, pretty bits,” he says. “[Skewering] is a way to use the ends of things, to use it all.” There is, of course, an art to skewering meat. Karam Sethi, of the newly opened London Tandoori joint Brigadiers, says the benefit of using a wrought iron skewer, for example, is that it absorbs and conducts the heat, meaning the meat both cooks from the inside and chars on the outside. Elsewhere, when using bamboo skewers, you need to soak them in water first so they don’t burn. But as can be seen from the various recent trends for cake pops, waffle pops, frozen banana lollies or mini burgers on a stick, most things can be either cut up and pushed on to a stick or piled up and skewered into place. Make the stick that transports morsel to mouth something edible – a sprig of rosemary, say – and you hit peak skewer, flavouring, cooking and eating with a single tool. Perhaps most appealing of all, stick foods give the eater choice. Instead of each spoonful automatically combining all the ingredients of, say, a stew, with this assemblage of distinct pieces, you get to pick what to taste and when. Morales talks about the integrity of each ingredient. Ceviche does an anticucho with prunes, pork belly and burnt sugar. Depending on where you take the bite, he says, you can go really sweet or really savoury. And it’s not just the bite: it’s portion size, too. Skewers mean you choose how much you eat, an autonomy the Kitchn website, in its 2018 guide to wedding food trends, suggests eaters want. It says, for example, to treat dessert like a second cocktail hour, to get guests up mixing and talking after dinner. As caterer Chappall Gage puts it, sweet stick foods mean “people don’t have to commit to one dessert and can come back after dancing to have another bite later”. This flexible approach to eating might be why food on a stick is having such a moment. It is on-the-go fuel for the choose-your-own-adventure generation, the millennial multi-hyphenate’s nibble of choice. A meaty oneYotam Ottolenghi mixes minced meat (beef, lamb and lamb fat) with pistachio, cumin and chilli flakes, then squeezes it around water-soaked bamboo skewers and chargrills over a high heat. A fish oneNigel Slater marinates cubed swordfish (or tuna) in fennel and parsley then stacks on sticks with similarly cubed cucumber to lightly cook on or under a hot grill until golden. A cheese oneRoll skewered halloumi rounds in flour, then egg, then a mixture of black and white sesame seeds before deep-frying until golden. Drizzle with honey to serve. A vegan oneThe Minimalist Baker threads peanut- and lemongrass-marinated triangles of tempeh on to metal skewers to grill on the hob or in the oven. A sweet oneAlternate squares of brownie or shortcake with toasted marshmallows and hulled strawberries on a bamboo skewer, then drizzle with melted chocolate.