Viewers tuned to CNN early on Wednesday afternoon were confronted with striking footage. As Hurricane Michael struck Florida, reporters were on hand, to convey information about the extreme conditions. They were also there to show the conditions at work. Storm reporting is one of the rare events in journalism where a reporter’s physical body becomes an informational tool. “I’ve got to look around to make sure nothing is coming at me,” one reporter cautioned. Trees nearby were snapping, he said. Over on the Weather Channel their own rotating team of reporters sputtered into microphones and struggled to stay on foot as the winds lashed against them near the beach. One reporter said he could smell gas. Ok, I’m all for weather reporting, but this is dangerous and insane. #hurricanemichael2018 https://t.co/RFArkIprlv Back on CNN, reporter John Berman was drenched and fighting off huge gusts of wind. He had just seen a rake flying down the street at what he estimated was 100mph. And this was all before the storm even got going. “If you have not evacuated at this point they have told you to stay in your homes and, I can tell you, I see why,” Berman said. One might ask why he hadn’t taken his own advice. @SimonStormRider getting wind measurements out in the eyewall as well. Got a 117 mph wind gust. pic.twitter.com/PVEPP8FbtB It’s a question that arises with every extreme weather event. During Hurricane Irma last year, as CNN’s Chris Cuomo reported from the scene, he admitted it was a bit crazy to be there. “There is a strong argument to be made that standing in a storm is not a smart thing to do,” he said. No matter the conditions or the storm, weather reporters pride themselves on their bravery and their commitment to get the story. Sometimes they pay a price for it, like reporters from Good Morning America who were memorably knocked over and almost washed away by an incoming wave during Hurricane Sandy in 2012. More recently, two journalists in North Carolina were killed when a tree fell on them while they were covering Alberto in May. One has to wonder if it’s all worth it, and, what’s worse, if it’s setting a dangerous example for people who might have otherwise evacuated? For the reporters it typically is a boon. The more dangerous the conditions, the more viewers their spots pull in, and the bigger chance for career advancement and exposure. Dan Rather launched his career broadcasting a hurricane in Houston in 1961. “This is our Super Bowl,” Chad Myers of CNN said during Sandy. But it’s also that pressure to be the one who captures the storm that can lead to charges of sensationalizing, as the Weather Channel’s Mike Seidel found recently when viewers accused him of playing up the severity of conditions during Florence last month. So dramatic! Dude from the weather channel bracing for his life, as 2 dudes just stroll past. #HurricaneFlorence pic.twitter.com/8FRyM4NLbL “There is not enough action in these videos, so they are manufacturing it, leaning into 30mph winds like they are battling a category 5,” Angela Fritz, the Washington Post’s deputy weather editor wrote a few weeks back. There a reason for that sort of thing. Destruction and mayhem is simply more interesting for viewers, most of whom are far from the storm themselves, to look at than a talking head simply reading off a list of facts. It’s pretty clear that networks wouldn’t be broadcasting so much of this stuff if there wasn’t a big audience for it. Janice Bunting, the executive director of National Weather Association, a group that counts many meteorologists and weather reporters among its members said it’s a topic of frequent debate in the field. “There are many different opinions on that,” she said of the efficacy, and the ethics, of sending reporters out into potential danger. “There are some that are for that and some that are strongly against it. There’s no yes or no answer.” Many reporters take special precautions that may not be visible to viewers at home, pre-identifying safe locales to report from, arriving with enough supplies to stay self-sufficient if they get trapped for a period of time afterwards and so on. “Many times what we don’t see is that they are very close to shelter so they can jump in quickly,” she said. “Many of them have authority where if they don’t feel safe they can pull back from that story.” On the other side of the argument are those who think it sets a bad example for the most crucial audience for reports like these: the people actually at risk of being affected. “Some of [the critics of this type of reporting] feel that if we tell people to leave but we’re still there we’re talking out of both sides of our mouth,” said Bunting. That may be a necessary risk to take. “I think it’s a fair question: why would you have reporters standing potentially in harm’s way who are telling people to do exactly the opposite?” Mark Strassmann, a veteran storm reporter for CBS News said recently to the New York Times. “Part of that is that television is all about visual proof,” he said. “You want to persuade people that what they’re seeing is real and matters to them. And if they can see me standing out there getting knocked around, it’ll convince them that they should not do the same thing.”