Mo Farah’s coach, Gary Lough, has hinted that the four-times Olympic champion may consider a surprise return to the track at the world championships in Doha next year. Farah looked hugely impressive in winning the Chicago marathon on Sunday in a European-record time of 2hr 5min 11sec but afterwards Lough raised the possibility that the 35‑year‑old might “surprise a few people” in 2019 – before adding that his plans for Doha had not yet been firmed up. “I think he will sit down with a few of us and look at his general plan for next year,” Lough said. “He really wants to run the world championships, but what he runs at the world championships hasn’t been decided.” That raises the possibility that Farah might consider running the 10,000m – an event for which he would not have to qualify as a reigning champion from London 2017. When such a scenario was put to Lough, he said he was “not suggesting anything” but then added: “He might change things up a bit next year and surprise a few people, so we will see.” Lough also warned the world marathon record holder, Eliud Kipchoge, that Farah would be his biggest threat in the future. “Right at this time Mo is the second best in the world but who is to know what will happen in six months?” he said. “Eliud has been doing this a long time. We don’t know what he will do between now and Tokyo and we don’t know what Mo will do. But if I was stepping on the line against him in a marathon in the Olympics I would be worried about Mo Farah.” Speaking after Farah’s win in Chicago, Lough said one of the keys to victory was doing longer blocks of work with shorter recoveries in training. “We went to Flagstaff and I was happy with what I saw,” he said. “There was more track work, more things he doesn’t like. In the past he has done quite a lot of really hard track stuff but with long recoveries so we brought that right down.” Lough has a reputation for speaking his mind and he admitted he was slightly surprised that his relationship with Farah had clicked so well. “It has been a bit bumpy sometimes over the years,” the coach said. “I have known him since he was 16. We are quite similar but different and do our own thing sometimes. We are not in each other’s pockets. We have been on top of each other for a while but it has been fine.” Farah says he is yet to decide which spring marathon to run in 2019 but suggested it would be either London or Boston. And when asked whether every other marathon runner apart from Kipchoge would be scared of him after his performance in Chicago he nodded. “I think they will be now,” he said. “They have seen me take control of a race. It is a similar thing I have done on the track over the years – building your character, building yourself, being able to control races. It is a good thing and it has given me a bit more credit when I turn up.” While conceding that Kipchoge was the better marathon runner, Farah said he fancied his chances against the rest of the world over 26.1 miles. “I think I can beat anyone else. I definitely think I am capable of mixing it.” Farah’s performance in Chicago was also hailed by his former training partner Galen Rupp, who was sick after the race having finished 70 seconds behind Farah. “He doesn’t need to run marathons,” Rupp said. “But it’s something he wants to do and he ran awesome and really smart.”