A few days on from the feats of resistance by Usman Khawaja and Tim Paine in Dubai, some of are still digesting the significance of that draw. Michael Atherton holds the record for the most time spent batting in the final innings to save a Test, in his bloody-minded masterpiece of resistance against the ferocity of Allan Donald’s South Africa back in 1995. It was the only such innings longer than Khawaja’s. No Australian team in Asia had ever batted as long to save a game. We knew we had a classic on our hands by halfway through that last day. We could feel it building, the tension and duration stretching out unbearably. The resolution was cathartic. But the numerical magnitude took a while longer to appreciate, as did the feeling that the Australian team had given home supporters something to be proud of, not just in terms of on-field feats but the conduct in achieving them. Still, Australia’s captain Tim Paine doesn’t want to play up the significance of the result, or the non-result. In fact he played it right down, gesturing to teammates after he defended the final ball in Dubai that they should keep a lid on their celebrations. For his rationale, he cited comments from England’s 2005 Ashes captain in a documentary about that series, when the fact that Australia heartily celebrated a draw at Old Trafford led Michael Vaughan to believe that his team had the visitors on the ropes. It’s a hard-marking approach from Paine: sure, it was one of the greatest escapes in the game’s history, but if they hadn’t lost 10 for 60 in the first innings then such an escape wouldn’t have been necessary. In the second Test, Australia are here in Abu Dhabi to win. This team are desperate to take a series in Asia, a fallow region since a victory over Sri Lanka in 2011. The current group is charged up and confident. The question of course is how they should go about it, especially when the pitch two days out from the Test was a shock of emerald green. By one day out, it had been shaved back, but there was still a thick thatch covering the middle section, and some grass remaining on a fuller length at one end. Not that it’s a seamer’s paradise, but it gave hope there would be something more for the bowlers than the immutable block in Dubai. “Sometimes over here looks can be deceiving,” Paine told Wisden’s radio broadcast. “I think it’ll still be good for batting, and I suspect it’ll turn again late in the game.” But playing three quicks was “certainly an option”, he said. “We’ll have a good look at the wicket again this afternoon. We know we’ve got some good options if we wanted to make changes, but we also think the guys who played last week acquitted themselves well and will be better for the run.” Paine made a particular point of backing his left-arm spinner Jon Holland, the obvious bowler who would make way, and sympathised with the lot of any second spinner for Australia. “It’d be a lot of pressure knowing you might get one Test, you might get two, and then it’s back to Australia where traditionally we play one spinner. I think for Jon it’s about trying to relax as much as he can and not try too hard, which is easier said than done. “I thought he bowled reasonably well at times, at times not so well. He knows he can get a little bit better, but he’s also now had that Test under his belt. He knows that the Pakistan players are probably going to attack him more than they have our other bowlers, so it’s just about him having a plan and being able to counter it.” So an unchanged line-up is likely. Pakistan will ring changes though: the highly attacking opening batsman Fakhar Zaman will make his debut after smashing a double-century in a one-day game a couple of months ago and after winning the player of the series gong in a T20 tri-series with Australia in Zimbabwe in July. His Test opportunity comes courtesy of a broken finger for Imam-ul-Haq, who made 76 and 48 in the first Test. There will almost certainly be another debutant in left-arm quick Mir Hamza, after fellow left-armer Wahab Riaz was omitted from the 12 after finding neither rhythm nor wickets in Dubai. Hamza has prodigious domestic record, racking up an eye-watering 26 five-wicket hauls in 56 first-class matches, at a rude average of 17. The other man into the 12 is leg-spinner and more-than-handy batsman Shadab Khan, who has recovered from a groin strain. But whether he could replace off-spinner Bilal Asif, who took six wickets in an innings in Dubai, is doubtful. Pakistan already have leg-spin from premier bowler Yasir Shah as well as quality part-timer Azhar Ali, while left-arm orthodox Haris Sohail turns the ball the same way. If Bilal missed out, part-timer Mohammad Hafeez would be the only option to turn the ball away from left-handed batsmen, of which Australia are in plentiful supply. Accordingly, we’ll wait until the toss to find out the teams. No pressure: the series could ride on those decisions. Both sides are in the frame, and don’t for a second think that either is blasé. Sarfraz Ahmed and Paine are two recently installed wicketkeeping captains with a point to prove that they can inspire their players. Both their teams want this one badly.