Born in Pennsylvania in 1980, Kurt Vile co-founded the War on Drugs with Adam Granduciel in 2005. He played guitar with them until 2008, when he released his debut solo album Constant Hitmaker. He has since released a further six, including 2011’s acclaimed Smoke Ring for My Halo and, last year, Lotta Sea Lice, a collaboration with Courtney Barnett. Vile’s new album, Bottle It In, is released on Matador on Friday; he tours the UK with his backing band, The Violators, from 5-15 November. Two years ago, John Prine turned 70 and had two nights at the Ryman Auditorium in Nashville. I travelled over there with the family and weaselled my way into both shows, even backstage, and sort of hung outside his door like a stalker. He’s one of the greatest living American songwriters: he’s a killer performer and storyteller, with all these lamenting finger-pickers that pull right on your heart. The song Summer’s End on his new album is as much of a heartbreaker as Sam Stone, a classic from his first record. He’s a real hero. I saw this with my wife and it’s a classic. Greta Gerwig’s acting is amazing and cutting edge, so it’s great to see her move into directing. I think it’s a really important movie and the young actors in it are spot on. Even little things, like the kid who plays her first boyfriend [Lucas Hedges] who ends up being gay – she finds him kissing [a boy] and he cries: “Just don’t tell my parents.” The way he cries is so effective. I haven’t seen something quite so moving or convincing on that subject. And Saoirse Ronan is an incredible actress. The actor Danny McBride is an effortless comedic genius. He has this sort of American stoner humour – a little black, a little stupid – that I’m into right now. His latest thing is Vice Principals, and it’s my favourite. In his previous show Eastbound & Down he plays a really loud, redneck, beer-guzzling, ex-professional sports guy. Here he plays a vice-principal, and it’s a more understated role: he’s a dorky type of character who will say things he thinks are cool but are not, like: “Why don’t you take a picture, it’ll last longer.” I watch it every night. This is a hilarious podcast presented by John Agnello and Stewart Lerman. They talk about making all kinds of records. It’s definitely nerdy, but I like to hear them ramble about gear – when you make records it’s fun to hear stories about how it’s done. One time they had Chris Shaw on, who worked on Bob Dylan records. There was a rumour they had to take some of it out because he was afraid of Bob Dylan… It was tough to pick just one podcast because I also love Marc Maron, and the country music one, Cocaine & Rhinestones. Speaking of podcasts, Marc Maron turned me on to this writer, who used to be in a band called Dungbeetle. He writes really smart, dark fiction generally based on his life: it’s a little gritty, there’s definitely some drugs involved at times. This is a collection of short stories, in the vein of things I used to read from the “brat pack” – I remember reading a lot of Bret Easton Ellis and Tama Janowitz – which are almost like pulp fiction but a little more psychedelic. I just wasn’t able to put it down. I go to this place almost every week. They do laid-back, Philly-style brunch, very casual. I wish I could have breakfast food all the time. I get enfrijoladas, which is a Mexican thing with veggie sausage, and potato latkes – a Jewish kind of deep fried potatoes – every time, and coffee, and eggs that run all over everything. I got the family so we just kinda own the place: they know to give us our corner booth and [the kids] can colour all over the tablecloths. I just stay there as long as I can and forget about whatever’s going on in the world.