New Yorker Chris Stein, 68, is co-founder and guitarist of new wave band Blondie, who have had six UK No 1 hits and sold 40m records worldwide. He’s also an accomplished photographer whose work has been exhibited worldwide and is now published in a new book, Point of View, which chronicles the downtown New York music scene of the 1970s. He has been married to the actress Barbara Sicuranza for 19 years and they have two daughters. What was the inspiration for your new book?Partly the visual aspect of social media, especially Instagram. There’s a lot of great street photography on that platform and generally I find that everyone’s more polite on there. There also seems to be a resurgence of interest in the 70s, with TV shows such as The Deuce, so I decided to dig up my images from that period. When did your love of photography begin?When I was a little kid in Brooklyn, I was always screwing around with Brownie cameras. Then I had a friend in my teens called Dennis McGuire, who was a really great photographer and a big influence. He’d apprenticed with Diane Arbus and worked on the periphery of the Warhol scene. So when I was about 18, I started carrying a camera everywhere I went. Describe your style?It’s about the aesthetics of it: angles, composition, just trying to create nice images. People I admired were the usual suspects: Brassaï, Robert Frank, Bresson, Arbus. I never had assistants or did photoshoots. I’d set stuff up myself and try to use natural light instead of flash. Did people ever get annoyed with you snapping away on the street?Not too much. I equate it to trying to talk to someone in a pub. The worst thing that’s going to happen is they’re gonna tell you to fuck off. I know Ron Galella, who famously got his jaw broken by Marlon Brando, but I’ve never been attacked for taking pictures, thankfully. There’s a shot of two girls on a stoop in the early 70s. Didn’t they get in touch decades later?Yeah, that connectivity is the cool side of social media. I don’t like Facebook at all. It’s not so much the politics of it, it’s the hideous way the damn thing looks, like a utility bill or some boring catalogue. Anyway, my Instagram feed is linked with my Facebook page and within two hours of that image going up, I heard from both of them: one became an NYPD cop, the other an actress. I get people identifying locations too. Two days ago, I put up a picture of Blondie but didn’t know where it was taken. Within minutes, a bunch of people recognised it as Manchester. Andy Warhol’s in the book. Tell us about him.Andy was very sweet. I wish I’d taken more pictures of him. Everybody in New York was connected to him, either directly or indirectly. He was the kingpin, the pope. You could play “Two Degrees of Andy Warhol” back then. There’s a picture of William Burroughs firing a rifle in a cornfield. What was happening?I was lucky I got to hang out with Burroughs. He became a mentor. I had a long illness and didn’t leave Manhattan for three years, so the first place I went afterwards was to go stay with Burroughs in Kansas. It was like the old days of hosting a salon. Me, Mick Jagger and various others would go visit. Bill was a peaceful guy but a big proponent of firearms. It was ironic that he had that accident and killed his wife. Everyone who went there would go out and shoot with him. You’d do target practice, then he’d take the target down and sign it for you as a souvenir. What was the illness?A genetic disposition called pemphigus – a chronic blistering skin disease. It was really annoying. Too much drug use – coke, dope, whatever the fuck – had compromised my immune system. What’s your favourite photo in the book?Lester Bangs on Coney Island beach, because he looks like such a freak among all these surprised kids. I gave a gigantic print of it to [former Daily Show host] Jon Stewart because his father lived in one of the apartment buildings in the background. Lester was hilarious. He tried to form his own band – most critics should try dabbling in the form they write about – and I vividly remember him coming off-stage and saying: “Shit, I didn’t realise how hard this was.” I was like: “Told you so.” There’s a shot of David Bowie too. Did his death hit you hard?That was on the Idiot tour in 1977, when we supported Iggy and Bowie. Bowie was always cautious about his image and what got out there. Luckily, he didn’t know I was any kind of photographer and just thought I was a hobbyist. His death was a big deal for us. The last time I saw him was shortly before Lou Reed died and we were discussing how concerned we were for Lou. Little did I know that within a couple of years, he’d be gone too. We went on to record an album at the Magic Shop studio in SoHo, where he did Blackstar. It was very moving because Bowie’s books and stuff were still lying around. Did anyone ever make you feel starstruck? Not really musicians, strangely enough. Being in a band is this secret society, like the Masons. You can just walk up to anyone and say: “Hi, it’s me from Blondie.” I often find actors more exciting. My wife and I saw Malcolm McDowell on a plane this summer and took a selfie. I ran into Peter Dinklage at a gas station recently; he was charming. Did you ever come across Donald Trump back in the day?No but Debbie did. She used to go out with Penn Jillette from Penn & Teller, and they met Trump at a party. He came over and told her she was too short for him. She didn’t pay him any attention. The whole Trump circus now is just fucking insane. Day-to-day crazy. The book closes with pictures of 9/11. Tell us about your experiences that day.It bookends it, because early on, there’s some shots of Debbie and me at the World Trade Center in 1975. By 2001, I lived in a loft in Tribeca, 20 blocks away. I heard this plane, way louder than I was used to hearing, then this muffled boom. I thought it was just a sonic boom, but within a few minutes, people started ringing, telling us to put the TV on. We went into the street and saw a huge hole in the north tower. Soon, both towers were replaced by a huge dust cloud. It was a big turning point for New York. That’s when it started to transition into rampant consumerism and corporate interests took over. [Mayor Rudy] Giuliani had a lot to do with it, helping sell the city out. Are you and Debbie still close?Definitely. We talk all the time and see each other as much as possible. Now we’re in old age, we feel closer in a way. We have so much shared history. What’s your take on music now?There’s a laziness to songwriting today. So much stuff just reminds me of jams in its melody structure. Then I hear something like Lean On by Major Lazer and it blows me away. That’s fantastic, one of my all-time favourite pop songs. I’m a big fan of modern Latin music: reggaeton, cumbia, all that stuff. I loved the Kanye and Jay-Z album, Watch the Throne. That’s genius. Debbie once spoke to Kanye on the phone and he was very polite, very nice. I’m disappointed with his political stance, which is kinda nuts. Are you still a punk at heart?I’d identify more as a bohemian. I don’t want to sound pompous, but I consider myself too much of an intellectual to be purely a punk (laughs). Point of View: Me, New York City and The Punk Scene by Chris Stein is published on 23 October (Rizzoli, £40)