When Australia’s cricketing world finished falling apart in early April 2018, no one much noticed the central contract list that came out a week later. But it was no more encouraging for the country’s immediate Test future than the ball-tampering scandal or the mountainous thrashing in Johannesburg that had preceded it. With a 50-over World Cup to account for in the forward estimates, the list was largely a hodgepodge of T20 bowlers, all-rounders and white-ball batsmen, along with an excellent Test bowling quartet and a couple of batting discards. It obviously didn’t include Australia’s only two contemporary world-class batsmen, given the year-long suspensions handed to Steve Smith and David Warner. The only contracted batsmen with experience or success in the longest form were Usman Khawaja, Shaun Marsh, and Mitchell Marsh. For those playing along at home, a Test top six usually comprises more than three players. Even crediting that trio with experience and success requires the terminology to be relative. The former two had played 32 Tests apiece, while the younger Marsh had 28. Khawaja had produced some worldly innings at home but struggled away. Both Marshes had been patchy for years but had delivered during the 2017-18 Ashes. The team’s future relied on each of them having turned a corner. Come the end of Australia’s next Test engagement in October 2018, as Pakistan recorded their biggest win over Australia to take the second Test in Abu Dhabi by 373 runs and the series 1-0, and Australia’s prospects look even more bare. Khawaja, the one good news story of this tour after his century in the first Test at Dubai, damaged a ligament in his knee and will likely miss the start of the home summer. The Marsh brothers managed 44 runs between them in eight innings. The portents in that contract list, with its lack of proven batting, became manifest on the field. The second Test was lost with collapses in each innings, the first to surrender the initiative, the second any resistance. When Australia bowled out Pakistan for 282 on the first day, the match was in the visitors’ hands. But a reply worth 145 handed it back, while Australia’s second innings barely exceeded it at 164. In one innings in this two-Test series Australia produced an extraordinary performance with the bat, seeing off 139.5 overs to draw the first Test in Dubai thanks to Khawaja soaking up 302 balls. In the other three innings, from the fall of the first wicket in each, they lost 30 wickets for 343 runs. Starting the fourth day in Abu Dhabi with one wicket down and 47 on the board, things progressed brightly while Travis Head and Aaron Finch added 24. But once Head lost a sense of his off stump and was drawn into a prod at Mohammad Abbas, the slide was on. Abbas made sure of it. He’s the sort of bowler that Australian selectors and commentators have condescended to for years, given his offerings are barely 130 kilometres an hour. But they’re accurate, landing on a good length over and over again. Simple yet thus far devastatingly effective. He’d lopped off the left-handed Head on 36 by nipping a ball away for an edge, then moved it into the right-handed Mitchell Marsh (5) and Finch (31) to take them lbw. Tim Paine’s delivery did the same to take his off stump for three. Within 11 overs of the morning beginning it was 78 for 5. Abbas took those four wickets in three overs. After lunch he would return to break the last resistance, dropping in a surprise bouncer to have an out-of-position Marnus Labuschagne edge a pull shot on 43, the bowler completing a second five-wicket haul for the match. Australia had stared into the Abbas, and the Abbas stared back. Brendon Julian on Wisden’s radio commentary had it down: “Mohammad Abbas has out-thought the Australians. They come over here worrying about how they’re going to play spin and how they’re going to do this or do that. They’re not expecting him. He’s bowled deliveries at the weakness of each Australian batsman, and he’s worked them out.” Abbas finished the match with 10 for 95 and the prize for player of the series. In a career spanning 10 Tests he’s netted 59 wickets at 15.64 – the fourth-best bowling average of all time. I see a new number 1 Test bowler coming... Mohammad Abbas The ease with which Labuschagne and Mitchell Starc picked off the bowling in a partnership of 67 showed how decent the fourth-day pitch still was for batting, if that hadn’t already been proved by the way Pakistan racked up 400 before declaring in their second innings. But when the pressure comes on for Australia, the wheels most often come off. “A number of reasons,” Paine suggested on radio after the match. “It’s technical, it’s mental, it’s pressure. At times it’s probably a mixture of all those things. We’ve got to go home and work on things to improve our batting from a tactical sense as well. There’s a lot of work to be done.” There’s never been a better Indian pace attack than the one that will visit Australia in December. So yes, there’s a lot of work to be done. It’s just that when you scan through those names on the contract list, or cast your mind further afield, it’s far less clear who will be able to do it.