Rockstar North’s co-studio head Rob Nelson has defended the video games studio’s working conditions in the wake of a controversy sparked by a New York Magazine profile, in which founder Dan Houser said “we were working 100-hour weeks” on forthcoming game Red Dead Redemption 2. Houser later clarified his comments in a statement to games website Kotaku, saying that it applied only to himself and three other members of the senior writing team over a period of “weeks, not years” – not to all of the developer’s staff. “Across the whole company, we have some senior people who work very hard purely because they’re passionate about a project, or their particular work, and we believe that passion shows in the games we release,” read the statement. “But that additional effort is a choice, and we don’t ask or expect anyone to work anything like this […] No one, senior or junior, is ever forced to work hard.” But on social media, former employees of Rockstar Games countered that they had been expected to work a lot of overtime at the company. One since deleted tweet from a former QA employee read: “I worked 80-hour weeks at Rockstar until I had a breakdown. If I hadn’t, my contract would have been terminated. There are plenty of ways to force a person.” Another, from former PR and social media employee Job Stauffer , reads: “It’s been nearly a decade since I parted from Rockstar, but I can assure you that during the GTA IV era, it was like working with a gun to your head 7 days a week. Be here Saturday & Sunday too, just in case Sam or Dan come in, they want to see everyone working as hard as them.” In an interview with the Guardian, Nelson acknowledged that Rockstar’s working culture has been in need of improvement. Asked how the studio manages employees’ time and welfare, he said: “As best we can, and it’s something that we’re always striving to get better at. We’re growing as fast as we can, and we’re structuring our departments based on need, because we don’t want people working too hard. “Do people work hard and is there overtime and extra effort put in? Yes, there is. Is it something we want happening regularly for long periods of time or as an accepted part of our process or as a ‘badge of honour’ thing? No, it is not. We are always trying to improve how we are working and balance what we are making with how we make it and we will not stop working to improve in this area.” Red Dead Redemption 2, which comes out next week, is the first Rockstar game to have been developed in collaboration with all its studios; more than 1,6o0 people have worked on it. Nelson said that this level of collaboration had enabled Rockstar to manage the workload differently from past projects, such as Grand Theft Auto 4 and 5. “Making these triple-A games requires more and more and more people and logistics,” he said. “The [working] culture and what [are] acceptable work practices [have] also grown. It’s all really changed for the better … As games are getting more complicated, we’re trying to figure out how to manage it. Nothing has been perfect at any time yet. “I don’t think we could make something like this with this amount of passion, if that was the way we operated. Even though we’re big, and it’s a somewhat difficult thing to do, we try to make sure that the team feels like they have a voice, that their concerns can be heard on any issue – whether that’s with the game, or an issue with the work. We want this team to be together for the long haul. We are not interested in losing people ... We could not have made this game if the same people hadn’t made the other games before it. People need to want to be here and want to work on this stuff together. Everything we do is trying to preserve and grow that, and have more people wanting to come here.” Statistics provided by Rockstar to the Guardian, based on employees’ self-reported hours across all studios from 8 January to the end of September 2018, show that the average working week was between 42.4 and 45.8 hours. The longest week – that of 9 July – was 50.1 hours, and during the studio’s busiest week, 20% of employees reported working 60 hours or more, to a maximum of 67.1 hours. On Wednesday, current Rockstar employees working on Red Dead Redemption 2 began sharing frank and often positive stories of their experiences. “In the time that I’ve been at the studio, work practices have definitely improved … Crunch on Red Dead Redemption 2 has definitely been a lot better that it was on GTA V, where I was pulling a month of 70+ hour weeks,” said one Rockstar North coder, Phil Beveridge. “That isn’t saying that overtime doesn’t happen. On average, I’ll do somewhere between 40- to 45-hour weeks, and that can go up to around 60 for a week or two when deadlines loom.” On LinkedIn, senior audio designer Sarah Scott wrote: “It has been difficult to see inaccurate, false or out of date information regarding the working conditions here at Rockstar circulated so widely … I’ve worked at a number of studios over the years and I can honestly say Rockstar North has been one of my best experiences. I could go home earlier and still hit my deadlines but I wouldn’t be happy with the quality of my work and I wouldn’t feel fulfilled.” The video games industry has long been notorious for exploiting workers, with some companies mandating long hours of “crunch” unpaid overtime in the final stretch of a game’s development. Increasingly in recent years, those with families or other obligations that make it impossible to participate in some game studios’ demanding working culture have spoken out about feeling squeezed out of game development altogether. In the US, game industry workers have few employment protections, with sudden layoffs and downscaling hitting prominent game studios several times a year. Recently, the collapse of Telltale Games, which allegedly operated under near-permanent “crunch” according to a report by The Verge, left hundreds of employees without severance pay. A spate of studio closures has led to a push for games industry unionisation, and increasing awareness of these issues among players. It is indicative of changing attitudes to the video games industry’s working culture that the reaction to Dan Houser’s “100-hour week” quote was near unanimous condemnation.