Leicester have made the difficult decision to play their Premier League game at Cardiff on Saturday, following the death of their chairman Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha and four others in the helicopter crash at the King Power Stadium. A minute’s silence will be observed before kick-off at Cardiff and the players will wear black armbands in honour of those who died when a private helicopter carrying Vichai, two members of his staff and two flight crew came down and exploded after Leicester’s match against West Ham. The tragedy close to the King Power Stadium – the helicopter had been booked to ferry the 60-year-old Thai billionaire to Luton airport – led to the outside of the ground becoming a sea of scarves and floral tributes and the decision was taken to cancel the home Carabao Cup tie against Southampton on Tuesday. That match will be rescheduled but though many at Leicester remain in a state of shock and bewilderment it was felt an away game at the weekend probably represents the best opportunity to begin the return to normality, even if emotions are still raw. Cardiff were involved in conversations with Leicester and the Premier League over the best way to approach Saturday’s game. “Following Saturday evening’s terrible events at the King Power Stadium the thoughts and feelings of Leicester City are at the forefront of our minds,” the Cardiff executive director, Ken Choo, said. “We will be offering our support to Leicester in any way necessary in respect of this weekend’s fixture.” Leicester’s city hall and county hall will light up in blue as part of the tributes to Vichai and the other four victims, Nusara Suknamai, Kaveporn Punpare and the pilots Eric Swaffer and Izabela Roza Lechowicz. The club have opened a marquee near the stadium where fans and people from the wider community can add their names to a book of condolence. It will be open daily from 8am to 10pm “for the foreseeable future”. Anyone unable to visit the King Power can leave a message in an online tribute via the club’s website. Investigations into the cause of the accident are continuing.