This Saturday, I will be among tens of thousands of young people marching on Westminster to call for a people’s vote on Brexit. For years, it was assumed we youngsters would not vote, would not take part in politics, and did not care. During this time, we were priced out of housing, had our tuition fees trebled, and were told to be grateful for the gig economy – because our failure to take part in democracy meant we did not deserve any better. We are desperate for a politics in which we can engage meaningfully But now, after enduring all this, we’re in the ballot booths and on the streets, making our voices heard. And guess what? Some members of the establishment really do not like it. The Spectator columnist Brendan O’Neill said the “cult of youth should terrify anyone who believes in democracy”; and he accused our organisation, Our Future Our Choice – part of an alliance of young and old campaigning for a people’s vote – of exhibiting “astonishing arrogance”. After years of moaning about our apathy, some of our elders are now really worried that we may participate. Turnout in the 2016 referendum among 18- to 24-year-olds was almost double what was originally reported: not quite enough to tip the result, but it would be higher if we get another chance. Young people changed the dynamic of the general election last year and helped wipe out a Conservative majority. At the head of Saturday’s march will be thousands of people from my generation, with politicians and celebrities following behind. We are desperate for a politics in which we can engage meaningfully. We want our leaders to listen to us by giving us a final say on the issue we care about the most. Young people won’t forgive, and they certainly won’t forget, anyone who fails to give us a vote on this botched Brexit. We will not let politicians destroy our futures. The Conservatives risk having the curse of Brexit hung around their necks for years to come. I went to the Tory party conference earlier this month where, at one fringe event after another, I heard a tone of desperation among the party’s pragmatists. What can we do? What can we offer you? The answer is simple: the one thing your ageing activists won’t let you do. Yet in the face of this disaffection, Labour cannot be complacent. Many young people believe Jeremy Corbyn offers hope and change. But we know any grand social pact will be near-impossible outside of the EU and in a new decade of austerity. With economic uncertainty and a more isolated, insular nation, idealism will turn to cynicism if all those visionary words fail to address the towering challenges of our time. This is not “astonishing arrogance” but a humble request to be heard. This is not a war on the old but a battle for the future. And Saturday’s march is not just for us but for everyone who cares about what kind of country we will be. Join us. Bring your friends. Bring your parents. Bring your grandparents. • Lara Spirit is co-president of Our Future Our Choice