Jan Vertonghen is expected to be out until after the November international break, although Mauricio Pochettino was unhappy at how Roberto Martínez, the Belgium manager, revealed the news. Martínez said at a press conference on Friday morning that the Tottenham defender was likely to be absent from his squad not only for the forthcoming international fixtures but the next round of them, too – which would have him on the sidelines until 20 November. Vertonghen injured a hamstring after 15 minutes of Spurs’s win at Huddersfield last Saturday when he stretched and received a kick at the same time. He thought it was merely a dead leg and played on until half-time only to feel the pain when the adrenaline subsided and he entered the dressing room. He did not reappear for the second half. Pochettino described it as “not a good injury” but he suggested that Martínez might not have all of the facts and, as such, ought not to have put a timeframe on the player’s absence. Vertonghen has had the injury scanned but he will have a second one on Monday, which should provide a clearer image and a more accurate idea of how long he will be unavailable. “Of course, we’re so disappointed but we’ll see if it’s six weeks or less,” Pochettino, the Tottenham manager, said. “One component in this that’s important is the adrenaline. When you’re playing football, it’s so high and you don’t realise. When you stop running, you feel it. It’s difficult to assess during the game because he didn’t realise how it was. He thought it was a dead leg. “It’s so difficult to communicate with all the national teams. Before my press conference, you knew about the Vertonghen situation because Roberto told the media in Belgium before us. But in the end, it’s our player, our Tottenham player, our Tottenham employee. They need to call us. If they call us, we are more than open to talk and give our opinion.” Vertonghen played the 90 minutes in six of Belgium’s seven World Cup games in Russia last summer – he sat out the third group game against England – while he played the 90 minutes for Tottenham in their opening seven matches of the season before being rested for the Carabao Cup tie against Watford on the Wednesday before last. Pochettino’s assistant, Jesús Pérez, explained that Vertonghen had been placed on a specialist programme in the week leading up to Huddersfield, with “no competition during the week”. Pérez added: “Any single player reacts differently to the same kind of injury. It’s difficult to guess [a timescale] until the next scan on Monday. The second scan after almost a week is needed to have a clear image before knowing the timeframe for that kind of injury.”