I have a friend with an extraordinary kitchen garden in Suffolk. All summer, her many tomato plants have been in their element, with ripe fruit hanging heavily from their branches, wafting their sweet aroma all around. The scent is intoxicating, one that the refrigerated tomatoes of winter certainly don’t have. So, now that we are at the end of the season, eat as many tomatoes as you can. Prep 15 minCook 40 minServes 4-6 8-10 chicken thighs, on the bone and skin onSalt and black pepper6 large tomatoes (such as beef or oxheart)4 garlic cloves, unpeeled4 sprigs thyme1½ tbsp small capers12 black olives (preferably kalamata), stoned½ tsp dried chilli flakes (optional)4 anchovies5 tbsp olive oil150g stale white sourdough, torn into large pieces For the basil oil1 large bunch each basil and parsley, leaves picked4 anchovies2 tsp capers8 tbsp olive oil4 tbsp red-wine vinegar2 garlic cloves, peeled Heat the oven to 200C/390F/gas 6. Remove the chicken from the fridge, lay it on a plate and season generously with salt and pepper. Leave out for half an hour. Meanwhile, cut the tomatoes into large chunks and transfer to your largest baking tray. Scatter the garlic cloves over the tomatoes, along with the thyme, capers, olives, chilli and three tablespoons of olive oil. Season generously with salt and pepper, mix with your hands, then roast in the oven for 10 minutes. Remove the tray from the oven and scatter the bread all around. Toss with the tomatoes and juices, then top with the chicken thighs. Drizzle the whole lot with the remaining two tablespoons of oil. Roast for a further 25-30 minutes, turning the bread pieces over once or twice. Now make the basil oil, whizzing all the ingredients together. If you want a looser consistency, add a few more slugs of olive oil. Taste and check for seasoning – it will be naturally salty so you may only need the smallest pinch of salt. Once the thighs are golden and cooked through, serve in the baking tray, drizzled with the basil oil, or transfer to a serving dish. Serve with a green salad and perhaps some cheese for pudding. Buy trays of tomatoes at the market at the end of the day and make bottles of passata (always useful) or jars of tomato and chilli jam, which is delicious with grilled vegetables, cheese, sausages and lamb.