Of all the nights following England it is difficult to think of a stranger experience, when near-goals were greeted with almost complete silence, when the players’ shouts carried through the evening air and at one stage, to Jordan Pickford’s bemusement, there was a muffled chant from the nearby hills for him to wave at the 20 or so supporters who had refused to accept the idea of missing this match. England’s goalkeeper peered into the darkness and dutifully lifted his glove without fully giving the impression he knew where these hardy souls were congregated. This certainly was not an orthodox night of international football. How could it be when it was the first time England have ever had to participate in a “ghost game”? It was surreal and hardly a surprise it took so long before turning into the kind of match that might ordinarily have been expected. Even then the excitement had largely petered out by the time Jadon Sancho came on for the final exchanges. Marcus Rashford could not convert England’s most inviting chances and the lingering memory will be the sheer weirdness of seeing two World Cup semi-finalists renewing acquaintances, four months since the fun of the World Cup, in front of an empty Lego-like stadium. If nothing else it was nice to hear the national anthem being played before an England away game without a single “No Surrender”. Except in this case it was difficult to hear any of the words, sung by the players, coaching staff and a small party of Football Association officials. That was still one of the noisiest parts of the evening and, in a strange sense, the atmosphere made one appreciate the noises that would usually be taken for granted: the excited hum for a promising attack, the exaggerated outrage that would normally have greeted a bad challenge, the chanted encouragement to lift an occasionally prosaic game out of its drearier moments. For reasons not entirely clear the Croatian federation still produced a programme – even though, with no one to buy them, they mostly remained unwanted in a pile of boxes. Security guards in fluorescent orange jackets could be seen monitoring the fences around the stadium’s perimeter and there was not a single St George’s flag at the caged end where England’s supporters would usually have been accommodated. That primitive enclosure is known, unofficially, as the “Guantanamo stand” (Hajduk Split’s away fans even turned up for one game in orange boiler suits). Here, though, the padlocks stayed on. There were a sprinkling of England fans among the trees behind one of the open-air stands and, true to form, they made themselves heard with a few chants drifting down from the hillside. That apart, however, there were no signs they had managed to persuade the high-rise flat owners to let them rent their balconies. It was certainly an eccentric night for Ben Chilwell – presented with his England shirt by Emile Heskey in the dressing room – to make his first start. After a year of operating with a wing-back system, Gareth Southgate had reverted to a back four, with Kyle Walker preferred to Kieran Trippier and Joe Gomez also dropping out. Jordan Henderson and Ross Barkley were either side of Eric Dier in midfield and the 4-3-3 system had Harry Kane flanked by Raheem Sterling and Marcus Rashford in attack. Southgate’s explanation was that he did not want to be tied down to one formation but there was still an emphasis on the full-backs to venture forward and Barkley, in particular, had the licence to support the front players. No one should have been too surprised that a game like this would struggle to hold the imagination and, with penalty box action at a minimum, the first half was notable only for confirmation that Henderson can officially be declared the loudest England player. At one point he took offence at something Zlatko Dalic had said and demanded to know – expletives removed – if Croatia’s manager saw himself as the referee. Henderson could have been excused for his grumpiness: his booking for an early foul on Ivan Rakitic means he will be suspended from Monday’s game in Spain. John Stones will also be absent after a yellow card early in the second half. Southgate might have altered England’s system but one aspect that had not changed was the danger the team posed from set plays. An angled header from Dier came back off the post from a corner and in the second half another of Henderson’s right-sided deliveries, this time from a free-kick, led to Kane heading against the bar. These were encouraging moments for England but they were let down by Rashford’s erratic finishing when the Manchester United attacker was played through the middle twice in quick succession. At least Rashford could argue the second opportunity, from an exchange of passes with Sterling, culminated in some fine goalkeeping from Dominik Livakovic. The first chance, however, was the easier and Rashford should have done much better once Walker’s pass had left him with the goal at his mercy. The game ended and, rather quaintly, the public announcer wished everyone a safe journey home.