Romeo would not take his eyes off me. This was flattering to begin with but then he kept trying to rub his head against my leg. Which would also have been cute except for the fact he stank. “He’s in rut and wants to breed,” his owner informs me. “Don’t get too close. When goats are in rut they urinate all over themselves and you really don’t want to get that smell on you.” I hadn’t expected to meet a horny goat called Romeo during my visit to Atlanta. I hadn’t expect to meet any goats at all. Atlanta is, after all, famous for things like hip-hop and Coca-Cola, not cloven-hoofed mammals. But that may be changing. Atlanta is intent on transforming itself into a truly sustainable city and a rapidly growing city farms movement is afoot in the southern metropolis. “By 2025, we want to develop a resilient local food system and institutionalize urban agriculture,” says Amol Naik, Atlanta’s chief resilience officer. Goats, it turns out, are playing an important part in helping Atlanta achieve these goals. Romeo’s owner is Hayley Evans, a PhD student at Georgia Tech. When she and her husband moved to the Carver Hills neighborhood of Atlanta a couple of years ago they weren’t expecting to acquire a small herd of goats. However, as Evans explains, Carver Hills is a food desert. “Fresh food is hard to come by – especially if you don’t have a car or a lot of cash. We soon realized several of the kids in the neighborhood didn’t know the difference between a potato and a tomato.” There was a vacant, overgrown city-owned lot adjacent to Evans’ house and she decided to turn it into an urban farm. Evans contacted AgLanta, an urban agriculture resource that is part of the mayor’s Office of Resilience. AgLanta chose Evans’ urban farm to be a pilot site for the Grows-A-Lot program, a new City of Atlanta initiative that gives residents five-year licenses to turn vacant city-owned land into gardens or farms. Nine out of 10 of the pilot sites in the program are located in low-income food desert areas like Carver Hills. Grows-A-Lot is just the latest in a series of similar city-led initiatives. In 2014, for example, Atlanta adopted an urban agriculture ordinance which changed zoning to encourage urban farms and local food production. The following year, the city appointed an urban agriculture director, the first position of its kind in the United States. These programs seem to be working. “In 2010, 53% of Atlanta was considered a food desert area and in 2016 this was down to 39%”, Naik notes. It is hoped that the new Grows-A-Lot program will reduce this number further. Romeo will not be participating in the next goat yoga session, Evans informs me, 'because of his incredible stank' In order to grow food you need to have clear land, of course. The plot Evans wanted to turn into a garden was overrun with impenetrable walls of kudzu, a fast-growing invasive plant species often known as “the vine that ate the South.’ AgLanta advised Evans to get goats to help clear it. Goats, which are great at eating up kudzu as well other troublesome plants like English ivy, are becoming an increasingly common way of reducing excessive vegetation in Atlanta. “We’ve really started to ramp up our goat use in the last few years,” says Kevin Mink, a forest restoration manager for Trees Atlanta, a nonprofit that helps protect the green life of the city. “It reduces the chemicals we put into the environment and puts a friendly face on what we do.” Thanks in part to some serious munching by Romeo and friends, the once overgrown lot next door to Evans in Carver Hills is now full of grapevines, tomatoes, and okra plants. A recent partnership with a local brewery means they’ve also started to grow hops, and free-range chickens deliver a steady supply of eggs. The local community pitch in to help maintain the garden and everyone shares the fruits of their labour. It’s brought the neighbours closer together. Since starting the community garden, Evans has also become something of a goatrepreneur and has launched a goat-rental company with her husband. “AgLanta recommended we get two goats to clear the lot for the garden,” she says. “But we got carried away because we adored the goats so much. So we multiplied and Herd Around Town was born.” The company rents out goats to people looking to clear their land and also runs goat yoga sessions. Romeo will not be participating in the next goat yoga session, Evans informs me, “because of his incredible stank”. As it happens, Herd Around Town is just one of a number of goat-rental businesses in the city. Goats, I kid you not, seem to be a growth industry in Atlanta. “We can barely keep up with demand,” says Megan Kibby, co-owner of Red Wagon Goats. Kibby started the company a year and a half ago and it has been rapidly expanding. In an age of Instagram it is, perhaps, no surprise that urban goats have grown in popularity. However, notes Kirby, there’s also something about Atlanta that makes it a particularly fertile ground for the animals. “Atlanta has a way of balancing urban life with a craving to be connected to the land,” Kirby explains. “We have a city where you can kayak and hike in the city limits. We have a farm-to-table food culture. Portland and Austin, of course, really have the whole urban homestead thing cornered, but Atlanta is right there behind it.” Guardian Cities is live in Atlanta for a special series of in-depth reporting. Share your experiences of the city in the comments below, on Twitter, Facebook and Instagram using #GuardianATL, or via email to cities@theguardian.com