They don’t say goodbye at the end of phone calls in films or even wrap them up in any kind of way which I actually like. They just hang up after the main part of the conversation is done. I started doing this but people just called me back to ask if my signal had cut out. GhostWiper One person stands to clap slowly but confidently, and then the rest of the audience/onlookers slowly join in, and gradually a huge cheer emerges and everyone acts like they were clapping like that the whole time. That has never, ever happened anywhere but on screen. ranelagh75 The sad or lonely or depressed, skinny young woman, sitting hunched over holding a steamy cup of hot coffee or tea, warming her thin hands, designer sweater sleeves pulled way down, revealing only her fingertips. Tom Whittaker In Scandi-noir, it is police procedure to enter an abandoned warehouse chasing a highly dangerous criminal, alone, drop your gun along the way, no phone signal, and have no spare batteries for your Maglite. dylan37 Lone maverick investigators covering the entire wall with photos and documents relating to a case, often linked with coloured thread. Photos are crossed out rather than removed when the subject is dead. They look at it for a bit, perhaps pacing to and fro. As it’s pretty useless as a tactic, they often tear it all down in a frustrated rage, after which a vital development always occurs. alexito A guy is doing a wet shave, while, of course, looking in a mirror. He either finishes scraping his face with the razor or he’s interrupted, and then instead of rinsing the remaining shaving cream off his face (which may be considerable in quantity), he wipes it off with a towel. Later his face incomprehensibly shows no sign of dermatitis. He’s that tough he has magic skin. I’ve always assumed there’s a financial arrangement somewhere with ointment manufacturers. NSNS There’s a strange way of taking pills that I suppose is taught at stage school. Tip an uncounted number of pills onto an open palm, clap it violently to the mouth and tip the head back suddenly. I remember trying it when I was a fairly small child and nearly choking. PickmansModel Walking into a house, shutting the door and walking across the room in pitch darkness to switch on a lamp. Answering a ringing phone to find silence on the other end and then saying: “Hello? Hello? Who’s there?” Followed by rattling the earpiece holder. Hearing a noise in the night and then going to investigate alone. Mila Gorka To show you like booze, you have to guzzle it straight from the bottle like a parched man in the desert. Or if you’re at a bar/pub, you have to sit right at the bar tipping back glass after glass of spirits. Nobody ever sits at a table and drinks beer or wine. Rhialto Often in a war or space race movie the powers that be are making an important decision, but in another part of the building a virtual nobody realises that they are all wrong. Cue a timeless run through corridors up and down stairs etc. trying to get the message through. They make it in the nick of time. goodcaptain You can join the conversation and add your comments here.