There is a shelf in the kitchen that is home to glass jars of dried fruits: apricots for lamb tagine; figs for marinating in glasses of muscat; dates for wolfing from the jar. There are also prunes that rarely get much of an outing. Beyond the airtight lid lie notes of liquorice and vanilla, lumps of fudgy, intensely sweet dried plums to add to chocolate cakes or to serve with walnuts after dinner. I have dipped them in chocolate on several occasions, dark at first, then a milk version, which turned out to be a happier marriage. (You can reach for the dark 80% chocolate all too quickly.) I like finding a prune in a rough textured pork terrine, too, the sort of paté that comes wrapped in bacon and crumbles as you spread it on rounds of hot, thick toast. Simmered in a good chicken stock, the prune’s dense flesh becomes silky. It was probably the old devils on horseback I had in mind when I added chunks of smoky, fat-marbled bacon and prunes to a chicken soup-stew the other day. A slightly butch version of the classic cock-a-leekie soup, but with the chicken pieces left on their bones, and the skin browned intensely to sweeten the flavour of the broth. We had a thigh and a drumstick each, soft, some caramelised shallots and sweet green leeks with a deep bowl of broth that had both prunes and bacon at its heart. Prunes appreciate dairy produce, which is probably how prunes and custard became a thing and that cream cheese canapé thing came about in the 60s. I have made a prune mousse that worked well, and a prune panna cotta that didn’t. I have often wondered what would happen if you matched prunes and chocolate in a soufflé. Last week I made a prune sauce, with cream and vanilla, to pour over pears I had cooked with star anise and cloves. Get the halved shallots, carrots and chicken a deep, nutty brown in the pan before you add the stock. The flavour of the finished broth will be better for it. Good though this is, I like it even more reheated the next day, once it has time to sit and think, so to speak. Serves 4 olive oil 3 tbspchicken drumsticks 4chicken thighs 4smoked bacon 250gbanana shallots 6, mediumcarrot 1, largecelery 1 stickchicken stock 2 litresblack peppercorns 12bay leaves 3thyme sprigs 12leeks 4, mediumprunes 16 Warm the olive oil in a deep, wide saucepan or stockpot set over a moderately high heat. Season the chicken pieces and place them in the pan, turning them from time to time as they turn a deep, even, golden brown. Transfer them to a plate then dice the bacon into short fat pieces and add to the pan, letting it cook until the fat turns gold. Remove from the pan and set aside. Pears that refuse to submit to my pampering end up in the pot Peel the shallots and cut them in half lengthways. Scrub and roughly chop the carrot, then cut the celery into short lengths. Add the shallots, carrot and celery to the pan, leaving them to brown lightly over a moderate heat, turning them occasionally so they colour evenly. When the vegetables are a pale, toasty brown, pour off any excess fat and add the stock, stirring as it comes to the boil, scraping at any delicious sticky goo in the pan so it dissolves into the stock. Return the chicken and bacon to the pan, add the peppercorns, bay leaves and thyme and leave to simmer. Cut the leeks into 2cm lengths and wash very thoroughly in deep cold water to remove any grit trapped in the layers. After the soup has been simmering for 40 minutes, add the leeks and a generous seasoning of salt, then the prunes and continue cooking for 20 minutes. Check the seasoning, then divide the chicken between 4 large shallow bowls, ladling over the vegetables and prunes and stock as you go. As the leaves fall, there always seems to be a plate of pears ripening in the kitchen. I turn them daily, as you would a mango, eating them only when they reach their brief window of perfection. Those that steadily refuse to submit to my pampering end up in the pot, in a light sugar syrup, with cloves, orange peel and a vanilla pod. Serves 4 For the pears:pears 4, large and slightly under-ripe pearsstar anise 2bay leaves 2water 500mlginger syrup 6 tbsp For the prune sauce:prunes 100g, soft dried, stoneddouble cream 100mlcandied orange peel 2 tbsp, chopped Peel the pears, leaving the stalks in place, and lower them into a deep saucepan so they fit snugly. Add the star anise, the bay leaves, water and ginger syrup. Bring to the boil, then lower the heat and simmer for about 30 minutes depending on the ripeness of the fruit. Keep an eye on the pears, piercing them from time to time with a skewer. The flesh must be completely tender, but it is important to catch them before they collapse. Carefully lift the pears on to a serving dish. Turn the heat up and let the syrup reduce to about 150ml then add the prunes and simmer for 5 minutes. Tip into a blender or food processor and reduce to a soft purée. Using a spatula, scrape into a small pan, add the cream and warm slowly over a low heat. Serve the warm pears on plates with the prune sauce. Scatter with the candied orange. Email Nigel at nigel.slater@observer.co.uk or follow him on Twitter @NigelSlater