What does the 21st century look like? What are the resonant images of a civilisation that aspires to be global? These kinds of questions were the starting point for a project that formed in the mind of William A Ewing, who had been a museum director, curator of international exhibitions and writer about photography for nearly 40 years. Every epoch and generation had sought to define itself, Ewing believed, but how would you go about defining our own dizzying times? The exhibition that represents his tentative conclusions will open at the National Museum in Seoul, South Korea, later this year. It will then tour the globe – Beijing, Melbourne and Montreal are its first stops – for what Ewing hopes will be a decade-long journey. The exhibition consists of the work of 140 of the world’s most celebrated photographers – from Edward Burtynsky to Cindy Sherman – each of whom is represented by the images that best seemed to answer the questions above. Ewing calls his ambitious project Civilisation in the knowledge of all the ironies and caveats that word excites. In his introduction to the book of the exhibition, he notes that even the International Society for the Comparative Study of Civilisations has, in many years of meetings and research, never actually come to an agreement on what “civilisation” means. He takes greater comfort in Kenneth Clark’s formulation for his original BBC series of the same name: “What is civilisation? I do not know. But I think I can recognise it when I see it… If I had to say what is telling the truth about a society, a speech by a minister of housing or the actual buildings put up in his time, I should believe the buildings.” Ewing’s photographers give us some of those buildings; the competing hubris of the city states in the Gulf with their soaring towers; the horizontal blandness of the hangars that service the internet economy; the teeming aerial views of shanty towns and the neat geometries of out-of-scale transport hubs and city planning. The civilisation that emerges from these depictions is resolutely urban, constantly on the move and rarely depicted at a human scale. One of the precedents that Ewing had in mind when he embarked on his project was Edward Steichen’s famous 1950s exhibition The Family of Man, which presented photography as the world’s first “universal language” and toured the globe promoting a message of shared humanity. “There is only one man in the world and his name is All Men. There is only one woman in the world and her name is All Women. There is only one child in the world and the child’s name is All Children,” the exhibition argued, hopefully. Including the work of 500 photographers from 68 countries, the show was seen by 9 million people. Some critics applauded its “imagine all the people” sentiment; others saw it as a cold war propaganda vehicle for US sentimentalism. Ewing’s previous large-scale project was an examination of the work of Steichen, who shaped the photography collection at New York’s Museum of Modern Art. He does not view his own exhibition as having the polemical intent of the 1950s show. “I don’t imagine it will make a difference on a large scale, in the way that The Family of Man aimed to do,” he told me from his home in Switzerland. “But then I do know from my own life and that of others that just seeing a picture in a book can change the way you think about things, if the picture is powerful enough.” Ewing is an anthropologist at heart. He sees photography as a cultural object, one that springs from a shared necessity of looking. “We have a cult of individuality and photographers in particular rarely like to think of themselves as part of a wider movement or a group. A photographer who is working taking pictures of prisons or schools hates to hear that someone else is also taking pictures of prisons or schools… ” Ewing is more interested in what that cumulative interest might reveal about us. The photographs he has chosen expose many of these shared obsessions, the ways that our lenses choose to dwell on what seems most particular or troubling about our globalising world. I point out to him that in contrast to The Family of Man, where many of the pictures concentrated on the struggles of the individual as part of a family and a community, the pictures here tend to dwell on people either as an unindividuated mass – kneeling at daily prayer in a vast mosque, crushed together on the daily commute or packed like slaves on a refugee boat – or “alone together” logged on to technology, isolated in their living rooms. Almost none of the pictures depict couples. Ewing suggests we are unnerved and preoccupied by population growth – 7.6 billion people and counting – and that our civilisation is subconsciously engaged with mitigating its effects. “It is one of the reasons we focus so much on celebrity,” he says. “We have a need to concentrate on the individual.” Looking at the photographs, it seems emblematic of our times how people in cities are drawn to events such as marathons, where the desire to be part of a group is in tension with our need to be thought of in the singular. I wonder, having spent some years poring over these pictures, cajoling and persuading photographers to include certain things, what Ewing came to see as their prevailing mood. To me, I suggest, the theme seems to emerge that we are creating a world in which we are anxious about being swept up in forces beyond our control. He suggests a couple of alternatives. “If there is a word I would use to describe the mood it is probably ‘desperate’,” he says. “Things like Trump and Brexit seem to be symptoms of that. But then also a great deal of comedy. The usual human comedy. Like the picture Wild River, Florida in which people float along a channel which is anything but wild.” The work, the pictures and some of the ironies they depict tend to be an antidote to any overarching gloom. “One photographer said to me, ‘I get up every morning an optimist and go to bed a pessimist,’” Ewing says. “I feel the opposite.” He cites the work of Yuval Noah Harari as a touchstone for his approach, the importance of synthesising and making broad-brush sense of where we are, however complex the challenge. And also the work of the Future of Humanity Institute at Oxford University, which tries to measure the relative importance of the existential threats that face us. The photographs insistently depict both the mechanisms and the infrastructure of a globalised world, one increasingly directed by technology. “It’s clear that now has its own momentum,” Ewing suggests. He points to the fact that a virtual city – nearly 2 million people – is travelling in the air at any one time, and to the idea of the Olympics, “which filters to every village in the world”. He adds: “The trend cannot be stopped. And the global systems that support our civilisation are literally incredible.” Some of the pictures dwell on the more prosaic aspects of that. A fibre-optic cable emerging in New Jersey having carried all the world’s knowledge under land and sea; some – a factory producing artificial hands – are more startling. The real truth of our civilisation, Ewing suggests, “is that we are surrounded by amazing objects and tools that individually we would not have the first idea how to make. I think part of what I was trying to do is to remind people of exactly what they are indebted to.” • Civilisation: The Way We Live Now by William A Ewing and Holly Roussell is published on 16 October (Thames and Hudson, £39.95). To order a copy for £34.36 go to guardianbookshop.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99