The US government has announced criminal charges against seven Russian intelligence officers. The announcement from the justice department’s national security division on Thursday comes after Dutch officials said they had disrupted a Russian cyberattack on the global chemical weapons watchdog. Four of the officers were charged with targeting the watchdog. All seven of the officers were indicted on cyber-hacking charges linked to the leaking of Olympic athletes drug test data, in an alleged attempt to undermine efforts to tackle Russian doping. Russia’s GRU military intelligence was blamed for the failed operation, which allegedly targeted the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and was thwarted by Dutch military intelligence with the help of the UK. The international organization was investigating the use of chemical weapons in Syria and the poisoning of former GRU officer Sergei Skripal and his daughter, Yulia, in Salisbury in March. Officials said the Russians had also made unsuccessful attempts to carry out a remote attack on the Porton Down chemical weapons facility in April and on the UK foreign office in March. According to US officials, the Russians also targeted a nuclear power company based in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, that supplied nuclear fuel to Ukraine. A grand jury in the western district of Pennsylvania has indicted seven defendants, all officers in the Russian Main Intelligence Directorate (GRU), a military intelligence agency of the general staff of the armed forces of the Russian Federation, for computer hacking, wire fraud, aggravated identity theft, and money laundering. “It is evident from the allegations in today’s indictment that the defendants believed that they could use their perceived anonymity to act with impunity,” John Demers, the US assistant attorney general for national security, said at a press conference announcing the charges. “In their own countries and on territories of other sovereign nations, to undermine international institutions and to distract from their government’s own wrongdoing.” “They were wrong. Working together with our partners in nations that share our values, we can expose the truth for the world to see.” US officials said the Russian efforts also targeted athletes and anti-doping agencies as retaliation of Russia’s state-sponsored athlete doping program, which saw Russia banned from the 2018 winter Olympics. Russian agents attempted to breach the personal information of approximately 250 athletes from 30 countries who supported the ban on Russian athletes or condemned the country’s doping program, officials said, as well as the systems of US and international anti-doping agencies, deeming it “a lengthy and wide-ranging conspiracy to hack into private computes and networks around the world”. The indictment says the hacking was often conducted remotely. If that unsuccessful, the hackers would conduct “on-site” or “close access” hacking operations with trained GRU members traveling with sophisticated equipment to target their victims through wifi networks. “State-sponsored hacking and disinformation campaigns pose serious threats to our security and to our open society, but the Department of Justice is defending against them,” the attorney general, Jeff Sessions, said in a statement. “We are determined to achieve justice in these cases and we will continue to protect the American people from hackers and disinformation.”