The way that Mauricio Pochettino tells it, Lionel Messi was about to become his teammate and then, who knows how the future might have turned out? It was the summer of 2005, Pochettino was a senior player at Espanyol – he would become the club’s manager in 2009 – and Messi had problems at Barcelona. “I remember that summer, he was so close to moving to Espanyol,” Pochettino said. “If he did, maybe he could have been the biggest star in Espanyol. We should be the Barcelona! He would have been my teammate and maybe I would still be in Espanyol managing him.” The doors, of course, slid in a different way, although it should be noted that Messi’s proposed move to Espanyol was merely a season-long loan; Barcelona knew what they had in the boy wonder who turned 18 that summer and was contracted to 2010. Messi duly became everything they dreamed of and more while Pochettino has progressed his managerial career to Tottenham. On Wednesday night they will be central figures in the Champions League tie between the clubs at Wembley. Back in the summer of 2005, Messi was entangled in red tape and it threatened to delay his take‑off at Barcelona. An Argentinian passport holder, he was classified as a foreign player and the club already had three of them – the maximum allowed – in Rafa Márquez, Ronaldinho and Samuel Eto’o. Messi had played in seven La Liga matches for Barcelona in 2004‑05, all as a substitute, including his professional debut in October 2004 at Espanyol, when he came on as an 82nd-minute substitute. Pochettino was in opposition that day at centre-half. But Messi’s status would be called into question. Barcelona argued that he was an “assimilated player”, having joined from Newell’s Old Boys in February 2001 as a 13‑year‑old, but the Spanish Football Federation was not convinced. Barcelona decided to stand him down until the legalese was resolved and that was when the idea of loaning him was discussed. Espanyol believed they were at the front of the aggressive queue for his signature, with the presence of Pablo Zabaleta in their squad a pull. Messi was close friends with Zabaleta: they played together at the Under-20 World Cup in 2005, which Argentina won. Messi was determined to play regularly in 2005-06 to fire his chances of inclusion in Argentina’s World Cup squad at the end of the season. The interest in him was also particularly strong from Juventus and Internazionale. Then, everything changed. “I’d started to hear about Messi when I was an Espanyol player – this small guy playing in the Barcelona academy, who had arrived from Argentina when he was 13,” Pochettino said. “And then I heard he was very close to signing for Espanyol. But because he was so fantastic in the Joan Gamper against Juventus and Fabio Capello praised him afterwards in the press conference, Barcelona changed their minds. They kept Messi at Barcelona.” The Joan Gamper Trophy is Barcelona’s annual showpiece at the Camp Nou on the eve of the season and, on 24 August 2005, the manager Frank Rijkaard named Messi in his starting XI. Capello’s Juventus had players of the calibre of Fabio Cannavaro, Giorgio Chiellini and Patrick Vieira but Messi was irresistible. A star was born and that star would get a Spanish passport five weeks later. Capello’s post-match assessment bears retelling. “I’ve never seen a player with so much quality at that age and with such personality, wearing such an important shirt,” Capello said. “He can do what he likes with the ball. I am pleased that a boy so young does something so beautiful for football.” I am not going to try to find a solution against Messi; I think that’s impossible. It’s only to enjoy it. More than worrying you, it needs to excite you. Pochettino, who is Messi’s senior by 15 years, also started his journey at Newell’s, although he did not hear about his compatriot’s exploits in the Rosario club’s junior teams up to under-13 level. By then, Pochettino had begun his first playing spell at Espanyol. And nor would Messi’s senior debut against Espanyol register with Pochettino. “You say to me: ‘You played in Messi’s debut’ … no, I don’t remember it,” Pochettino said. “I was at centre-back and he played on the side. We didn’t face each other. “When Messi made his debut, it was like another youngster that had arrived to the Barcelona team from the academy – like it was Xavi or Iniesta or Iván de la Peña. Actually, no. When De la Peña started to play for Barcelona [in 1995], there was an explosion of excitement. I always remember Ronaldo saying he was the best player that he saw in his life and he played with.” Pochettino will have a simple message for his Tottenham players on Wednesday; he wants them to enjoy the experience of facing Messi so that they might remember it – certainly more than he did. “I am not going to try to find a solution against Messi; I think that’s impossible,” Pochettino said. “It’s only to enjoy it. More than worrying you, it needs to excite you. “I played against Maradona and Ronaldo and, for your ego, it’s a thing that you are going to tell your kids and grandkids. So enjoy it, stay close and try to play in the opposite half; push Leo to play far from your goal. Because if not, it’s terrible.”