The barbarians are at the gates. The lunatics are on the grass. Ten kilo bags of mixed gravel aggregate are two‑for‑one at your local Bumcrack Warrior Warehouse. And most alarming of all, starting with Wednesday’s rain‑ravaged first one‑day international in Dambulla, the cricket is now on commercial radio. When the news broke in April that TalkSport had outbid the BBC to take the radio rights for England’s tour of Sri Lanka the response was mixed. Reactions tended to veer between mild irritation at the loss, for a few months, of a much‑loved programme; to wistful, sun-bleached nostalgia for a world shadowed with decay (cricket’s chief default setting to any news whatsoever, from signs of the impending apocalypse to news that the tea van by the pavilion has run out of Double Deckers). Mixed in with this was a degree of snobbery, concern about other voices, a different kind of tempo intruding into what has always felt like a much‑cherished private garden square. And yet, somehow, the world continues to turn. TalkSport’s opening stint at the first one-day international in Sri Lanka was all the things we were told it would not be: crisp, clear, fun and well put together; not to mention almost entirely free of the sound of men talking about drills that give you all the freedom of cordless with the power of corded at a price you would not believe. It was classical stuff in many ways. Twenty overs into the day the skies opened and it started to chuck it down, leaving the TalkSport team to fill and muse and chatter pleasantly enough over updates on the size of the puddles on the covers. English cricket has agonised over the shrinking of its “base” over the past few years. This is at least something new. On the Alan Brazil Sports Breakfast – a programme that is essentially an extended afternoon lunch discussion interspersed with the great Alan demonstrating the full breadth of his research-led analysis by saying things like “let’s have a look at their next three fixtures” – it was intriguing to hear a minor ODI series being treated with the same hushed reverence usually reserved for José Mourinho saying something, or a want-away ace being linked with a stunning swoop. “And now we cross over for team news from Dambulla!” Alan declared at one point, prelude to a surprisingly urgent discussion of the significance of Liam Dawson’s selection as a third spinner. Er. Well. Let’s have a look, shall we, at Liam Dawson’s next three fixtures. And so we were off. The opening voice of the TalkSport cricket era was Mark Nicholas, a deeply reassuring presence. Nicholas may resemble the kind of roguishly handsome provincial double-glazing magnate who your wife is always a little too pleased to see at the country club mixed-doubles summer fundraiser but he is a an excellent broadcaster and a proper cricket man, in a sport where that is a good rather than a bad thing. After a brief dusting of the Nicholas sugar we were handed over to Neil Manthorp and Darren Gough for the first live stint. Manthorp was a surprise choice who instantly made all sorts of sense, a skilled commentator with a journalistic eye for detail. Gough is a good broadcaster and a fun, spiky presence, but he was perhaps a little too eager to fill all the available air on the first morning. His best bit came as Manthorp handed over to Nicholas. “A word from Darren Gough?” [Pause] “Well, an interesting start …” The pause was great. The pause felt like cricket commentary. Even in the middle of London and tooled up with an expensive DAB radio it needed an app just to find the station Two obvious problems early on were the small number of adverts, a point of editorial principle you suspect after all the early sniping about gravel and van hire. Second, and perhaps related, was the inaccessibility of TalkSport 2 itself. Even in the middle of London and tooled up with an expensive DAB radio it was necessary to download an app just to find it. At which point you do wonder about the likely size of TalkSport’s audience. Not least when plenty will be drawn to the BBC’s competing offer, The Cricket Social, a Test Match Special-without-the-cricket format, which also kicked off on Wednesday morning. No doubt the most devoted fans will continue to miss TMS, which is, like so many parts of the cricketing infrastructure, an object of genuine, deeply felt affection. It takes time to generate the hugely engrossing level of familiarity TMS has with its presenters and its audience. For TalkSport Mark Butcher dished up his usual mix of insight and waspish wit. Mahela Jayawardene was an excellent addition as the day wore on, with a voice as elegantly soothing as his batting, a man who as a player always seemed to be gliding though more fragrant air. New voices, new energy, new platforms: cricket can always do with more of this. Not everyone wants to see their much-loved aunt taking up with a vigorous old rogue who drops his aitches and takes her out dancing the twist to all hours. But who knows, in the end it might just do her some good.