In May 2013, Matt Prior was named the England Men’s Cricketer of the Year. It was hard to think of a more impressive, reliable cricketer. Prior was selfless, resourceful, tough and brilliant. At 31, he was in his prime. Fourteen months later he played his last professional game. His achilles was a mess and his confidence was shot. Prior’s dramatic decline was a reminder that almost nothing should be taken for granted in sport, and that outstanding careers can fall off a cliff without rhyme or reason. Jonny Bairstow is nowhere near the precipice yet, but his international career has taken a troubling turn since he broke his finger against India in August. His ankle injury, which he sustained playing football and which is likely to rule him out of the first Test in Sri Lanka, is the latest in a turn of events that have made him unexpectedly vulnerable. He is still one of England’s best players in both formats, but life moves pretty fast in international cricket and Bairstow, who was indispensable a few months ago, is a bad series away from being under serious scrutiny. It’s been a strange year. Bairstow was the first batsman in the world to reach 1,000 ODI runs, and was England’s best player across all formats in the first half of 2018. England’s Test team had a million problems but Bairstow wasn’t one. Jos Buttler has since become an established Test player, as well as vice-captain and the darling of the media, while Bairstow has picked up some untimely injuries. He has also been accused of selfishness by many, of sulking by Michael Vaughan and of only being good enough to bat No7 in Tests by Geoff Boycott. And they’re two of his biggest supporters. Bairstow probably feels cricket has started biting him on the arse for no reason. The broken finger and ankle injury; the absurd fuss over his greeting to Cameron Bancroft last winter; the constant suggestions he should give up the gloves. It’s enough to give a man a complex, and it seems to have sent Bairstow’s natural stubbornness into overdrive. It’s easy to say from afar that he has a chip on his shoulder, but we’ve all sulked at work over far less than this. Bairstow is arguably a victim of his own excellence. The call for him to give up wicketkeeping stems not from the poverty of his glovework but the quality of his batting. And the spectacular success he had in one-day cricket by making room to open up the off side led to him doing the same in Tests. It hasn’t worked – he was bowled a lot in the summer and the resulting impact on his confidence probably affected his one-day batting in Sri Lanka. In all formats Bairstow had made just two fifties and no centuries in his last 20 innings for England. If he still feels important, he is not irreplaceable. Bairstow and Jason Roy cannot afford a bad run in the one-day team, with Alex Hales waiting, while Buttler gives England a seamless wicketkeeping alternative in the Test team. With the emergence of Buttler, the re-emergence of Moeen and Joe Root’s final answer over where he wants to bat, it is getting very congested in England’s middle order. In Tests, Bairstow’s form has been mildly frustrating for some time. He never looks out of form, and his batting is so dominant and impressive that it can feel like he scores more runs than is actually the case. The same is true of Stokes, Moeen and probably Buttler. All have Test averages in the thirties; all average less than Gary Ballance, who had the reverse problem of seeming to score fewer runs because of his uglier style. Bairstow’s big breakthrough seemed to be 2016, when he played a variety of brilliant innings, both attacking and defensive, and averaged 59. Since then his Test average is 31, and last summer that dropped to 23. It’s hard to recall the last time an England batsman got out as often playing big shots so early in an innings. While Buttler, Moeen and especially Stokes spent the summer grinding out runs, Bairstow seemed to want to hit every ball for four. There has probably been fault on both sides. Bairstow has, through accident rather than design, been made to feel undervalued. It’s a complicated case in which it’s not easy to apportion criticism, never mind blame. It feels like one of those relationships in which both parties realise things have become awkward but neither knows why or when it started. And such awkwardness can have an unpleasant habit of perpetuating itself. Bairstow could do with a few quiet months – no injuries, no loose dismissals, no more talk about changing his role. The Spin would give him a simple choice – play as a specialist batsman at No5 or as a keeper-batsman at No7 – and ink that in for the winter. A settled role and a couple of centuries would soon restore equilibrium to Bairstow’s career. But if Sri Lanka prepare raging turners, as expected, at least one and maybe a few England batsmen will have a minor shocker. In the last three years, Usman Khawaja, Hashim Amla, Aidan Markram, Dean Elgar, Quinton de Kock and Joe Burns have all averaged less than 15 in a Test series in Sri Lanka. It would be a bad time for Bairstow to join the list. All this is probably premature, and we hope this article is dug up by trolls when Bairstow belts centuries to win both the World Cup and the Ashes next summer. The England cricket team is a much better concept with him in it. But something doesn’t feel right, and it’s hard to get a handle on how it has come to this. • This is an extract taken from The Spin, the Guardian’s weekly cricket email. To subscribe, just visit this page and follow the instructions.