Jos Buttler’s unqualified success in Test cricket during the summer, despite a light back catalogue in the first-class game, has another member of the England one-day team eyeing a similar transition. Jason Roy’s limited-overs prowess has seen his exposure to the red ball reduced of late, and last summer he played only two County Championship matches at the back end of Surrey’s title-winning campaign. But while his 128 against Essex in the season finale came after the Test squad for Sri Lanka were selected, Roy’s name is still understood to have featured heavily in the discussion. Joe Root, captain though not a selector, is believed to have been very much in favour. What likely tipped the balance was a concern about Roy versus the left-arm orthodox spin expected to be sent down by Rangana Herath and instead he will join the England Lions in the United Arab Emirates next month to work with Graham Thorpe, the batting coach, and play a four-day match against Pakistan A. “It is a good opportunity for me to showcase some skills there,” said Roy, who averages 38 from 80 first-class matches, with nine centuries. “There is a six-day training camp before the game so I can do some work with Graham Thorpe. I have still got a huge love for the [first-class] game. It is a very pure form and I enjoy going out there with no ambitions at going at eight runs an over. It is quite nice just to stand there, watch the ball and bat.” Roy’s focus is on the 50-over format, with he and his teammates hoping the rain does not return for Saturday’s one-day international against Sri Lanka after only 15 overs were bowled during the series opener in Dambulla on Wednesday. Game two is at the same ground, but the morning start may allow more play (afternoon is when storms tend to build up) and there is also a reserve day, one that will finish off the match rather than see a full restart. Unless the second pitch is markedly different, both sides are likely to be unchanged. It was during the hour of cricket on Wednesday that Roy and his opening partner, Jonny Bairstow, passed a landmark, having become the first England pair to pass 1,000 ODI runs together in a calendar year – and from only 18 innings. Dambulla, 5.30am BST Saturday 13 October Sri Lanka (possible): U Tharanga, N Dickwella (wk), K Perera, D Chandimal (c), D de Silva, D Shanaka, T Perera, A Dananjaya, L Sandakan, N Pradeep, L Malinga. England (possible): J Roy, J Bairstow, J Root, E Morgan (c), J Buttler (wkt), B Stokes, M Ali, C Woakes, A Rashid, O Stone, M Wood. Umpires: P Reiffel (Aus), R Martinesz (SL) Third umpire: A Dar (Pak) Match referee: R Richardson (WI) “That’s a beautiful stat and something to keep working on. It is all good foundations leading into next year’s World Cup,” said Roy, whose 66 one-day games have produced six centuries. “We are free-flowing batsmen who express ourselves and look to take it to the bowlers. He has got different scoring areas to me, so the bowlers have to bowl different deliveries.” Roy has unfinished business from that match. He looked in good order against the seamers, Lasith Malinga and Nuwan Pradeep, and crunched four typically clean fours before his fourth ball from the mystery spinner, Akila Dananjaya, saw him misjudge the length and spoon the simplest of catches to mid-off. As was the case with India when they played England in the summer, it was mildly curious Sri Lanka did not open with spin. Though Roy is strong against off-breaks, the left-armers have had early success against him and the home side have one (albeit a wrist-spinner) in Lakshan Sandakan. Roy sees it differently, of course, even if his own net routine suggests he is aware that despite an impressive average of 46 in Asia, a slight chink in his armour remains. “I’m not really surprised they didn’t [open with spin],” he said. “Especially in the powerplay, it is quite a risky thing. It is something we have been working on in the nets. The first thing I face is spin, so I am ready for whatever they throw at me. It’s not anything new. Other teams have tried to do that in the past, it’s the way they game is.” As regards his goals for the series, Roy said: “Just batting as long as possible and learning different techniques. Before, in the subcontinent, I have got 70, 80 and 90 and got out, so getting some scores will put me in good stead for the next few years.” Could it result in a Test call down the line, too? With Buttler England’s leading batsman against Pakistan and India, it is certainly not out of the question.