President Donald Trump condemned protesters who have turned out in droves to oppose the nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the supreme court, calling them “elevator screamers” funded by professional interest groups. The thousands of protesters descending on the Capitol have included sexual assault survivors pleading with senators by highlighting their own past traumas, but Trump dismissed them on Friday as insincere. “The very rude elevator screamers are paid professionals only looking to make Senators look bad. Don’t fall for it!” he said on Twitter. “Also, look at all of the professionally made identical signs. Paid for by Soros and others. These are not signs made in the basement from love!” Trump wrote, adding the hashtag #Troublemakers. Some critics saw antisemitic overtones in Trump’s tweet referencing George Soros, a billionaire liberal activist who is Jewish. Mehdi Hasan, a columnist for the Intercept, tweeted that Trump’s coded message was “Paid for by the Jews!” More than 300 protesters, including comedian Amy Schumer, were arrested on Thursday opposing Kavanaugh, who has been accused by Dr Christine Blasey Ford of sexually assaulting her when they were both teenagers. He denies the allegations. Ana Maria Archila, the woman who approached Flake in the elevator, responds to Trump’s tweet. "No one can pay for someone's lived experiences." pic.twitter.com/d7CkpoP2yO A crucial Senate vote to move forward with the nomination is expected on Friday, before a final vote as soon as Saturday. Republican senator Chuck Grassley, chairman of the Senate judiciary committee urged his colleagues to say no to “mob rule” and vote to move Kavanaugh’s Supreme Court nomination forward. “This should have been a respectable and dignified confirmation process,” he said. The Republican senator Orrin Hatch has also lashed back at the protesters. He was recorded on Thursday telling a group of mostly female protesters to “grow up” as they confronted him boarding an elevator. The Utah senator waved off the group of protesters, one of whom shouted, “Don’t you wave your hand at me.” Hatch snapped back, “When you grow up, I’ll be glad to.” After boarding the elevator, he waved repeatedly before the door closed and shut out the protesters. Senator Jeff Flake of Arizona had a different reaction after being confronted at an elevator last week by two women who identified themselves as sexual assault survivors. The Republican had announced he would vote to confirm Kavanaugh, but ended up insisting on an FBI investigation before he would back the nomination.