Always do something different. Richard Wagner’s famous advice to his admirers should be the motto of Wexford Festival Opera. Different is what Wexford does, year after year – sometimes in the face of daunting financial, artistic and political challenges. It has made the festival what it is: an improbable but unique place of annual autumnal pilgrimage in the opera world as well as one of the prime cultural achievements of modern Ireland. This year’s festival, which ends on 4 November, has been hewn from the same operatic motherlode as its 66 predecessors. Wexford’s speciality is the unknown and neglected operatic repertoire. Its calling cards are the works – sometimes written by household names – that have fallen into neglect. This year’s edition offers new productions of Franco Leoni’s L’Oracolo, Umberto Giordano’s Mala Vita, and Saverio Mercadante’s Il Bravo, along with the European premiere of William Bolcom’s Dinner at Eight, all served up at the excellent National Opera House in which the festival has been based for the past decade. Four new productions is a huge undertaking. In an era when opera companies and audiences in, for instance London, seem determined to play it safe with repeats and revivals, there is something heroic about Wexford’s determination to live more dangerously. Happily, fortune favours the brave. The festival’s audiences roughly comprise one third international visitors (mostly from the UK), one third from the Dublin area, and one third local people. Given that there is much less opera of any kind in Ireland – certainly in comparison with London – it is a striking thought that Wexford’s Irish audiences acquire a much wider education in the art form than most British operagoers. Its variety is surely one reason why they keep coming back for more. It is a smart idea to make a double bill out of Leoni’s L’Oracolo and Giordano’s La Mala Vita. Other than being by Italians of the verismo era and having the tragic endings that this tends to entail, the two works have little in common. The Leoni is set in San Francisco, the Giordano in Naples. Musically, Leoni’s is mostly feeble, while Giordano’s is often the real deal, especially when the Spanish tenor Sergio Escobar lets rip. But the energy level rarely falters in either. Partly that’s because Francesco Cilluffo, who conducted Mascagni’s equally rare Isabeau for Opera Holland Park this summer, grips these scores with such commitment. But Cordelia Chisholm’s revolving tenament set is the real star. Its doorways, windows and shop fronts double as Chinatown and the Neapolitan slums, and – as in Hitchcock’s Rear Window – there is always plenty going on behind the curtains. Street scenes, private passions, dark crimes and stock operatic cliches come at the audience from all sides. Production values at Wexford are always high, and this pays terrific dividends in Bolcom’s stylish comedy Dinner at Eight, set in Depression-era New York and based on a George S Kaufman and Edna Ferber Broadway play of 1932. Here too, sets and costumes are full of style and conviction. And operas about dinner parties – Bolcom is following Hindemith and Lennox Berkeley along this seam – have the built-in advantage that they invariably involve a rich mix of contrasted characters, domestic dramas, farcical possibilities and ensemble opportunities. It helps greatly that in the pit is David Agler, Wexford’s artistic director since 2005 (and whose last season will be in 2019), who also conducted the world premiere of Bolcom’s new work for Minnesota Opera last year. It helps too that the wealthy hostess Millicent Jordan is played by the creator of the role, soprano Mary Dunleavy, who brings her to life with vocal and stage daring. Bolcom’s music, efficient and light in touch, is matched by a high-quality libretto by Mark Campbell in which every word is clear. Clarity is not a word that comes to mind when confronted with Mercadante’s Il Bravo. This is the sixth of the prolific Mercadante’s works to be staged at Wexford. The Italian composer’s 1839 setting of what was originally a novel by James Fenimore Cooper has a plot about Venetian treachery and assassination that is hard to follow and harder still to believe. There is fine music, especially in ensembles, in which Rubens Pelizzari in the title role excels, and Mercadante was not alone in writing operas on such daft themes. But it is his fate to have written the kind of operas that Verdi, 18 years his junior, wrote far better, far more incisively, and took in wholly new directions. Il Bravo’s case wasn’t helped by a staging by Renaud Doucet and André Barbe that weighed it down with too many visual pretensions. In the end, however, Wexford audiences don’t seem to mind too much. And there is logic in that approach. Operas that have languished in obscurity for decades, even centuries, have invariably done so for a reason. Very few are likely to come up from out of the vaults of dusty neglect to be revealed as brilliant and gleaming masterpieces. But almost without exception, these works are worth hearing, worth seeing, worth making an effort for and worth thinking about. Sometimes they are revelations. And that is what makes the Wexford festival not just consistently different – but consistently fascinating. Wexford Festival Opera continues until 4 November.