I am affronted on behalf of the World Anti-Doping Agency president Craig Reedie to learn that he was pointedly not invited to this week’s White House event entitled “Advancing International Commitment to Clean Sports: Reforming the World Anti-Doping Agency”. In many ways the White House should be a place of camaraderie for Sir Craig. He certainly wouldn’t have been the only guy in the place who thinks he has been treated very unfairly over matters relating to Russian urine. “I am used to athletes complaining,” sniffed Reedie of the outrage over last month’s Wada decision to reinstate Russia to international competition. “But my question to them is what, in practice, is the alternative?” Not reinstating Russia to international competition? Or is that too fiendishly simple? So it seemed. Having masterminded the biggest doping scandal of the 21st century, Russia was formally readmitted to the fold in a highly IOC-friendly decision, despite having not complied with two of the crucial requirements of the 2016 McLaren investigation which uncovered the country’s vast state-sponsored doping programme. One of which requirements was for Russia to even acknowledge that they had a state-sponsored doping programme. To anyone playing with a full set of B-samples, it was quite clear that Wada was complying with Russia, as opposed to the other way round. I don’t want to be too harsh on Reedie’s claim that Wada was doing this because it was the only way it could hope to be given access to 2,800 samples in a Moscow lab that it needs for further investigations. So I will simply mention that it is among the wettest, most misguided and most defeatist things I have ever heard, even in sports administration. As for Reedie, his line on this stuff is that all the athletes and all the anti-doping groups critical of the decision simply don’t understand it. “Athletes should also know that efforts are being made to produce a really good and robust and monitored doping process in Russia,” he explained hotly last month, “and that’s likely to deliver clean sport.” Mmm. That “likely” is doing more heavy lifting than the 100 Russian weightlifters whose samples the Russian ministry of sport fiddled. Still, in a world where so few people are willing to believe the Russian state’s good faith on a variety of matters, it’s good to see Craig daring to be different. When he does finally retire from Wada, I hope he would consider running trips to Salisbury cathedral for spire-curious Russian bodybuilders. It comes to something when national anti-doping agencies are attempting renegade crisis management behind Wada's back That said, Reedie’s reliance on casting his opponents as clueless amateurs was not helped by his predecessor in the Wada chair, David Howman, describing it thus: “Wada has gone from being an organisation that cared about clean athletes to one that cares about international federations that have not been able to stage events in Russia: it’s money over principle.” This level of disillusionment was shared by Beckie Scott, the former cross‑country skiing champion who resigned as chair of Wada’s athlete committee over the decision to readmit Russia, and later claimed that some of the body’s most senior officials attempted to “bully” her over this opposition. This, declared Scott, was “indicative of a general attitude of dismissal and belittling of the athlete voice.” Come, come Beckie – not all athletes. I always think of Sir Craig as a tenacious sportsman – he could still win gold in the Hanging On For The Retirement Carriage Clock category. Even so, I wonder if Sir Craig regards the title of the White House event as somewhat ominous. It has already been quite a busy week for him. By Monday, he had already rejected one call for his resignation, in this case from the Movement for Credible Cycling. The MPCC had been up in arms over Wada’s handling of Chris Froome’s asthma drug case and the decision not to add tramadol to the banned substances list. Yet the MPCC were dismissed by Reedie as having “over-simplified” the case with “an astonishing lack of understanding”. Yet again, the astonishment is all Craig’s. According to Reedie, Wada is “stronger and more effective than it has ever been” – a diagnosis that suggests it has spent the two decades since its inception flatlining. Others very high up in the field of anti-doping simply do not share his view, suggesting that either a) he is the last and only true expert or b) this is just bollocks. As the US Anti-Doping Agency chief recently put it: “Confidence in Wada has never been lower.” It does come to something when national anti-doping agencies are staging renegade attempts at crisis management behind the international body’s back. The leaders of 17 anti‑doping agencies, including the UK, have recently held an emergency summit in Paris which resolved to “strive to transform Wada and ensure that it makes decisions in the interests of clean sport”. Well quite. I know Reedie hates anything he can conveniently regard as “simplification”, but the facts are these: huge numbers of sports are now facing critical levels of audience disbelief, and trends suggest the others will go the same way. Athletics in particular has been a punchline for most tenuously informed adults for years; Wada’s decision to change its own criteria for Russian readmittance simply hastens the day when even children think the same. Reedie currently veers between insisting athletes are at the heart of every decision he takes, to belittling athletes and any other experts who take a stand against Wada’s decisions as ignorant or stupid. So on he goes, with the obvious irony being that no one is more in need of performance enhancing than Wada itself.