This time the football boot was on the other foot. Marcelo says that some of the criticism aimed at Real Madrid’s players is unfair and that the media is trying to “damage” the team – and suggested that it might be motivated by jealousy from those who don’t know how to play the game. The full-back spoke to the media after Madrid defeated Viktoria Plzen 2-1, his appearance in the Santiago Bernabéu becoming a 10-minute conversation, back and forth with radio journalists, which provoked righteous indignation from some in the media – although most of it was reasonable enough, and some of it was right. It was pointed but at times it was entertaining too, more revealing than the usual cliches. Informed that Madrid’s director of institutional relations, Emilio Butragueño, had confirmed that Julen Lopetegui would continue as coach, Marcelo responded: “[It’s] wonderful to hear that. From my point of view, we’re working well; it’s true that the results are not helping.” That prompted one journalist to note that from the outside things are seen rather differently and to ask how the dressing room responded to a run of five games without a win and eight hours without a goal, which is when it began. “It’s hard when you don’t win,” Marcelo said. “But all this stuff about crisis and eight hours and all that; we don’t talk about that. You lot talk about that. That doesn’t affect us at all. You try to damage the dressing room …” “Do you think?” one journalist asked. “Yes, very much so … journalists, all of them,” Marcelo replied. Asked why he thought that was, the Madrid full-back responded: “I don’t know; jealousy, maybe, I don’t know. Maybe because they don’t know how to play football, how should I know?” Among the group, a series of journalists admitted that they don’t play, until one said that he does. “You do? Great!” Marcelo shot back, grinning. Accused of showing a lack of respect, Marcelo said: “Why? You asked me why [I thought that] and I said I don’t know, maybe that it’s jealousy because you can’t play football, that’s all. You’ve criticised me lots of times. Have I said anything to you? I don’t know, I have no idea and I don’t really care, maybe it’s that. I’m not attacking anyone. Look how angry you are, and look how calm I am. Listen to me, lack of respect? I’m always here, showing my face, talking to you, looking you in the eye. Sometimes, some things seem unfair to me. But I always stand up to be counted. “It’s unfair to judge at this stage. Wait until the end of the season. how do I define it now? I don’t know. The results we want aren’t coming. I don’t think the team has a [mental] blocked. We go out to play, with pain, without it. It’s harder to win than we thought? Yes, but we’re always trying. Its not that we’re saying ‘it doesn’t matter’, not at all. I don’t think there’s anxiety. If you don’t score in the first ten minutes, it starts a little bit … but it’s not anxiety, it’s the desire to score. Maybe we have to have a little more patience. “The manager is doing a great job, I am not the person who signs or not, that’s nothing to do with me, but what I can say is that we’re on his side and the results will come. We’ll keep working to win. Real Madrid always come back.”