Anti-racist protesters have attempted to block the route of a planned march through central London by the Democratic Football Lads Alliance, leaving hundreds of the rightwing group’s supporters stuck in Pall Mall, as police formed a barrier between the crowds. The march, which began on Park Lane, soon descended into violence, with some of the DFLA supporters trying to push through police escorts and fighting with officers. One was seen seen threatening a policeman and screaming “I’ll kill you”, while several men had to be held back by their friends from joining in the fighting, according to a Press Association reporter. Scores of police on horseback and wearing riot gear tried to control the groups with vans attempting to block them in. Reports on social media claimed that black-clad anti-fascist protesters had blocked the DFLA march on Pall Mall. Other pictures and video appeared to show several hundred protesters already at the rally point on Whitehall. Blocking the route of the DFLASome DFLA got within 10 metres of us - pushed backThe police have stopped their march and are holding them on Pall Mall#stopDFLA pic.twitter.com/PrbFJfURMU Not many of the DFLA at their rally. pic.twitter.com/IBl4PulI4x Scores of officers and dozens of police vans later separated a group of counter-demonstrators shouting “Nazi scum off our streets” in Trafalgar Square. They traded insults with a splinter group from the DFLA march, with both sides provoking each other as riot police sought to keep them apart, bringing traffic to a standstill. A large section of the DFLA march eventually arrived on Whitehall, where a truck was used as a stage for speeches. The DFLA, a group formed of mainly middle-aged, white male football fans, had planned a mass march from Park Lane to Whitehall. The organisers had said on Facebook that they were protesting against ”returning jihadists”, “thousands of Awol migrants”, “rape gangs and groomers” and “veterans treated like traitors”. Counter-protesters organised by trade unions, Stand Up To Racism and Unite Against Fascism said the group’s stated aims were a mask for racism and Islamophobia and pledged to block their route. Some of those on the DFLA march were ambivalent about their fellow protesters. Peter Mantell, 53, from Crayford, who identified himself as a supporter of the former English Defence League leader Tommy Robinson, said: “I detest some of the people I’m walking with. A lot of them hate people because of the colour of their skin. I’m a lefty, but I believe we should have a voice against the people who want to hurt everyone and cause harm.” .Unite Against Fascism’s secretary, Weyman Bennett, said it was significant that anti-racist demonstrators had outnumbered their opponents. He estimated that the counter-protest had mustered about 2,000 people, compared with 1,500 on the DFLA march. On previous occasions, counter-protesters had been in the minority. In a message read out to counter-protesters at their own rally, the Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, and Diane Abbott, the shadow home secretary, who helped to organise the event, said: “Congratulations on today’s demonstration standing up against racism and far-right extremism. “We’re in solidarity with all those around the world standing up to oppose racism and to support the diversity of our communities. We’re proud to walk in the traditions of anti-racism campaigners and activists. Your fight is our fight.”