In an early episode of the second season of Big Mouth, Netflix’s wonderful, critically acclaimed animated series, Missy attempts to comfort Andrew after his tiny mustache is cruelly waxed off by his parents, who are uncomfortable with the fact that their son is developing secondary sex characteristics. “We need to love ourselves for who we are!” Missy reassures her friend. “I’m in an online community called ‘Girls Are Perfect and There’s Not a Thing Wrong With Any One of Them and Anyone Who Would Tell You Otherwise Is Actually Just Afraid of Your Power!’” “Is there anything like that, but for pubescent boys?” Andrew asks. “Oh ho ho yeah, it’s called, ‘society’ you privileged white, cis-hetero male!” Missy chortles, resolutely, though not unkindly, before leaving Andrew to grapple with whether or not Jews are actually considered white. This scene highlights what has become the most successful aspect of Big Mouth, a show where we see the perils of puberty play out in all their raunchy glory. The show might be filled with jokes about inopportune erections and obsessive masturbation habits, but its tender look at bourgeoning sexuality is less about changing bodies than about how we learn to navigate a world where there is no clear roadmap for healthy sexuality, and where many of the messages we receive about sex are confusing at best and toxic at worst. At first glance, it may seem like the current moment is the worst possible time for comedy about the perils of puberty. After all, our news docket for the past two years has been overwhelmed with stories of rampant sexual assault, rape and abuse, whether in politics, entertainment or religious institutions. And for the past week in particular, we’ve seen how cavalier attitudes towards abuse end up creating a culture where victim’s experiences are minimized and where male (or, at least, white male) behavior is often given a pass. It’s in this particularly fraught context that Big Mouth emerges on the small screen, offering a portrait of heterosexual male coming-of-age that is sharp, nuanced and, above all, steadfast in its refusal to reduce female characters into mere objects of male obsession. One of the reasons for this has to do with the fact that the series has so many wonderfully layered female characters who are presented as equal friends in the strange journey through puberty. Both Jessi and Missy, as well as this season’s newest character Gina, are funny, smart and shown to be struggling with their own unique challenges that come from having sexual feelings and changing bodies. But it’s not just the excellent female characters that make Big Mouth such a perfect show for the current moment. Rather, it’s that the show insists on demonstrating how the way that boys are socialized to be men is often incredibly destructive. Missy’s response to Andrew is humorous precisely because Andrew could very much benefit from some type of positive initiation into manhood, and, even though society very much caters to his experiences, the playbook he is being given is filled with mixed messages about what it means to be a man. As in season one, Andrew continues to have to navigate a relationship with his hormone monster, a hilariously devilish creature named Maurice who is constantly encouraging Andrew to think and do dirty, outrageous things, from thinking sexual thoughts about his friend’s mom and sister to masturbating about everything from his dad’s assistant to an especially plump tomato. This season, however, Andrew also inherits another mystical creature to guide his coming of age. The Shame Wizard is a cruel overlord who is constantly telling Andrew he is a terrible, perverted person. Rather than temper any of Andrew’s sexual feelings, the Shame Wizard reduces Andrew to his baser instincts, while poor Maurice is plied with various drugs or forced to sleep at the foot of Andrew’s bed. In one plot line, Andrew starts to date his classmate Lola, who is cruel, crude and oddly similar in personality to his own father. Though Andrew can’t stand Lola, he dates her for the opportunity to French kiss and, ahem, “rub fronts”. After he breaks up with her, Lola tries to enact her revenge by painting Andrew to be a sexual deviant. When Andrew arrives at school, he sees a protest group of young women chanting: “If you hump, you can’t dump” while carrying posters with Andrew’s face crossed out, as well as various sayings such as “Hump Trumps Dump” and “I’m not with him”. In an attempt to interview Andrew for his school news show, Matthew asks whether Andrew is a “harmless dweeb or disgusting sex monster”. Andrew’s actions clearly aren’t tantamount to criminal behavior, but one of the most daring aspects of Big Mouth is the way that it demonstrates that learning to be sexual is something that is relational. At one awkward family dinner, Nick’s mother and sister explain how it’s OK to like boobs, but that you can’t treat a woman as if she is only a pair of boobs. Later, in episode seven, we journey to “Guy Town” a bachelor apartment complex for single and newly divorced men, where Andrew gets a terrible pep talk from Jay’s dad, who is clearly a jerk, about the joys of being a pimp. “I live balls out and give zero fucks. That’s pimp!” he tells Andrew, giving him a white hat with jewels. Later, when Nick asks him for girl advice, Jay’s dad tells him that “Mean guys fuck, nice guys clean it up!” The boys clearly have misgivings about being mean to girls, but they are also desperate for some sort of guidance about what will help them to be men. In season two, Nick’s dad becomes the foil to toxic masculinity, consistently showing how the boys that there is no one way to be a man. At first, Nick and Andrew aren’t buying his idea that men can be sensitive, but, by the end of the episode they see how Jay’s tough guy persona is nothing more than a charade, and that being a man means being a protector, rather than a bully. If all this sounds a little too heartwarming and earnest, don’t worry. There are plenty of off-color sexual jokes and hilarious visual gags to keep Big Mouth from ever being exactly sweet (in one moment, Andrew’s puberty monster shows up with a giant banner that proclaims “Andrew has a boner” on it). But the series’ insistence that sexuality isn’t something to be afraid of resonates strongly at a time when it seems as though many adults could benefit from a crash course on human sexuality, as well as treating people with dignity and respect. In this way, Big Mouth’s insistence that young people can grapple with morality and kindness, even when trying to keep their unruly hormone monsters at bay, is as affecting as it is hopeful. Big Mouth returns to Netflix on 5 October