Back with a bang! Jodie Whittaker gives an electrifying performance, with David Tennant-like rapidity of speech, bristling energy and genuine warmth. (And silliness. The charity shop scene: fabulous.) But I also loved the down to earth setting, shot in beautifully muted colours. This is when Who works best, bringing the alien into the ordinary, with the Doctor to the rescue. Big thumbs up to Chris Chibnall for not over complicating the plot but sticking to characterization and the things that give a story heart. I am looking forward to seeing this new fab four travel the galaxy – and to Ryan staying on a bike for a whole minute. Enjoyed the first episode. Jodie Whitaker has made a good start as the Doctor and the new friends also seem pretty solid. I like that the tone of the episode was a little more breezy and humorous than the Capaldi era, hope this continues for the rest of the series. Also liked the Sheffield setting (although I’m biased given I live here). All in all, a good start, looking forward for the rest of the series. It’s one of my favourite seasons already! Jodie Whittaker was everything we could have hoped for, she delivered lines with character, energy and emotion, it was beautiful. I loved the new characters that were introduced and the plot of the episode itself was unpredictable and thrilling. I really loved the change in the theme tune, it sounds like classic who but still has a fresh feel to it. The music throughout the episode was also great and is something I’m definitely going to add to my playlists when it’s it’s released. I’m really looking forward to more from Chibnall and Whittaker, it’s going to be the highlight of every week for me! A good dark, eerie tone throughout most of the episode. I wasn’t sure about Whittaker’s take on the Doctor (and probably I still need to tune completely to her), but I enjoyed the scene where she built the new screwdriver, accompanied by uplifting music. What got me less was the villain. He did not bring anything new. I like the three assistants, they are already coming out of the page and will definitely bring different things to the adventure (possibly without looking super humans). This is promising. I was incredibly dubious of how the new incarnations would go, but I loved Jodie Whittaker and her entourage. As a nurse myself, I am over the moon with the idea of a woman nurse, police officer, and Doctor all in one show. I’m still watching the first episode live, so I don’t know how it ends yet, but I’m sold. I have always loved Doctor Who and identified with their resilience, reliance on science, and incredible sense of adventure, now I truly feel like I have “My Doctor”. A breath of fresh air, Jodie bounds across the screen with so much energy and life that you are instantly sold by her performance. The creepy and layered story line of the first episode has set a good tone for this new season from the start. Yas and Ryan both seem like they will be helpful and practical companions, although I fear Ryan will be used to explain plot points a lot because of his dyspraxia, though I do find them strong characters from the beginning. Really looking forward to the full season of adventures to come, I really like this doctor so far! That was the first Doctor Who episode I have completely enjoyed since the David Tennant era. I found my eyes welling up at least four times and I was wondering why. It wasn’t until the show was over and I had a moment to reflect as to the reason. “My” Doctor Who is back – intrepid, half-mad, inventive and kind. Oh, and one more thing. The Doctor is understandable again without two hours spent on Google checking out obscure references. The Doctor is safe for children again, even children like me with grey hair. Thank you Chris Chibnall and Jodie Whittaker! No one will be comparing this Doctor with previous Doctors. The 13th Doctor has shown herself to be a completely new character, compelling and exciting, refreshing with a dash of quirkiness and best of all, she’s hilarious. Maybe it’s the accent, maybe it’s the companions ... the first episode was definitely brand new in Doctor Who. We’ve never been on top of a crane before. We’ve never completely lost the Tardis before. And we’ve never seen this Alien (Tim Shaw – hilarious!) before. There’s a small buzz in the air with this Doctor, getting stuck into building her own bits and bobs. She does yap on but she seems to be acknowledging her companions as something worthwhile. Personally, I think she did Doctor Who justice. I loved The Doctor, I loved the team, I loved the idea of the series as Doctor Who and The Sliders. I didn’t love the plot of this one though. Especially the exceptionally low stakes. My seven-year-old boy Barrington, however, LOVED it. He loved the less dark approach and was promptly dancing around being 13. He liked fish fingers and custard but I think this will be his Doctor.