Annie Ryan, who successfully adapted A Girl Is a Half-Formed Thing for the stage, has had another bold idea. She has taken an Arthur Miller work, best known as an ill-fated 1961 film but originally written as a short story, and turned it into a stage piece for the vibrant Dublin theatre festival. The result is a brooding, intelligent show that reverses the film’s angle of approach so that three male misfits are now seen through the eyes of a critical female outsider. The action remains much as one remembers it. Roslyn, a nightclub singer in the midst of her six-week divorce residency in Reno, meets up with three men. Gay is an ageing cowboy, Perce is a nervy rodeo contestant and Guido is a widowed mechanic and war veteran. While Roslyn stirs their passions, she is not the flaky sex object that a visibly unhappy Marilyn Monroe played in her final movie. She instead becomes the means of exposing the men’s rootlessness, insecurity and uncertain sense of self. Miller may have seen himself as a misfit in the sense of being a political malcontent, but Ryan’s version reminds us that at the heart of the story is a wider crisis in masculinity. Staging it, however, poses problems, most of which Ryan’s production overcomes. The high point of the story is the scene where the men capture wild mustangs on the silvery Nevada flats. Here they simply lasso a large black tyre while a fifth character, Isabelle, whirls her hair like a horse’s mane. Surprisingly, the effect works. Meanwhile, Miller’s dialogue throughout is reduced to its laconic essentials: “anything’s better than wages” is the men’s philosophical refrain. Aoibhínn McGinnity excellently conveys Roslyn’s sense of wariness and solitude without turning her into a male fantasy. Aidan Kelly as the burly drifter, Emmet Byrne as his rodeo-riding protege and Patrick Ryan as the footloose pilot each show different facets of damaged manhood, while Una Kavanagh as a bartender embodies resentful neglect. But the final impression of Ryan’s Corn Exchange production, which had an all-too-brief run, is of loss and loneliness behind a posturing virility. • The Dublin theatre festival continues until 14 October.Michael Billington’s trip was supported by Tourism Ireland.