Martin O’Neill is looking to kickstart a new cycle of his management of the Republic of Ireland but must know there is a risk that bad defeats in Dublin by Denmark on Saturday and Wales on Tuesday would intensify calls for his four-year era in charge to end. There is a sense that these games are about more than Nations League points. The Football Association of Ireland has no desire to jilt its manager and one of the most conspicuous assistants in international football, Roy Keane, both of whom signed contract extensions in January to 2020. But a portion of Irish fans have lost faith in the duo and that constituency could swell to a critical mass if these matches were to bring defeats as emphatic as the last two competitive games did. Those were also against Denmark and Wales, who won by a combined score of 9-2. On one hand, criticism of O’Neill seems unfair. Those matches were 10 months apart, the 5-1 home thrashing by Denmark in the World Cup play-off preceding September’s 4-1 clobbering by Wales. Ireland were shorn of several key players in Cardiff and, for that reason and also because of the dwindling of stalwarts, O’Neill has had to explore ways in the past year of regenerating his side, capping nine new players, most dredged from outside the Premier League. A more obvious target for condemnation would be an association that has neither a properly backed player development plan nor an adequately supported domestic league. Yet there is some merit in the complaints of fans who, while acknowledging the limited quality available to the manager, complain O’Neill has not shown enough tactical cuteness to play his modest hand as well as possible. Doubts about the value of Keane’s contribution hardened after Stephen Ward’s inadvertent leaking last month of the assistant’s sweary confrontation with Harry Arter. The midfielder has returned having made himself absent in protest at Keane’s outburst. “That has been addressed and it’s fine,” O’Neill said. “The player and the assistant manager are on good terms now and really the rest is up to Harry.” Another positive development for O’Neill is that Denmark will be without the injured Christian Eriksen, who scored a hat-trick during that 5-1 win. The loss of the Tottenham Hotspur schemer will force Denmark into a reshuffle which could result in Chelsea’s centre-back Andreas Christensen being deployed in midfield. O’Neill, too, is considering a rejig. He shifted to a back three for last month’s friendly against Poland and the performance in a 1-1 draw may have encouraged him to use it on Saturday. That could lead to a first competitive start for Matt Doherty, who has thrived as a right wing-back this season for Wolves. One of the few Irish players to play regularly in the Premier League, Doherty has only three caps and O’Neill has been castigated for preferring Fulham’s Cyrus Christie when Séamus Coleman has been unavailable through injury, as the Everton player is again. The left wing-back role could go to Sheffield United’s Enda Stevens, another of the recent new caps. Further forward selection becomes even more difficult. The only Premier League centre-forward in the squad, Southampton’s Shane Long, has not scored since April and his barren streak for his country stretches to October 2016. Millwall’s Aiden O’Brien could start instead after striking the equaliser on his debut in Poland. O’Neill will not announce his lineup until matchday, although he did break with convention by revealing one starter: Jeff Hendrick. The Burnley midfielder says the team are hungry for atonement, especially after that drubbing by Denmark. “Everybody’s hurting,” he said. “It wasn’t a good night. But we’ve got new faces in, we’ve had a good week’s training and everyone’s looking forward.” Hendrick also spoke up in support of Keane. “I enjoy [working with him],” he said. “After the last game we played in Wales there were a few clips that I didn’t do well in and I sat down with him and he talked me through it. I tried to put that into practice in the Poland game and personally I thought my performance was better. He did that with a few others players too. We keep picking his brain.” Ireland have played only one home match this year – June’s 2-1 win over USA – and the size of the crowd will be the first indication of how confident the Irish public is that good times lie ahead. “I don’t think the crowd have deserted the team by any stretch of the imagination,” said O’Neill, adding his team would aim to “re-energise” the public if needed.