Mike Ashley’s Sports Direct has bought Evans Cycles out of administration but has warned that it may have to close half the specialist retailer’s 62 stores, putting about 440 jobs at risk. Evans, which traces its roots back nearly 100 years, had been seeking a buyer after its management team said they needed £20m for a turnaround plan that its former private equity owners were unwilling to fund. Sports Direct bought House of Fraser in a similar prepack deal in August and is also thought to be interested in buying Debenhams, the department store group in which it owns a large stake. Ashley, chief executive of Sports Direct, said: “We are pleased to have rescued the Evans Cycles brand. However, in order to save the business, we only believe we will be able to keep 50% of stores open in the future. Unfortunately, some stores will have to close.” Evans, which employs 1,300 people in total, of whom about 880 work in store, had been struggling to survive amid tough high street conditions that have already seen Toys R Us, Maplin and House of Fraser collapse into administration, and a string of other well-known names close their stores. Gourmet Burger Kitchen: The upmarket burger chain wants to close 17 of its 85 restaurants via an insolvency process known as a company voluntary arrangement (CVA) House of Fraser: The department store chain is expected to close about 12 stores after being bought out of administration by Mike Ashley. It had agreed a CVA under which 31 stores were to close, but this lapsed on administration. Homebase: The DIY chain is closing at least 42 stores after completing a CVA organised by new owner Hilco.  The restructuring expert bought the DIY chain for £1 from Australia's Wesfarmers who botched an attempt to bring its Bunnings chain to the UK. Poundworld: The discount retailer has closed all its 355 stores, with the loss of 5,100 jobs after falling into administration in June. Cau: The owner of the Gaucho and Cau steakhouses fell into administration in July leading to the closure of all 22 Cau restaurants, with loss of 750 jobs. The groups lenders have since bought the 16 Gaucho outlets. Mothercare: The chain is closing 60 of its 137 outlets after agreeing a CVA in May. Additional closures in July mean 900 jobs will be lost. Carluccio's: The Italian chain secured a CVA to close 30 of its 99 restaurants in late May. New Look: The chain is closing 85 stores in a restructuring plan announced earlier this year. Its chairman, Alistair McGeorge, said the future of a further 39 stores was in doubt as talks with landlords continued. Carpetright: The retailer obtained a CVA in April to close 92 of its 409 UK stores in September with the loss of about 300 jobs. Prezzo: In March the Italian-themed restaurant group secured a CVA to close 94 of its 300 restaurants, with the loss of 500 jobs. Rent cuts were agreed on a further 57 locations. Jamie’s Italian: The chain closed six locations in 2017 and this year agreed a CVA to close about a third of its 35 loss-making outlets. Byron: The upmarket burger chain is closing up to 20 of its 67 restaurants after a CVA agreed in January. Debenhams: The under-pressure department store chain has said it could close up to 50 of its 165 stores stores and wants to get rid of space at 30 more by bringing in gyms and other services. M&S: The high street stalwart wants to close 100 outlets – a third of its main stores by 2022 as part of a 'radical transformation' plan. The cycle retailer also faced fierce price competition, particularly from the fast-growing online sports retailer rival Wiggle. Evans found itself nearly £6m into the red in 2016 and has since faced rising business rates, an increase in the minimum wage and a fall in the pound’s value, which has made imported goods more expensive. In the year to October 2017, its sales rose nearly 2% to £138m, but the company recorded another loss, of £2.5m. Amid the difficulties across the retail sector, the private equity firm ECI Partners, which bought Evans three years ago, and the retailers’ lenders, AIB and HSBC, were unable to agree on a deal to fund management’s rescue plan. James Keany, at the advisory firm CBRE, which is retained to manage property for Sports Direct, said: “We are looking forward to working with landlords in order to help create a sustainable business. We will make contact with landlords over the next few days and discuss the future of individual stores.” Sports Direct’s warning that it was likely to close half of Evans’ stores appears to have come as a surprise to PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), the advisory firm that sealed the sale of Evans and put it into administration immediately ahead of the sale on Tuesday. Matt Callaghan, joint administrator and PwC partner, said: “Evans is a longstanding, well known and trusted brand with nearly 100 years of heritage in the cycling market. To have managed to preserve the business and transfer all staff to the purchaser is particularly pleasing; 2018 has been a very difficult trading year for the business, in part due to the impact of the extended winter weather in the early part of the year and a lack of cash to invest in stores and develop the online platform. A combination of losses, the capital expenditure requirements and tightening credit has led to a liquidity crunch.”