Leg-spin worked the oracle on a steamy night in Colombo as England signed off from the white-ball leg of their tour with a comfortable 30-run victory in the one-off Twenty20. Forced to defend 188 on a ground that for the second time in a week offered runs for the ball-strikers, Eoin Morgan’s men bowled their hosts out for 157 in 20 overs. And though Adil Rashid’s figures of three for 11 from his four overs may have once again underlined his current form and confidence, the story of the night was provided by Joe Denly. The 32-year-old has spent eight years in the international wilderness, during which time England have played 384 matches across all formats. But through his much-developed leg-spin, Denly removed both Sri Lankan openers with the new ball before returning late on and capping a memorable finish with four for 19 via the final two strikes. With the returning Morgan losing the toss and asking to bat first, his England charges were not lacking in motivation following the 219-run DLS defeat on the same ground in Tuesday’s fifth ODI. As well as Denly in for the omitted Joe Root, Chris Jordan simply had to play following a 5,400-mile journey for this fixture. The 187 for eight that resulted from England – one sliced in two by an hour of rain at 11.2 overs – was a pretty harum-scarum affair, not least for Jason Roy, who top-scored with 69 but also found incident following him at every turn during his 36-ball stay. On 20 he survived a tricky return catch to Isuru Udana. Two balls later Sri Lanka were appealing for obstruction after a shy at the stumps struck his backside. In the one over from Lakshan Sandakan he was dropped twice, on 34 and 41 – two shoddy efforts in the deep – and there was time for another on 53 as Kamindu Mendis, the ambidextrous spinner, was denied a wicket on debut by a tumbling deep cover. Roy, who had earlier lost Jos Buttler and Alex Hales in the space of three balls – the latter wrongly adjudged lbw when sweeping Amila Aponso to end a miserable tour of 16 runs from three innings – was also one half of a slapstick run-out that saw Morgan depart for 11. But these madcap moments should not detract from some mighty fine shots along the way, as Roy opened his account second ball by slotting Lasith Malinga over long-off for six before clearing the rope a further five times. Of his four fours, a slapped drive through cover off Mendis was anything but ambiguous. Roy’s departure, caught behind trying to cut Sandakan, came just moments before the 60-minute rain delay and from 113 for four England’s innings fizzled out a touch. Moeen Ali blazed 27 from 11 balls but was bowled on the sweep, while Ben Stokes (26 from 27) and Denly (20 from 17) were undone by Malinga’s low-slung wizardry. While a spot at No 7 may have been unfamiliar territory for Denly, being tossed the new ball is certainly not. Since being jettisoned on the eve of the 2010 World Twenty20 his wrist-spin has blossomed in limited overs cricket and in his first two overs his slider crashed into the stumps of the openers, Niroshan Dickwella and Kusal Mendis. Rashid was not to be upstaged by his fellow leggie, however, striking in the seventh and 10th over to snuff out Dinesh Chandimal and Mendis as Hales salvaged something from his trip with a pair of fine catches on the rope. When Dhananjaya de Silva was trapped lbw for 17 on review by the Yorkshireman in the 11th, Sri Lanka sat 77 for five. From there it was a case of closing out the game. And though the hulking Thisara Perera struck six sixes amid a 31-ball 57, eventually holing out off Denly at the end, his support at the other end was simply vaporised. Liam Plunkett bowled Dasun Shanaka with a fine yorker before Jordan wiped out the tail-end pairing of Udana and Aponso, the former flapping a full toss to mid-off, the latter castled by another toe-crusher. It may have been a flying visit to the island for the single-format Sussex man but with figures of two for 29, he will doubtless feel it was a worthwhile one.