A British academic being held in Dubai on spying charges has been released on bail after spending nearly six months in jail, the Foreign Office has confirmed. Reports emerged on Monday that 31-year-old Matthew Hedges, who was detained on 5 May at the end of a study trip in the United Arab Emirates (UAE), had been allowed to leave prison, where he had reportedly been held in solitary confinement. The BBC reported that Hedges had been told to stay in the country until a scheduled court appearance on 21 November and that the authorities there had kept his passport. Furthermore, he has been made to wear an ankle bracelet and warned he may have to return to prison, the broadcaster said. Daniela Tejada, the wife of the Durham university doctoral student, was quoted as saying Hedges was tired and “shocked by everything”, but was in good spirits and “glad to be breathing fresh air”. Tejada, who has previously criticised the UK government’s response to her husband’s arrest and months-long detention, said his release on bail was a “great step”. He was said to be suffering from “significant health issues” after spending so long in jail. But Tejada said she was “still hoping for justice” for him. British officials said on Monday that the report that Hedges had been released was accurate. A Foreign and Commonwealth Office spokesperson said: “As the foreign secretary has made clear, there are limits to what we can say publicly on Matthew’s case due to ongoing legal proceedings. We are monitoring developments closely and have made the Emirati authorities aware of all our concerns. We continue to do everything we can for Matthew and his family. “Our staff are in close contact with Matthew’s wife, Daniela, offering her all possible support at what we appreciate is a hugely difficult time. We also remain in regular contact with his lawyer. It is the longstanding policy of successive UK governments not to comment on intelligence matters.” Hedges denies the spying allegations and his family has said he was in the UAE to “carry out academic research for his PhD”. The country’s authorities have accused him of “spying for and on behalf of a foreign state, jeopardising the military, economy and political security of the UAE”. Tejada has previously said her husband had “not received appropriate medical care and attention, especially in regard to his mental health”. She said he had been kept in solitary confinement for more than five months. “Matt does not speak Arabic and is therefore unable to communicate fully with the court-appointed lawyer, who he has only met once, at his court hearing last week.” She added: “Matt is a man of integrity and principle. He has a brilliant academic mind and an impeccable track record. He is kind and caring and greatly loved and respected. Please send him home.”