Leicester and England have both been waiting a long time for a rejuvenated Manu Tuilagi and finally the big man is back. With his national coach, Eddie Jones, in attendance, the fit-again centre chose the perfect night to produce his most compelling display of the season and help the Tigers secure the bonus-point victory they required to revive their European campaign. By the end there was no need to refer this particular Champions Cup contest to the Court of Arbitration for Sport. Tigers scored five tries in all, with Tuilagi sealing a man-of-the-match performance by powering over for his side’s crucial fourth after 64 minutes. With Jonny May also proving his fitness with a try following his recent shoulder knock and George Ford contributing 20 classy points, it was a most welcome night for Jones with the autumn Tests looming. Among those who also enjoyed their evening was Dan Cole, pointedly omitted from England’s squad for next month’s internationals, but ultimately this was a result for everyone at Leicester to cherish. Not only did it maintain their record of never having lost at home to Welsh opposition in this tournament; it also yielded an overdue victory after five straight European defeats. The Tigers, who had trailed by two points entering the final quarter, still have to find a way past Racing 92 in Pool 4 but, after a sticky start to the domestic season, their late surge delighted their interim head coach, Geordan Murphy. Murphy was also encouraged by his forwards’ improved showing, particularly as his club captain, Tom Youngs, withdrew through illness just before kick-off. Any coach would love to have a fully-firing Tuilagi at his disposal and Murphy thinks England will soon feel the benefit as well. “He gets better every week,” said the former Ireland full-back. “The way he played tonight you’d think he’s got a shot at getting selected. That try was world-class.” Murphy also believes Cole’s international career is far from finished – “He’d be one of my first bodies on the team sheet” – having seen his team start and finish the game like the Tigers of old. After eight minutes they were already 10-0 up via a Ford penalty and an eighth-minute converted try from the lock Harry Wells, only for the Scarlets to hit back strongly. Even their tight forwards can give and take a slick pass and, after an attempted chip over the top by Ford had fallen into Scarlets’ hands, Wyn Jones and David Bulbring combined to put Gareth Davies away for a fine score. In addition to Leigh Halfpenny’s conversion and subsequent penalty, Scotland’s new back-row addition Blade Thomson came within inches of another try, the ball just bobbling from his grasp as he slid towards the line and Leicester’s supporters were mightily relieved when the busy Guy Thompson dotted down in the left corner to restore the home lead. Halfpenny still had time to drill over another penalty to make it 15-13 at the break and set up an intriguing second-half. Even without the injured Rhys Patchell, Aaron Shingler and Jake Ball, the Scarlets visibly fancied their chances of raiding the Tigers’ lair for the first time in their European history. But they reckoned without Leicester re-emerging as the sharper side. Another Ford penalty was followed by a 47th-minute close-range try for the onrushing Sione Kalamafoni to give the Tigers a 25-13 cushion. Once again, though, the visitors swiftly found a way back into the contest, a clever inside ball from Gareth Davies sending Steff Evans through the narrowest of gaps. When Ben Youngs’ attempted clearance failed to find touch, allowing Ken Owens to send the electric Davies clear and put Thomson over for the visitors’ third converted score, a grandstand finish loomed. Much to Leicester’s relief it was to prove merely a temporary blip, Tuilagi and May burying any chance of a Welsh triumph. The Scarlets, having been defeated in both their opening two pool games, already have it all to do to reach the last eight.