Cesar Sayoc, from Aventura, Florida, was arrested on Friday and is suspected to have sent a series of what are believed to be pipe bombs to critics of Donald Trump. The 56-year-old was arrested at an auto parts shop in Plantation, Florida, and television footage showed a white van, adorned with pro-Republican, pro-Trump and anti-liberal signage, being towed away from the location. Here’s what we know about Sayoc so far. Public records show Sayoc was sentenced in 2002 for threatening to “throw, place, project or discharge any destructive device”. The attorney who represented Sayoc told ABC News that he had threatened to throw a bomb “in a conversation with a Florida utility representative”. In May 2014, Sayoc pleaded no contest to felony charges of grand theft and battery in Broward county, according to court filings. Daniel Lurvey, Sayoc’s attorney in the case, told the Guardian that the plea arrangement meant that Sayoc was not left with a felony conviction. Sayoc’s first arrest, according to public records, was in 1991 for “grand theft in the third degree”. The white van believed to have been used by Sayoc was covered with images of Donald Trump and Mike Pence. It also had a number of images of liberal figures, including Hillary Clinton, film-maker Michael Moore and CNN’s Van Jones, with target symbols over their faces. A photo on Sayoc’s Facebook page – his profile has since been taken down – shows him wearing a red “Make America Great Again” hat. He is standing in front of what appears to be a vehicle with a picture of Donald Trump on it. A video posted to the page shows Sayoc at a Trump rally in Florida, in October 2016. Sayoc is a registered Republican. Records show he last voted on 8 November 2016 – the date of the presidential election. A video posted on his Facebook page shows Sayoc at a Trump rally in Florida, in October 2016. A Twitter account registered in Sayoc’s name says he works as a booking agent for a live events company and is a former wrestler and cage fighter. A number of tweets focused on Andrew Gillum, the Democrat currently running in a tight race for Florida governor. One post described Gillum as a “[George] Soros puppet”. The first of the suspected pipe bombs sent this week was discovered at Soros’s New York home. Many tweets also criticize the Democratic congresswoman Maxine Waters, who was also the target of a suspected bomb this week. Other tweets attacked the Parkland shooting survivor David Hogg as a “paid protester” who did not attend Parkland high school – a common conspiracy theory on the right. Public records show that a 56-year-old called Cesar Sayoc is associated with a variety of businesses in Florida. Sayoc is listed as a manager at a company called Native American Catering and Vending, based in Hallandale Beach, Florida, as president and director of a company called Sayex Ltd, and as president of Proud Native American One Low Price Dry-cleaning Inc. Sayoc is also listed as a manager at a company called Ver Tech AG, LLC, a business that was only registered in July this year. Ver Tech shares the same Hallandale Beach address – a United States Postal Service office – as Native American Catering and Vending, which could possibly suggest Sayoc used a mailbox as a registration address. Sayoc filed for bankruptcy in 2012 in a Miami court. A note which is part of the filing said: “Debtor lives with mother, owns no furniture.”