A helicopter believed to be carrying Vichai Srivaddhanaprabha, Leicester City’s chairman, crashed outside the King Power Stadium following Leicester’s home draw with West Ham United on Saturday night. The identity of the passengers was unknown in the immediate aftermath, despite unconfirmed reports that Srivaddhanaprabha was on board, and it was unclear if there were any survivors. The incident occurred around an hour after the final whistle. The owner’s helicopter crashed in a car park near the south-east corner of the stadium shortly after taking off from the pitch at around 8.30pm. Eyewitness reports indicated that the helicopter just cleared the roof of the stands, stayed in the air briefly and spiralled down to earth after reportedly developing a fault with its tail rotor. There were reports of a huge fireball erupting. Witnesses said there was a smell of acrid smoke in the area. Emergency services rushed to the scene to tackle the fire and search the wreckage. It was unclear if any bystanders were injured by the crash. The areas around the stadium had largely emptied out after the game, with most spectators likely to have headed back into the city centre after full time. Leicester did not make any comment on Saturday night. Tim Acott, a Leicester season ticket holder of 40 years, said: “It just came out of the stadium already spinning, then down to the ground. Just in a spiral. It hit the ground with a big bang then burst into flames. It’s over on the other side of the car park, I don’t think there were people there. I’m shaking like anything.” There was confusion outside as security personnel attempted to restore order and prevent members of the public from taking pictures and filming videos of the wreckage. Supporters in the area walked away in obvious distress and Kasper Schmeichel, Leicester’s goalkeeper, was seen in tears outside the ground. Srivaddhanaprabha, who bought the east Midlands club for a reported £39m in 2010, is normally flown back to London in his private helicopter after home games. He has become a hugely popular figure at Leicester, who have become a regular presence in the top half of the Premier League under his chairmanship. The Thai businessman, 60, helped Leicester return to the top flight of English football in 2014 and he became part of the club’s folklore when his backing helped Leicester win their first ever Premier League title in 2016. Srivaddhanaprabha has four children. It was unclear if any of Srivaddhanaprabha’s family members were on board. Aiyawatt Srivaddhanaprabha, Leicester’s vice-chairman and Srivaddhanaprabha’s son, was not at the game. Srivaddhanaprabha began his business journey by opening a duty free shop in Bangkok in 1989. His retail company, King Power, grew to prominence in Thailand and he is ranked as the fifth richest person in the country, with an empire worth £3.8bn. Srivaddhanaprabha extended his influence in European football when he bought the Belgian club OH Leuven in May 2017. The club are in the Belgian second division. Leicestershire police said: “We are dealing with an incident in the vicinity of the King Power Stadium. Emergency services are aware and dealing.” Leicester earned a point when Wilfred Ndidi’s deflected strike in the 89th minute cancelled out Fabián Balbuena’s goal for West Ham.