‘I was looking for something that could write itself, that could self-generate, evolve or mutate,” says Pierre Huyghe. Impeccably grizzled and sparkly eyed, the French artist sits vaping discreetly in dappled sunshine beaming through the upper windows of the Serpentine Gallery in London. Downstairs, Huyghe’s new exhibition is being installed. After our interview I’ll try for a glance through the gallery door. The show is not available for sneak peeks. I’ll try again, unsuccessfully, a week later. It’s not that they won’t let me in, the polite, dust-covered curator explains, it’s that they can’t. Not yet. I’m not surprised: Huyghe is exacting. Autonomous, changing, self-regulatory systems such as colonies of bees, dividing cancer cells, flu virus, ants’ nests and groups of creatures cohabiting in an aquarium are this artist’s preferred raw materials. They tend to make his work tricky to install. While he also makes film and sculpture, over the last decade Huyghe has become known for reimagining the artwork as ecosystem. He deposits groups of objects – some evidently alive, others not so – into an environment, then retires and allows nature to take its course. Last summer I made a pilgrimage to his acclaimed ecosystem After ALife Ahead. An eight-hour journey from London ended in a rain-soaked trudge through the German city of Münster, to city margins where the urban fabric dissolves into a lacework of petrol stations, fast-food joints and leisure centres. Tucked behind a drive-through Burger King, Huyghe had excavated the concrete floor of a derelict ice rink and replaced portions of the ceiling with robotic hatches that opened and shut to the work’s mysterious inner rhythms. Climbing down into the vast pit revealed an alien landscape, pocked and uneven: packed clay towers housed colonies of bees; algae grew in pools. On a platform in the middle was an aquarium housing a genetically modified GloFish and a venomous Conus textile sea snail. HeLa cancer cells divided, unseen, in an incubator. At the start of the work there had been chimera peacocks, too: piebald birds with two sets of DNA. An earlier environment, Untilled, included a lanky white dog called Human with one leg painted bubblegum pink and a concrete cast of a reclining nude, with a large bees’ nest that grew over her head like a parasitic mask. Installed between compost heaps in a park in Kassel, Germany, the bees pollinated psychotropic, medicinal and aphrodisiacal plants – nightshade, jimson weed, rye, cannabis. Frogs croaked, ants hatched, Human acquired the ennui befitting an art-world celebrity, and the cycle of life rolled on. Human, alas, will not make an appearance in Huyghe’s new work at the Serpentine. The star turn here is not animal, but artificial intelligence (AI), the processing of which we witness via five LED screens as it attempts to analyse events within the human brain. In January, Huyghe learned of a laboratory in Kyoto in which scientists were working on deep image reconstruction to decode complex visual information from human brain activity: artificial intelligence that can go some way toward working out what it is you’re looking at or visualising. This machine telepathy uses data harvested during functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI), which measures brain activity. After analysing this brain activity, the AI sorts through vast nets of example images already in its system looking for fragments of a match to help it determine what image the human subject was holding in their mind’s eye. Huyghe worked with a man to whom he gave a set of interlinked images to visualise, some based on physical images, others that he invited him to imagine. The man pictured them one by one as his brain activity was monitored. What we see on the screens in the gallery is the AI moving through its exemplar images, sifting for echoes: we are looking not at the final result of the image reconstruction but a visible manifestation of the process of machine learning. Huyghe won’t disclose what the original images were: it’s up to us to decipher in turn what they might have been, and how they may be linked to one another. “Of course as a visual artist it is very appealing – a new medium,” says Huyghe. With machine learning he has generated an “ecosystem” of a different kind, passing “from a world that is constructed – with all the complexity and contingencies that go with it to evolve without me – to a world that can be imagined”. AI's deep image construction is far from reality … a chimera made out of thousands of past images Rather than manipulating a physical environment, he is now, as he puts it, “gardening” in someone’s mind. The work asserts its autonomy first in the perceptual gap between Huyghe and his human subject – if I tell you to think of an apple, the apple you think of will not be the apple I think of – and then in the analysis and image construction undertaken by the AI. While “very impressive”, Huyghe warns that deep image reconstruction “is far from something close to a reality or image that we know”. What we see on the Serpentine’s screens at any one time is “a chimera made out of thousands of past images and the present images that are just there for a fraction of a second”. Huyghe shows me a couple of clips on his phone. They’re like something out of deep space or even deeper nightmare: a fleshy, suggestive sump, seething with traces of near recognisable detail. AI does not process images as a human brain might: there’s no associative logic to what might emerge. Near-human intelligence that reveals itself to be subtly non-human is freaky. Huyghe and I discuss the idea of the “uncanny valley” – the zone occupied by entities that are nearly but not quite recognisably human. As humans we tend to find them particularly alarming. (Monster-makers for horror movies understand this perfectly; it’s why the most disturbing monsters tend to have attributes that recall Homo sapiens.) Huyghe says the term “uncanny valley” came from “a Japanese guy who was trying to make a kind of android”. “When you do 3D realism, you arrive at a threshold. That threshold is the moment where you’re trying to reach realism but there’s this tiny, tiny something that says it is not, and that’s where the uncanny valley is. It puts you in a very excited mode, because there’s something you start to have empathy with, and of course a part of you says you should not.” Even without a 3D android as persuasive as the one in Alex Garland’s film Ex Machina, Huyghe’s AI will invite intellectual empathy. Pattern recognition isn’t only the preserve of machine learning: we humans do it, too, and we’ll find it hard to resist interpreting the images as they evolve on the LED screens. However, just by standing in the gallery looking at them, we, as components in the Serpentine gallery ecosystem, will have an impact on the overall environment. Then there are the flies. Along with the behaviour, movements and density of human visitors, a set of sensors installed in the gallery will also monitor the behaviour patterns of 50,000 bluebottles introduced into the space. Though 50,000 sounds akin to the fourth plague, the intended effect, curator Rebecca Lewin tells me, is something closer to an “irritating August infestation”. The flies will be fed sugar up in the rotunda, where they are expected to congregate. Unable to breed without the presence of protein, their stock will need replenishing over the course of the exhibition. Purchasing flies in bulk has been one of Lewin’s more unusual curatorial challenges. Human visitors and bluebottles alike will trigger sensors in the gallery, feeding into a “neural network” that will change the pace at which the images on the screens evolve. Huyghe presents himself as an instigator, rather than author. That stance is in keeping with an ego-denting suggestion buried in the work – if deep image reconstruction can generate images from brain activity, it suggests that this brain activity and the images it generates are common to all of us: that something about our imagination is generic. In the field of visual art, that idea is humbling and not a little awkward. What if the mind is not what sets us apart from other people, asks Huyghe. Each of the complex, self-generating ecosystems Huyghe has constructed over the last decade reflects an existing set of real-world relationships. After ALife Ahead repackaged the struggle between the built human environment and the living world couched just beneath its crust. Within it coexisted organisms that were opportunistic (weeds, algae), alien (peacocks), genetically manipulated (GloFish), and mutating (cancer cells). At the Serpentine, a system structured around machine learning offers a controlled microcosm of the world we have just stepped out of, where algorithms predict our behaviour, tracking everything from search words to our physical movements. Of equal, if not greater importance perhaps: within this work, just as outside it, human behaviour has a profound effect on an environment that we share with other living organisms. • Pierre Huyghe is at the Serpentine Gallery, London, 3 October – 10 February. 