Alexander Soros, the son of financier George Soros, has said the explosive devices sent to his father and other political figures are a threat “to the future of American democracy”. An explosive device was found on Monday in the mailbox of George Soros’ home in Katonah, New York, and is believed to be linked to other devices sent to former president Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, CNN’s New York newsroom, former attorney general Eric Holder and Democratic congresswoman Debbie Wasserman Schultz on Wednesday. “We are all grateful that no one was injured, and grateful to those who kept us safe. But the incident was profoundly disturbing – as a threat not just to the safety of our family, neighbors, colleagues and friends, but also to the future of American democracy,” the younger Soros wrote of Monday’s incident in a New York Times op-ed. Soros said that the sending of the devices was linked to the current political environment in the US and abroad. “While the responsibility lies with the individual or individuals who sent these lethal devices to my family home and Mr Obama’s and Ms Clinton’s offices, I cannot see it divorced from the new normal of political demonization that plagues us today,” he wrote. George Soros, who was born in Hungary, has given money to Democratic candidates and progressive causes after making his billions running a hedge fund. He has become an archenemy of the right, who frequently paint him as behind leftwing protests and social justice movements. Trump has targeted him as well, claiming on Twitter without evidence that protesters opposing the supreme court nomination of Brett Kavanaugh were “paid by Soros and others”. George Soros, who is Jewish and fled the Nazis as a child, has also been the target of antisemitic comments and conspiracy theories. The sending of the devices comes as the US is gearing for midterm elections on 6 November and Alexander Soros urged voters to avoid extremism. “We must find our way to a new political discourse that shuns the demonization of all political opponents. A first step would be to cast our ballots to reject those politicians cynically responsible for undermining the institutions of our democracy. And we must do it now, before it is too late,” he said. Alexander Soros also took a direct swipe at Trump and his election campaign of 2016, saying “something changed” that year as Trump won the White House and previously prejudiced attacks on his father and others became more extreme. “With Donald Trump’s presidential campaign, things got worse. White supremacists and antisemites like David Duke endorsed his campaign. Mr Trump’s final TV ad famously featured my father; Janet Yellen, chairwoman of the Federal Reserve; and Lloyd Blankfein, chairman of Goldman Sachs – all of them Jewish – amid dog-whistle language about ‘special interests’ and ‘global special interests’,” he wrote. “A genie was let out of the bottle, which may take generations to put back in, and it wasn’t confined to the United States,” he added.