Peanut butter and jam, an expensive alpaca jumpsuit, fruit trees and wooden spoons are just a few things on Samin Nosrat’s 12-page list of things she loves. The food writer and soon-to-be television star is talking about the process of making Salt Fat Acid Heat – the Netflix adaptation of her James Beard-award-winning cookbook of the same name, which airs next week – and tells me that the director set her the task of writing the list to capture Nosrat’s life as a kind of collage. “She told me: ‘We want this show because of you, because you’re this lovable, imperfect person who wears Birkenstocks and overalls, who lives in a messy house, whose kitchen isn’t always clean.’ They didn’t want me in spite of this stuff, they wanted me because of it,” she says. We are sitting in a cafe in the so-called “gourmet ghetto” of Berkeley, California – Nosrat’s adoptive home since she came here for college in the late 90s. The child of Iranian immigrants, she grew up in San Diego. Her objectives for the show, she says, were to build on those of her book: to arm anyone with the resources necessary to put together good, highly flavoured food. Over almost 20 years working in kitchens, Nosrat observed a pattern to everything she cooked, perceiving that a basic grasp of four elements – salt, fat, acid and heat – are key to building flavour. Netflix’s four-part take on the premise was inspired in part by Cooked, Michael Pollan’s series on the streaming platform, in which Nosrat appeared for one episode. Salt Fat Acid Heat covers an element an episode and sees Nosrat travel to a different place for each – Japan for salt, Italy for fat, Mexico for acid, home in California for heat. In Italy, this includes watching the olive harvest in Tuscany before making oil-drenched foccacia, or visiting a parmesan producer in Modena, then making pesto with a Ligurian nonna – Nosrat’s enthusiasm pulsing through each scene. “I think the goal of Chef’s Table is that you are so moved by the story that you want to go and eat that person’s food at their restaurant,” Nosrat says, of the much-heralded food show. “But I wanted the takeaway from my show to be that you go and cook the thing.” Inclusivity is an important theme for Nosrat, and the show’s other key purpose is to introduce people and faces currently under-represented onscreen. The show is “filled with people of colour, with women of colour, with older women, with home cooks, [those] who don’t typically get credit for their work – that was very intentional and hard to do”. When looking for chefs and cooks to work with on location, she says there were times when it would have been easier to choose the top Google result – “most often a man, often a white man” – and she would tell her team to make more calls, to find “the badass ladies of different ages and colours”. Those badass ladies include Doña Conchi, a friend of a friend’s mother in rural Mexico (who doesn’t have the internet but does make a transformative turkey escabèche – marinated with seville oranges, briefly poached, eaten with pickled onions and tortillas), and Nosrat’s own mother, who in the Heat episode shows us how to make tahdig, Persian crispy rice. Rice, stewed meats, yoghurt and piles of herbs are the foods with which Nosrat grew up (“the other taste of my childhood is Mexican food – I hesitate to claim it, as it’s not culturally mine, but there’s a burrito in my heart”). Her parents moved to the US in the mid 70s and food became a vehicle for instilling in their children an understanding of the culture they had left behind. Nosrat remembers the greatest compliment that could be paid to her mother’s food was that it tasted like back in Iran. “What any immigrant is after is a taste of home,” she says. Her mother would pack Nosrat and her twin brothers into the back of their station wagon “and drive us all over southern California looking for just the right bread, feta cheese, cilantro … it was a single-minded search for taste”, one which would set her in good stead in her later chapters as a cook. Until she was 15, Nosrat was destined to be a doctor (“like every Iranian child”), but credits an English teacher who spotted a proclivity for storytelling with setting her on the course to becoming a writer; at first, she wanted to be a poet. As an undergraduate at the University of California, Berkeley, in search of a job, she dropped a résumé at Chez Panisse, Alice Waters’ now legendary Bay Area restaurant, famed for championing seasonal, organic and, above all, local produce. She had no cooking experience but was offered a busser role, clearing tables and assisting the waiting staff. Despite the lowliness of the position, she was seduced. “It spoke to some other part of me,” she says. “Chez Panisse is a sensory temple – you might have to be made of stone not to fall for it.” Nosrat is sure that her Iranian upbringing has given her many of the tools for her success – the grafting, the performing, the “comfort-making” qualities of a cook – but admits this comes with a darker side, too. Pleasing people, she says, is at the heart of Persian culture; she mentions ta’arof, the Iranian etiquette that prizes hospitality over all else, no matter the cost, as a way of keeping face. She explains the concept with examples of the extraordinary lengths Iranians will go to this end – calling ahead to pay the bill in a restaurant, even when your bank account is empty; an always-open-doors policy in homes, whatever the circumstances. At 38, Nosrat says she is still trying to disentangle herself from the web of ta’arof. “The people-pleasing and performing is 100% ingrained in me, partly because I was a little brown girl growing up in a very white, homogeneous community in San Diego – where in second grade I was called a terrorist. [I thought] if I’m good, kind, welcoming, whatever enough, [they will] accept me.” Nosrat also draws parallels between her mother and Waters: “Chez Panisse was like having a family with high standards that I needed to please – I was familiar with the dynamic.” While we are eating breakfast, at least five people approach us to say hello to Nosrat; she is well-known and loved in Berkeley. She is, of course, about to become much better known. She tells me she recently received an email from a Berkeley-based mother seeking advice for her daughter, who wants to get into cooking: “That [she] trusted my voice to advise her daughter, and that moms write to say their kids are now eating their green beans because they started to salt their water properly – that means more to me than all the accolades.” Salt Fat Acid Heat is available on Netflix from 11 October.