There was a period midway through the second half here when the away following in the Putney end broke into a raucous chorus of: “We’ve got our Arsenal back.” That it had taken a goal that could have been lifted straight from the glittering pomp of the Arsène Wenger era to provoke such a reaction carried a certain irony, but their delight was understandable. This was a ninth successive win in all competitions –only Herbert Chapman, George Graham and Wenger have achieved that for this club. Unai Emery is making quite the impression. The majestic third goal of a rampant display epitomised Arsenal’s most vibrant victory to date under the Spaniard, with a fluid frontline utterly irresistible for long periods and, by the end, slicing through their demoralised hosts at will. Watching them conjure first-time passes in the buildup to shift the ball swiftly from the excellent Alexandre Lacazette to Héctor Bellerín, Aaron Ramsey to Henrikh Mkhitaryan, was to recall Wenger’s teams at their fluent best. The Armenian’s reverse pass into space duly released Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang but it still required Ramsey, who had been on the pitch for less than 40 seconds, to improvise a backheel in supplying the finish. The ball kissed the far post with Marcus Bettinelli helpless before dribbling over the line. Every win needs putting in context, and Fulham were obliging hosts – 21 goals shipped in eight league matches will have alarm bells ringing in these parts, not least because it does not feel surprising – but to see Arsenal revelling in this fashion is still restorative given the discord that has festered over recent years across north London. Lucas Torreira is imposing himself in central midfield but, as an attacking force, they would not be contained whether it was Alex Iwobi and Danny Welbeck leading the charge, or Mkhitaryan and Ramsey in the latter stages. “We knew we could win today if we were efficient,” said Lacazette, whose ruthless finishing had served to deflate the hosts and offered Aubameyang a platform upon which to revel late on. “We knew we’d create a lot of chances.” They actually created fewer than half of Fulham’s 21, but there was bite, energy and class to their attack that eased them home and ensured their 5,700-mile round-trip to Baku in midweek was less of a hindrance. The hosts could point to a bright start when Bernd Leno reacted smartly to turn away Luciano Vietto’s shot, deflected sharply off Rob Holding. Or the slickness of André Schürrle’s equaliser just before the break, the German lifting a shot over his onrushing compatriot from Vietto’s pass. They could even rue their own substitute Aboubakar Kamara’s fluffed header, which might have forced them level for a second time. But in truth they will stagger into the international break still contemplating how best to address the step up needed in terms of defensive discipline having been scythed apart far too easily for comfort. “We opened all the doors,” said Slavisa Jokanovic ruefully. “They finished the actions easily. I don’t believe in sitting deep in our own box, but we’re showing too many weaknesses defensively for Premier League level at the moment. This is realistic. We need to be more solid, more competitive. Arsenal showed the quality, the pace, the strength. This is what I missed.” Fulham knew there would be difficult days like this following promotion. In the second tier, they could be confident of outscoring all-comers. At this level, Fulham will never be clear of trouble while they remain this porous. A clean sheet feels unthinkable at present. Lacazette had wrecked their latest attempt at a shutout just before the half-hour mark, Iwobi and the overlapping Nacho Monreal having combined down the left for the striker to collect, hold off Tim Ream, spin and finish crisply beyond the wrong-footed Bettinelli. His second, just after the break, actually stemmed from a throw-in and innocuous punt upfield by Lucas Torreira, nodded down by Welbeck to the striker just outside the penalty area. He sensed Ream had offered him sufficient space to prosper and duly ripped a volley beyond an unsuspecting Bettinelli from distance. Ramsey’s sumptuous contribution in effect settled the contest, with Aubameyang prospering in what time remained with any semblance of resistance having melted away. The substitute spun away from Maxime Le Marchand to convert from close-range, then skipped on to Ramsey’s pass to ram a fifth into the corner. Mesut Özil, absent with a back spasm, was not missed in the slightest. This was Arsenal at their irrepressible best and, for the first time under Emery, nestled in the top four. For Fulham, far too welcoming as hosts, it was all a bit chastening.