Best performance? Away at Newcastle. It was like a training session for us. Then again, maybe they just made us look good. And the worst? The 4-2 defeat to Bournemouth. They picked us apart. Happy with the manager? I’m going to make no friends with this answer. Claude Puel has done OK but there’s still a lingering sense that a talented squad is playing well below its potential. Our results are fine, but our football, at times, is turgid. Why I love … Wilfred Ndidi He just doesn’t get the praise he deserves – he keeps improving. Some of the challenges he makes with his Stretch Armstrong-like legs defy belief. How is the atmosphere? Dire. As the club look to expand the stadium at the end of this season they need to find a way to reignite the intimidating atmosphere we were once renowned for. We still have our moments, though. “Woop woop – that’s the sound of Nampalys” never gets old. What is “the Leicester way”? Fast, frenetic, direct and in-your-face: I like to call it “wasp football”. It’s the sort of haranguing approach that reaped such sweet rewards just three years ago. Sadly the club is adamant that we must change to a Poundshop Pep philosophy. We need to rediscover our intensity. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? The Wes Morgan of two years ago. Our greatest ever captain’s best days are behind him. It’s truly sad to watch the fickle subsections of our fanbase turning on our commander-in-chief. Funniest moment so far … All the Sunderland fans coming up to me after our win at Newcastle to snicker at their near-neighbour’s defeat. Proper schadenfreude. • Chris Whiting TheChrisWhitingShow.wordpress.com @ChrisRWhiting Best performance? The first half away to Tottenham in September. Last season at Wembley they battered us 4-1, but not this time. We steamrolled them: it was only 1-0 at the break but we totally dominated. Firmino added another to secure our fifth league win on the bounce. And the worst? Napoli away. We didn’t click, didn’t score – barely had a shot – and conceded in the last minute. Happy with the manager? We’re unbeaten in the league, we’re a real unit, great to watch and such a threat that we made Guardiola change City’s regular game. So, pretty good. Should he have changed the side at home to Chelsea in League Cup? No matter who was playing, Hazard’s goal was genius. Why I love … Roberto Firmino He’s ace, and he’s funny. How is the atmosphere? Good. There’s been a buzz around the place. European nights are special at Anfield – it is no cliche – and our game against PSG was a case in point. Their fans were superb too, and never stopped singing – though they were stunned into silence by Bobby’s winner … What is “the Liverpool way”? Keeping the game simple – pass and move; defending and attacking as one; building for the future; passing down of culture and traditions; humility, being respectful of others and non-gloating. We’re a family – club, players, fans. It does feel we’re a “we” at the moment: we’re in it together and the club do seem to be listening to fans more. Great credit must go to the work done by Spirit of Shankly and LFC’s supporter liaison officer, Tony Barrett. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Johnny Barnes. As a player he was immense and he talks a lot of sense. Funniest moment so far … A mate’s face after spotting the price of a half-time pint at Wembley. • Steph Jones Observer reader Best performance? The 6-1 thrashing of Huddersfield. It’s not that it was totally unexpected, but to play with such fluency so soon after the World Cup was really impressive. Our performance at Anfield deserves a mention too, though: I don’t think Pep gets enough credit for how he sets his teams up defensively. The way he stifled Liverpool’s attacking transitions by tucking Mendy/Walker in to occupy the wide channels was a really well judged move, as was dropping Stones/Laporte a bit deeper in possession. And the worst? Definitely Lyon. It was a very uncharacteristic performance: one we probably haven’t seen since Guardiola’s first season at the club. Happy with the manager? He was never going to take his foot off the gas. Far from it, in fact. He’s clearly been working harder than ever to try to come up with new methods/ways to win, and so far it’s gone pretty well. Why I love … Bernardo Silva He’s had a sensational start. We honestly haven’t missed De Bruyne since his injury. I say this cautiously but we may have found the heir to David Silva’s throne. How is the atmosphere? It’s the same as at almost all Premier League grounds: sanitised and subdued. It’s a shame, but in general that’s just how it is. The Ederson She’s Electric chant remains a cracker, though. It’s a shame Everton have nicked it… What is “the City way”? Never being afraid of taking risks. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Maybe not an obvious one, this – but I’d say Jadon Sancho, who we lost to Borussia Dortmund last year. He’s going to be some player. Funniest moment so far … More of a series of moments: the soap opera at United, on and off the pitch. • Lloyd Scragg NinetyThreeTwenty.com @lloyd_scragg Best performance? Young Boys away. We played 4-3-3 with two attacking full-backs and three forwards: thrilling, fast-flowing, counterattacking football. We thought we were building momentum. Then we drew with Wolves. And the worst? Take your pick. Valencia, Derby, West Ham, Brighton – and that first half against Newcastle. Happy with the manager? Mourinho has constantly singled out players for criticism, but has to take his share. It’s clear that Woodward hired a chequebook manager, then shut the chequebook. Why I love … David de Gea Dave Saves deserves to be in a better team than this. He will inevitably leave when his contract is up. How is the atmosphere? During the fightback against Newcastle it was superb as fans rallied to push the team over the line – but otherwise it’s still in decline. Some fans are trying to resurrect it, others definitely aren’t. You can’t help noticing empty seats around the ground where season ticket holders are picking and choosing the games they go to. What is “the United way”? What it should be: “Football taught by Matt Busby”. What it is right now: leaderless and, at times, gutless. This football isn’t what Reds were brought up on. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Sir Alex would win the league with these players. A close second: Bryan Robson. Funniest moment so far … One I witnessed outside the ground before the Wolves game: a steward opening a woman’s bag for a routine search and pulling out a bottle of vodka, complete with the pub optic still attached. No half measures there. • Shaun O’Donnell Observer reader Best performance? The first half at Old Trafford: two great goals within 10 minutes, putting Mourinho on the ropes, playing with attacking verve: dreamland. It was nice to be reminded of why you enjoy football, even if just for a little while. And the worst? The Leicester defeat: an inept performance which exposed our squad’s frightening lack of depth. Kenedy at left-back says it all. This should have been an opportunity to bag some points, but instead confirmed that we are in a relegation battle. Happy with the manager? Rafa’s organisational abilities have ensured that we haven’t been overwhelmed by the top sides and, while his substitutions are baffling at times, on the whole he’s kept our support. He’s as frustrated as we are about transfers. Why I love … Martin Dubravka A formidable presence between the sticks. Could be vital in keeping us up. How is the atmosphere? Subdued – and the antagonism towards Mike Ashley is always in the background. What is “the Newcastle way”? Scintillating attacking football built around number nines who’ll bang the goals in, week in, week out. We’re light years away from that now. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Alan Shearer – as a player. What we’d give for a striker with his ability. Funniest moment so far… The thought of Mike Ashley trying to paper over the cracks by treating Rafa and the squad to a few margherita pizzas is so sad it’s almost funny… • Richard & David Holmes Observer readers Best performance? By default it’s got to be Crystal Palace away: our only league win so far. It could have been more than 2-0, although given our usual “sit back on a lead” attitude after an hour or so, we were thankful for Christian Benteke’s goalscoring woes. And the worst? A few to pick from, but probably, relative to expectations, the opening-day bore draw with Burnley. Happy with the manager? It’s difficult to work out what Hughes has done, positive or negative. We don’t seem to be learning any lessons from (the many) setbacks, our defence is a shambles, and we seem capable of at most an hour of competence in any game. Chopping and changing the formation in-play must be confusing the hell out of the players. Why I love … Nathan Redmond The fanbase’s chosen boo-boy more or less since he arrived two years ago, he suffered from a chronic lack of confidence last season, but appears to have addressed it by opening up about it. It’s good to see someone battling through the tough times. How is the atmosphere? Dreadful, mostly. There’s a combination of apathy and, to be honest, boredom about the place these days – understandable considering what came in the few years beforehand – and our home record is absolutely pathetic. What is “the Southampton way”? It used to be based around high-energy, attacking football with a young, hungry team. It’s fair to say we’re now about as far away from that as is imaginable. in recent times. These days, we seem to operate in more or less the same way as every other mid-sized club, happy to just plod along collecting the TV money. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Sadio Mané, in a heartbeat. While he wouldn’t fix our defensive issues, we’d at least have a bit more excitement going forwards. Funniest moment so far … Neil Warnock’s failed appeal against one of the most blatant red cards you’ll ever see. That’s it, though. Slim pickings in what’s likely to be a pretty predictable and monotonous season for most Premier League sides. • Steve Grant SaintsWeb.co.uk @SteveGrant1983 Best performance? Spurs were satisfyingly ruthless at Old Trafford: three goals without reply at a ground where we haven’t had much success. Lucas Moura marauding through the United defence to score the third and send José Mourinho into his “respect me” meltdown was the standout moment. And the worst? The 2-1 home loss to Liverpool felt a bit flat. We had the bulk of possession but lacked zip and creativity. Michel Vorm, in for the injured Hugo Lloris, was at fault for both goals, and we rarely threatened at the other end. Incredibly we nearly snatched an undeserved draw with a late Lamela goal and decent penalty shout. Happy with the manager? Mauricio Pochettino, he’s magic you know: no summer signings, players knackered after the World Cup, but somehow we’re still only two points off the top despite not hitting top gear. Poch just needs to find a way of winning those key games. Why I love … Érik Lamela Technically gifted, looks like a god, scores rabonas, gives everything, fights Arsenal players … and he’s Argentinian. What’s not to love? OK, so “Coco” is a bit Marmite, but this could finally be his time. How is the atmosphere? It’s hard to generate a proper atmosphere: the seats are red and we’re not even meant to be there. Wembley’s just not “home”. It was barely half full for Cardiff, though the away fans were full of gallows humour: “Tottenham, Tottenham give us the ball.” A return to N17 can’t come soon enough. What is “the Spurs way”? Danny Blanchflower said the game is “about glory, doing things in a certain style.” This side is going about it the right way, although a trophy or two would be nice. Obviously. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? Chas Hodges of Chas & Dave. The duo are as much part of the identity of the club as Ricky Villa’s 1981 Cup final goal. It would have been fitting if he could have been there for the first game at the new ground – in spirit and song he will be. Funniest moment so far … Everybody was rooting for Moussa Sissoko when the ball fell to him on the edge of the box against Barcelona at 3-2 down. He duly blazed it high and handsome towards the top tier, and minutes later helped gift Messi their fourth. Oh, Moussa! • Richard Barnes @barnesrichard Best performance? We’ve taken a few big scalps since our promotion three years ago but Spurs had been missing from the list. Adding them was significant, not least for the force of personality and verve which saw us come from behind. And the worst? There’s only really been one, and it’s fresh in the memory. Everything went wrong against Bournemouth, including the weather: it was an island of cold, wet misery in a week of balmy sunshine. We’re hoping that we got all of our bad days out of the way in one go. (Bournemouth were pretty good too.) Happy with the manager? The jury was out on Javi over the summer but the ferocious personality of his side combined with his placid demeanour and lack of histrionics has won folk over. He’s not doing a lot wrong. Why I love … Adrian Mariappa A bit-part defender at three Premier League clubs. In that sense he’s unremarkable. But his association with Watford started 15 years ago and he’s exceeded all expectations on his return to the club. One of the good guys. How is the atmosphere? Great, thanks in equal measure to the performances on the pitch and the efforts of the 1881 supporters group who have transformed what was previously a relatively mellow home crowd. What is “the Watford way”? Community. Despite the high turnover of multinational head coaches and players, the links have rarely been stronger. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? John McClelland. He was tremendous. Funniest moment so far … With Spurs pegged back to 1-1 we were pushing for a winner on a blazingly hot day. Before a corner in front of the Rookery, Troy Deeney grabbed a bottle of water, emptied it over his head while staring into the stand unblinking, unsmiling, before turning back into the fray. Pure theatre. Spurs’ defence were sucked towards him and Cathcart ducked in to head a winner. • Matt Rowson BHappy.wordpress.com @mattrowson Best performance? Beating Manchester United 3-1, shouting “Olé!” as we passed the ball around and taunting José was very enjoyable. The win at Everton was a great result, too. And the worst? Losing at home to Wolves in the last minute and looking lacklustre all game. A terrible display. Happy with the manager? Pellegrini has stuck to his philosophy and did well not to panic after the first four defeats. He seems to understand the West Ham way and getting the youngsters to train with the first team is a good move. He comes across as a charming man, to coin a phrase. Just hope he can be tough on the players when needed. Why I love … Declan Rice A star of the future. He might also corner the market in half and half England/Ireland scarves. How is the atmosphere? No pitch invasions, so generally better. One of the best games was the 8-0 win against Macclesfield: the 24,000 fans really got behind the four academy players on the pitch. What is “the West Ham way”? Note to Big Sam, the West Ham way is simply playing entertaining football. And winning when we ought to lose and losing when we ought to win. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? During our terrible start I’d have loved to see Billy Bonds injecting a bit of passion. Funniest moment so far … It was nice to see Bradley Walsh seemingly wearing a West Ham scarf in Doctor Who. Quite apt as West Ham fans are used to disaster, starring into the abyss and evil plots to conquer the universe. • Pete May Author of Goodbye to Boleyn; HammersInTheHeart.blogspot.co.uk Best performance? We were so impressive (bar the finishing) in the 1-0 massacre of Burnley, but I’ll go for the point we gained at home to the reigning champions. It showed we aren’t here just to survive – we are here to compete. And the worst? We were quite poor at home to Southampton. It was a taste of things to come: away teams attempting to suffocate our midfield. Happy with the manager? He’s got it pretty much spot-on – naming the same starting XI for every game so far. His use of Adama Traoré has been interesting – the winger’s been making a big impact from the bench. Why I love … João Moutinho He’s been even better than I hoped: the perfect partner for Rúben Neves. At £5m, the signing of the season so far. How is the atmosphere? It’s been loud. There are actual fireworks before kick-off these days at Molineux, too. What is “the Wolves way”? The identity is evolving: we’re becoming recognised for attractive passing but defensive organisation is key. We can control games in and out of possession. Which figure from the past would you most want to bring back now? It’s sad that Sir Jack Hayward didn’t get to see the rise of his beloved club. Funniest moment so far … The realisation that Willy Boly had indeed handled the ball into the net at Man City. Some good fortune to go with an excellent performance that day. • Louie Silvani ThroughTheThirds.blogspot.com @louiesilvani4 • Part one: Arsenal to Huddersfield