American Muslims have raised more than $120,000 since Saturday for the families of those killed and injured in the Pittsburgh synagogue shooting, in a demonstration of interfaith solidarity. CelebrateMercy and MPowerChange, non-profit Muslim organizations, launched an online drive to raise funds for the synagogue within hours of the shooting, in which 11 people were killed and six were injured. It reached its target of $25,000 in six hours. “We wish to respond to evil with good, as our Islamic faith teaches us, and send a powerful message of compassion to the Jewish community – our Abrahamic cousins,” said Tarek El-Messidi, director of CelebrateMercy. “Through this campaign, we hope to send a united message from the Jewish and Muslim communities that there is no place for this type of hate and violence in America or anywhere worldwide. ” The Islamic Center of Pittsburgh will distribute funds to affected families in consultation with the Tree of Life synagogue, where the attack took place. The aim is to help with immediate needs such as funeral expenses and medical bills, said El-Messidi. The first funerals, for brothers David and Cecil Rosenthal, were planned for Tuesday, relatives said. In a statement posted on its website, the Islamic Center of Pittburgh said: “The Pittsburgh muslim community extends our deepest sympathy and condolences to the victims, their families, and all of our Jewish brothers and sisters. We condemn this hate crime unequivocally, and denounce all forms of hatred and bigotry. “The Pittsburgh community is our family; what happens to one of us, is felt by us all. May peace and blessings be upon all of us during this tragic time.” Muslims also expressed solidarity with the synagogue on social media using the hashtag #Muslims4Pittsburgh. Another online drive, launched by Shay Khatiri, a student from Iran attending Arizona State University, has raised more than $600,000 in donations. Several interfaith vigils took place in Pittsburgh over the weekend.