In New York, there is a seasoned florist in Chinatown who puts on red rubber gloves when handling the exotic flowers in his dark storefront. Chinese newspapers hang behind him and down below, a cat walks towards him. This simple, charming photograph details the life of one Chinese immigrant – who has a hint of loneliness on his face. “New York City is a place where there’s millions of things happening, everyone lives their own story,” said An Rong Xu, the photographer. “Even when there are so many people around you, it could feel like the loneliest place.” This photo, and more, are in Interior Lives: Contemporary Photographs of Chinese New Yorkers, a new exhibit opening at the Museum of the City of New York on 26 October, which traces the lives of Chinese New Yorkers through the eyes of three New York photographers: Xu alongside Thomas Holton and Annie Ling. “I’m drawn to loneliness,” said Xu. “Loneliness is one of the most commonly shared emotions among humans; a lot of my family history involved one of us leaving China to pursue dreams in America. So, in one way or another, the isolation and loneliness to pursue your dreams are ingrained in me.” The exhibit features roughly 60 photos of the Chinese community living in New York, from Chinatown natives to first-generation Americans, those who arrived from the 1960s onward to the new wave of immigrants. The images have been selected by MCNY’s photography curator, Sean Corcoran. “Immigration is one of the stories that is told in each of the photographer’s works, in different capacities,” said Corcoran. “Another point is the idea of community, home and how we make home through communities we build.” New York is the city with the largest Chinese population outside of Asia with an estimated 573,388 people recorded in 2014. “This exhibit is not a comprehensive look at life inside this community,” he said. “It’s meant to shine a light on the personal lives of Chinese New Yorkers and recognize how much they contribute to our city, which is overlooked in American culture.” He explains Chinese immigration to America almost doubled between 1980 and 1990, and again between 1990 and 2000. “The Chinese community has exploded here in New York City,” he said. “A lot of people make the association to Chinatown but we are trying to show they live everywhere in the city. They participate in all aspects in life, from working in restaurants to banking.” Xu’s photos look at the everyday lives of Chinese Americans through a quiet, cinematic lens. His series covers everything from Chinese barber shops to beauty queens, marching bands and teenagers hanging out in the park. “In New York, I feel Chinese Americans have created a community for themselves, that at times is welcoming and at other times, isolating,” said Xu. “I look at how we’re surrounded by each other and yet all have our own individual stories to tell.” Xu’s photos also seem to challenge well-worn stereotypes about Chinese Americans. “He is combating racism in his work, combating the idea that Chinese immigrants only work in Chinese restaurants,” said Corcoran. “He shows whole careers and cultural standpoints of how Chinese immigrants can absorb the local culture and made it their own, while combining it with their own culture they’ve grown up with.” The exhibit also features the photos of Taipei-born photographer Annie Ling, who documented the day-to-day lives of residents living in 81 Bowery, a defunct lodging house that offered cheap, often cramped housing for labor workers and Chinatown kitchen staff. “It’s about the complexities of immigration and the American dream,” said Corcoran. “It shows the sacrifices some people are willing to make for their families and their futures.” Meanwhile, New York photographer Thomas Holton shows a series based on one family he photographed for over a decade, the Lams, who carved out their lives in a 350-sq-ft apartment on Ludlow Street. “Ultimately, I think the Lams work is not about being Chinese American or specifically Chinese New Yorkers, but about family and the ups and downs families across the globe go through,” said Holton. “Life is not so easily scripted, it’s full of drama, which I believe everybody can relate to.” From kitchen meals to snoozing on the sofa and playing video games, viewers can watch the Lam children grow up and move onto other chapters in their lives, like college. “One theme in the series is growing apart but its more about the power of family and creating home, even when the home doesn’t work in ways expected,” said Holton. “What I have learned the most from this project is that life can, truthfully, be quite messy. I have a young son now, so I realize how important it is for me to be there for him and help him navigate the world.” Interior Lives: Contemporary Photographs of Chinese New Yorkers is on show from 26 October to 24 March at the Museum of the City of New York