Increasingly it feels as if European club rugby is turning into La Liga. In the ever-familiar world of Spanish football the domestic title has been won for 13 of the past 14 years by either Barcelona or Real Madrid, with only Atlético Madrid briefly interrupting the established hegemony. This year’s Champions Cup has a similar vibe before a ball is passed or kicked. Since 2011 just three teams have won Europe’s elite club trophy – Leinster, Toulon and Saracens. Substitute a fading Toulon for their French rival Racing 92, the most extravagantly backed French side in this year’s tournament, and you have the three main candidates for this season’s podium. As far as rugby is concerned, Europe is a shrinking concept regardless of Theresa May’s next move. This is not simply a consequence of the relentlessly high standards at Leinster and Saracens, two organisations apparently twinned in their desire to grow stronger every day. Talks are already happening behind the scenes to reduce the number of competing teams in the Champions Cup from 20 to 16 (it was 24 before 2014), partly to ease the pressure on the players’ groaning fixture schedule. Italian representation is now zero and the future direction of the tournament after 2022, when the current broadcasting deals expire, remains to be seen. It makes this season a crucial one quality-wise if the pan-European dream – and what a waste it would be if the best invention in the short history of the professional club game withers on the vine – is to be rekindled. The rugby, frankly, will have to be dazzling if the finalists can be predicted with reasonable confidence seven months in advance and shock away wins occur only once in a Leinster blue moon. The potential risk of deja vu, as things stand, is inescapable. Neither of the two early front‑runners in France’s Top 14, Clermont Auvergne and Stade Français, are involved this time and nor are La Rochelle, such a buccaneering, bold addition in 2017-18. Of the English contingent, it would be pushing it to describe Newcastle, Leicester or Bath as in-form contenders primed to tear down the houses of the continent’s aristocrats. Wasps and Gloucester will also swiftly discover their true worth when they face the champions of Leinster and Castres respectively on the opening weekend. Wasps already have some crucial absentees, the Friday weather forecast is not great and Leinster already have a record fifth European title in their sights. Gloucester, should they slip up at home against the French champions as they did against Harlequins last month, must then go to Thomond Park to face Munster. Start slowly and their Pool 2 challenge will already be over. Pool 1Bath, Leinster, Toulouse, Wasps Opening fixtures Fri Leinster v Wasps 7.45pm (BST)Sat Bath v Toulouse 1pm Pool 2Castres, Exeter, Gloucester, MunsterOpening fixtures Sat Exeter v Munster 3.15pm Sun Gloucester v Castres 1pm Pool 3Cardiff Blues, Glasgow Warriors, Lyon, SaracensOpening fixtures Sun Lyon v Blues 1pm, Glasgow v Saracens 3.15pm Pool 4Leicester, Racing 92, Scarlets, UlsterOpening fixtures Sat Scarlets v Racing 5.30pm, Ulster v Leicester 5.30pm Pool 5Edinburgh, Montpellier, Newcastle, ToulonOpening fixtures Sat Montpellier v Edinburgh 3.15pmSun Toulon v Newcastle 3.15pm Assuming Saracens can see off Glasgow and Lyon in the first two pool rounds, though, a home quarter-final should be well within the north London club’s capabilities. Last year they were undone by their rescheduled Monday aberration against Clermont, who beat them 46-14 at home and condemned them to a quarter-final in Dublin. “It re-taught us there is no margin for error in this competition,” said Mark McCall, their director of rugby. “It’s different from the Premiership, you can’t afford to slip up.” Watching Leinster subsequently overcome Racing 92 in Bilbao and take all the plaudits has also galvanised a Sarries squad who lifted the trophy for the preceding two years. “Nobody enjoyed watching the semi-finals and final which we weren’t involved in,” McCall said. “They’re an ambitious group who want to do well in both competitions and they didn’t enjoy watching the final. I think they believe we can do well in Europe this season. They know we’re good enough.” Going unbeaten through the entire pool stages, as Sarries did for the previous two seasons and Leinster achieved last season, also makes it less likely that the two heavyweights will have to meet before the final in Newcastle next May. The now-abandoned semi-final draw system used to increase that possibility but these days it is tougher than ever for the tournament’s minnows. For those aspiring to challenge the elite the battle cry is simple: go hard or go home. It would do wonders for the tournament if, for example, Glasgow or Edinburgh – Scotland have two participants for the first time in five years – could bag a munro or two. This is an overdue opportunity, too, for Cardiff Blues to reach the last eight for the first time in a decade following their thrilling win in last season’s Challenge Cup final. If not, the pool phase highlight may well be the ding-dong of a battle between Munster and Exeter for top spot in Pool 2. Both sides could well progress, with Exeter’s director of rugby, Rob Baxter, determined to ensure his Premiership-topping squad improve on their European record of qualifying for the knockout stages just once in five previous attempts. For the first time the Chiefs have been working specifically towards the Munster game for weeks, rather than cruising into Europe merely looking to replicate what they do in the Premiership. “Our home pool game against Leinster last year was the big influence,” Baxter said. “I don’t want that to happen again. I think what we do will work in Europe; it’s just we have to do it really well.” Exeter are certainly worth backing to join Leinster, Munster, Saracens, Racing 92, Scarlets, Montpellier and Toulon in the last eight but, final-wise, a Leinster‑Saracens clash of the titans remains the likeliest endgame.