Kleenex is scrapping the Mansize branding of its tissue boxes following complaints it is sexist. The company said the boxes would instead be called Kleenex extra large. Kleenex was first sold in the US in the early 1920s as a cold cream and makeup remover and launched in the UK the following year. The company introduced Kleenex for Men in 1956 with the claim that the tissues would “stay strong when wet”. But growing criticism has forced the company to change its branding. Consumers have tweeted to askKleenex why its products still use the term Mansize when “the world is changing”. Hi @Kleenex_UK. My 4yo son asked me what was written here. Then he asked, why are they called mansize? Can girls, boys & mummies use them? I said: I don’t know & yes of course. He suggests you should call them “very large tissues”. It is 2018 pic.twitter.com/SeOg32RsDV In this day and age, is it right for @Kleenex_UK to have a product that is MANsized? The world is changing maybe they should too? #BOUCRY The company has yet to respond to the Guardian’s request for comment, but a spokesman for its parent company, Kimberly-Clark, told the Daily Telegraph: “Kleenex Mansize tissues have been on shelves for the past 60 years. Over that time, the brand has always been characterised by a much larger tissue size, which is both soft and strong. “It was launched at a time when large cotton handkerchiefs were still very popular and Kleenex offered a unique disposable alternative. Despite that, our consumer service is registering consistent increase of complaints on gender concern related to the Mansize sub-brand.” The spokesman added that the branding does not endorse gender inequality and does not suggest that being both soft and strong is an exclusively masculine trait. “Nevertheless, as we remain committed to developing the best possible products for our consumers and take any feedback extremely seriously, we decided to renovate our current product and update the product sub-brand as Kleenex Extra Large,” he said. The move follows Waitrose’s announcement that it will be changing the name of its gentleman’s smoked chicken caesar roll because of consumer complaints. The Advertising Standards Authority (ASA) said it had yet to receive any complaints about Kleenex ads referring to Mansize tissues. While the ASA does not have a breakdown of complaints specifically about sexism in adverts, a spokesperson said the debates and concerns around the depiction of gender was a “live issue”. The ASA has undertaken a significant amount of work around gender stereotypes in ads in the past 18 months, the spokesperson said. This has included research into public opinion and a consultation on a proposed new rule preventing harmful gender stereotypes.