The UFC president, Dana White, has not ruled out a rematch between Conor McGregor and Khabib Nurmagomedov despite their fight at the weekend ending in ugly scenes. However, any potential meeting could be in jeopardy after the Nevada State Athletic Commission said it will file formal complaints against both fighters. Nurmagomedov beat McGregor inside four rounds in Las Vegas before he leapt into the crowd and fought with one of his opponent’s trainers. Meanwhile, men thought to be members of the Russian’s team entered the octagon and attacked McGregor. Nurmagomedov apologised for his actions but said he had been provoked during the build-up to the fight, when McGregor had mocked his religion, father and country. Despite his loss, McGregor tweeted after the fight that he would like to meet Nurmagomedov again. “Good knock,” he wrote. “Looking forward to the rematch.” Such a fight would be likely to generate huge revenues, despite the distaste generated by Saturday’s events, and White said he had already heard from McGregor. “[Nurmagomedov] has to go before the Nevada commission [after his purse from the fight was withheld due to the brawl], and we have to see what’s going to happen with Khabib and this whole mess,” White told ESPN on Monday. “But Conor McGregor has already called me, wanting a rematch. “That’s what Conor has asked for. We’ll see what happens with Khabib and what’s next. [Former interim lightweight champion] Tony Ferguson looked amazing. Those two have been lined up three different times to fight and it hasn’t happened. We’ll see how things play out.” Meanwhile, the NSAC chairman, Anthony Marnell, told ESPN hearings about possible discipline against the fighters would not be heard until at least November. If they are found guilty, McGregor and Nurmagomedov face fines and suspensions. “This is a serious issue, this is not a light issue,” Marnell said. “This isn’t, ‘We smacked each other in the face in a hotel lobby the week of a fight.’ This is the night of the event, and it needs to stay inside that field of combat. There are serious regulations and statutes about what took place, and the consequences have to match the actions.” Many believe that McGregor had crossed the line from trash talking to bigotry before the fight with Nurmagomedov. However, White said neither fighter was blameless, and described McGregor as a “superstar”. “We knew some things could happen after this fight, so we had everything in place to make sure that didn’t happen,” White said. “I didn’t see Khabib jumping over the cage like that. He got over that thing quick and was going after one of Conor’s cornermen. “There’s no doubt he’s justified for being upset, but first of all, you, you just won the fight against the biggest superstar in all of sports, let alone our sport. You just beat him while the whole world was watching ... The only one getting hurt in this thing now is Khabib. Now he has to go before the Nevada commission.” Meanwhile, Nurmagomedov’s father and coach, Abdulmanap, said his son’s action were unacceptable. “I think that for Khabib, the most severe sanctions would be my regard,”he told Ren TV. “I am going to regard this severely. I warned him. For me, the most important thing is discipline. You can do whatever you want in the octagon, but beyond its barrier – this is the border separating civilians, there are children, women, bystanders. “This fight took place within the octagon. That’s the spectacle. But I am categorically against fighting outside the octagon. Outside of the octagon, you need to exist peacefully. Fight in the octagon.” Nurmagomedov had already said he was wary of his father’s reaction to Saturday’s events. “I know my father’s gonna smash me when I go home,” he said at the post-fight press conference.