A Saudi Arabian business conference shunned by western business leaders in the wake of the murder of Jamal Khashoggi has concluded with £39bn ($50bn) of deals signed. The Future Investment Initiative (FII), nicknamed “Davos in the Desert”, was overshadowed by international outcry over the Saudi regime’s alleged involvement in the journalist’s death. Multiple business leaders withdrew from the event in Riyadh, including executives from HSBC, Google, JP Morgan, Uber and Glencore, as well as the head of the International Monetary Fund, Christine Lagarde. The withdrawals led to questions about whether Saudi efforts to use the FII to bolster its position in the global investment community would pay off. In the absence of high-profile figures, $50bn of deals were signed, although most were with companies from Saudi Arabia’s regional allies, as well as the French oil firm Total, one of the few western companies that refused to withdraw. Saudi Aramco, the national oil champion that postponed plans for a $100bn flotation this year, signed 15 deals worth $34bn. It announced tie-ups with Total and the US oil services firms Halliburton, Baker Hughes and Schlumberger, as well as 11 other agreements with companies from Japan, China, India and the United Arab Emirates. One attendee, who asked not to be named, said he believed many more deals were signed on the sidelines of the event, which was well attended, albeit mostly by Saudis and people from the Middle East. “There were battalions of bankers, hedge funds and venture capitalists here, all wanting to find out how to tap into Saudi monies via the Public Investment Fund and also investment opportunities across the region,” the source said. Mohammed bin Salman, the Saudi crown prince and de facto ruler, told the FII that Khashoggi’s killing was a “heinous crime”. He vowed to increase the standing of Saudi Arabia and the Gulf on the world stage. “The new Europe in the next 30 years will be the Middle East,” he said. Conference attendees were shown a presentation of some of Saudi Arabia’s much-vaunted “giga-projects”, including a futuristic new city called Neom, a luxury tourism project including new islands along the Red Sea coast and a gigantic amusement park called Qiddiya. The projects are part of efforts to modernise the country and diversify the economy away from oil, a strategy known as Vision 2030 and led by Bin Salman.