Geoffrey Rush and the woman at the centre of a defamation trial between the actor and Sydney newspaper the Daily Telegraph exchanged familiar and “affectionate” emails with one another after the alleged inappropriate behaviour at the centre of a defamation trial had occurred. On the opening day of Rush’s two-week defamation trial against the Daily Telegraph on Monday, his barrister, Bruce McClintock SC, told the court the actor denied all the allegations made against him, and accused the newspaper of deliberately seeking to “smash and destroy” Rush’s reputation. McClintock told the court Rush had forged a reputation as one of Australia’s best-known actors over an almost 50-year career. Rush, he said, had been a “household name” and a “national living treasure” with “no scandal attached to his name”. “As well as giving pleasure to millions, his reputation was stellar. It could not have been higher,” McClintock said. But the Telegraph and journalist Jonathan Moran, who McClintock described as a “gossip columnist”, had sought to “smash and destroy” Rush’s reputation in a deliberate attempt to link him to the scandal surrounding other disgraced personalities such as Don Burke and Harvey Weinstein. The Telegraph, McClintock said, had been desperate for the story after being “gazumped” by Fairfax Media over the Burke story. “There’s no one who could read these articles and think anything other than [that] this was a straight-up, full-blown attack on my client,” McClintock said. Rush appeared on the stand briefly before the lunch break on Monday. He appeared calm as he spoke about his early career as a young actor in Brisbane and Paris in the late nineteen seventies, and later in Sydney as a teacher at the acting school Nida where he shared a home in Kensington with “a very young” Mel Gibson. He talked about how throughout his career he had specialised in playing “the ratbags, the fools, the conmen and the idiots and the drunks”. Rush is suing the Telegraph and Moran over a series of articles published in late November and early December 2017 that alleged he behaved inappropriate during a 2015 stage production of King Lear. The actor was swamped by journalists but remained silent as he entered the court wearing a navy suit and dark-blue shirt on Monday morning. Rush claims the articles defamed him by portraying him as a “pervert” and “sexual predator”. His lawyers argue the Telegraph was motivated by “malice” and that the newspaper published the articles “predominantly for the improper motive of harming” Rush. Rush’s lawyers are seeking aggravated damages against the Telegraph, and on Monday McClintock said his client had suffered “real financial hardship” and “the hurt to his feelings”. He said Rush was earning “many millions of dollars per annum” in the years before the publications, but that in the 10-and-a-half months since the stories were published he had made only $44,000. The woman at the centre of the allegations, Eryn-Jean Norvill has not spoken publicly since the Telegraph published the stories, but in August the federal court heard News would seek to argue truth in its defence on the basis of her statement. In his opening submissions on Monday, McClintock told the court the trial would hear evidence from the director of the Lear production, Neil Armfield, as well as other cast members, that they did not witness any of the alleged inappropriate behaviour. He said Rush believed his relationship with Norvill to be “professional and cordial”, and read out emails and text messages between the two of them which he said showed “familiarity” and “affection”. In earlier emails Norvill thanked Rush for a positive reference, and asked him to attend her birthday. McClintock also sent an email sent after the alleged inappropriate behaviour from Norvill to Rush after he had forwarded a positive review to her. “That was wonderful, thanks for sending through dearest daddy gush,” she wrote. McClintock also accused Moran, the author of the articles, of telling “bare-faced lies” in some of the articles complained about. Moran, who McClintock described as a “gossip columnist” will not appear during the trial. The trial continues.