This could be the end of Apu Nahasapeemapetilon. After 28 years of service – and increasing controversy about the depiction of the character – it has been reported that the Indian-American convenience store worker may no longer appear in The Simpsons. The debate over whether Apu is a harmless caricature or a racially insensitive misstep has been raging since the standup comic Hari Kondabolu released a documentary, The Problem with Apu, in 2017. In it, Kondabolu said that the character had become “a tool for kids to go after you”. On Friday, Adi Shankar, the showrunner for the Netflix series Castlevania, told Indiewire that The Simpsons was planning to “drop him altogether just to avoid the controversy”, citing three sources. However, Al Jean, a veteran producer of the cartoon, tweeted on Sunday: “Adi Shankar is not a producer on The Simpsons. I wish him the very best but he does not speak for our show”. It is clear that The Simpsons needs to do something with Apu, especially since its last attempt to address the growing clamour over his portrayal – a condescending throwaway line in an unrelated episode – only compounded things. So, what can The Simpsons do? Here are some ideas: This appears to be the current plan. If Shankar’s claims are true, Apu will simply be dropped out of rotation. This would not be unprecedented – characters such as Üter Zörker and Sideshow Mel have drifted out of favour in recent years – although it would be the first time that The Simpsons has benched a character due to a race controversy. Ditching Apu feels sneaky and dishonest. It is not something the show would have attempted in its prime. Rather than quietly brush him under the carpet, The Simpsons could instead give Apu a grand onscreen farewell. However, finding the right tone for this would be exceptionally hard. Murder him, like they did with Maude Flanders, and it would look like an act of aggression towards those who expressed their disappointment with the character; give him a rose-tinted farewell and it would come off as a celebration of a problematic character. Getting it right seems nigh-on impossible. Therefore, the show could … Hank Azaria, who plays Apu, has long expressed ambivalence about the character. In an interview 11 years ago, he admitted that his accent was “not tremendously accurate” and in a recent appearance on Stephen Colbert’s talkshow he said he would be “perfectly willing to step aside” from the role. So, why not keep Apu, but replace him with a south Asian actor? Not having the vocal equivalent of brownface on the show would immediately make things much better. From there, the show could work on clearing up the concerns with the depiction of the character. This is something else Azaria mooted on Colbert. “The most important thing is to listen to Indian people and their experience,” he said, adding: “I really want to see Indian, south Asian writers in the writers’ room, genuinely informing whichever direction this character takes.” This is a very sensible suggestion. Obviously, The Simpsons is a cartoon and hewing too close to realism would destroy it. However, of The Simpsons’ 120 credited writers, the overwhelming majority have been white and male. In 2018, this seems very shortsighted. And, of course, mixing things up might breathe life into the show. Maybe The Simpsons should just end – look itself in the eye, accept that it has been off the boil for close to 20 years now, that every new mediocre episode harms a series that once meant so much to so many people. Not only would this solve the Apu problem, but it would also address the Lady Gaga cameo problem, the Elon Musk cameo problem, the “Bart is suicidal now” problem and the general sense that watching a Simpsons repeat on TV these days feels like a heavily disadvantaged game of Russian roulette.