A limited FBI investigation into allegations of sexual misconduct against Brett Kavanaugh, Donald Trump’s supreme court nominee, has been received by the US Senate and placed in a secure basement room where the body’s 100 members will be given access. FBI agents have spoken to some potential witnesses to Kavanaugh’s alleged assault against Christine Blasey Ford, which she set out in detailed testimony to the Senate judiciary committee last week. The report was delivered to Capitol Hill at 2.30am with a statement from the White House saying it was “fully confident the Senate will vote to confirm Judge Kavanaugh to the supreme court.” Senators are expected to begin reviewing the FBI report on Thursday morning in a secure basement room in the Capitol complex. The Senate judiciary committee chair, Chuck Grassley, is first at around 8am ET, followed by ranking Democrat Dianne Feinstein, and then other colleagues, either individually or possibly in groups. Grassley on Thursday confirmed the committee had received the report. No copies will be made of the report, as is standard, so senators will have to go to the room to learn what is in it. They are not supposed to divulge its contents to the public. “If you want people to be candid when they talk to the FBI, you ain’t going to make that public,” Grassley said on Wednesday. The report will review allegations from Deborah Ramirez, who says Kavanaugh exposed himself to her at a party when both were students at Yale. Kavanaugh has angrily denied the allegations. The limited FBI investigation was begun late last week when Jeff Flake, a Republican hold-out on the judiciary committee, signalled he would not confirm Kavanaugh without further checks. Trump ordered the FBI to report within a week. On Wednesday night, he reiterated his support for his nominee. “Wow, such enthusiasm and energy for Judge Brett Kavanaugh,” he tweeted. “He is a fine man and great intellect. The country is with him all the way!” Trump also claimed Kavanaugh’s embattled confirmation process was having “an incredible upward impact on voters”. The harsh and unfair treatment of Judge Brett Kavanaugh is having an incredible upward impact on voters. The PEOPLE get it far better than the politicians. Most importantly, this great life cannot be ruined by mean & despicable Democrats and totally uncorroborated allegations! The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell, has signalled he plans to force a final vote on Kavanaugh’s nomination as early as Saturday, following an initial cloture vote on Friday. Republicans hold a 51-49 majority in the Senate and a simple majority is needed to advance his nomination. A handful of Republican and Democratic senators are undecided on whether to support Kavanaugh and their votes will decide whether he is confirmed. In short, cloture is a way of cutting off debate and ending a filibuster on a particular issue before the US Senate – part of a multi-step process that culminates in a final vote on legislation or a nomination. In the case of judge Brett Kavanaugh, the Senate Majority leader, Mitch McConnell, must first file for cloture, which will set the stage for a final vote on Kavanaugh's supreme court nomination. Once McConnell files for cloture, the motion must “ripen” meaning that it cannot be voted on until a full legislative day has passed. For example, if he filed for cloture on Wednesday, a cloture vote would not take place before Friday. The cloture vote – as opposed to the final vote – is often where the real drama happens. Republicans have a narrow 51-49 majority in the Senate and could vote to invoke cloture without support from a single Democrat. If only 50 senators agree to end debate, Vice President Mike Pence would be brought in to break the tie. If the motion, fails McConnell could try again or he could opt to pull the nomination. Invoking cloture for supreme court nominees once required 60 votes but was lowered in 2017 to a simple majority threshold last year during the nomination fight over justice Neil Gorsuch. Sixty votes are still required to approve legislation. Once cloture is invoked, debate on the matter is limited to an additional 30 hours. After that, the full senate would proceed to a final vote. Lauren Gambino Ford’s lawyers have criticised the limited scope of the re-opened investigation. They pointed out that the additional FBI background investigation did not include interviewing Ford or the witnesses they say corroborate her testimony. They said they were “profoundly disappointed” that those directing the probe “were not interested in seeking the truth”. Trump on Tuesday inflamed tensions over Kavanaugh’s nomination by mocking Ford at a Republican rally in Mississippi. Three key Republican senators condemned Trump’s remarks. “I wish he hadn’t have done it and I just say it’s kind of appalling,” Flake told NBC. Susan Collins of Maine and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, who are seen as swing votes on the Kavanaugh nomination, also rebuked Trump. The rising tensions have led to heightened security at the Capitol, with some senators using police escorts to shield them from protesters eager to confront them. Collins was escorted out of a hearing on Wednesday by three police officers. This comes as hundreds more anti-Kavanaugh demonstrators are expected to descend on the Capitol on Thursday and throughout the weekend. Another group will broadcast on a screen outside of the Capitol the Access Hollywood tape of Trump bragging about grabbing women without their consent, which was published two years ago. Fresh questions have been raised about Kavanaugh’s temperament and the evidence he gave to the judiciary committee last week. Several high school and college classmates have come forward to challenge his characterisation of his teenage years and his drinking habits. On Thursday, a letter signed by more than 1,000 law professors will be delivered to senators urging them not to confirm Kavanaugh. “We regret that we feel compelled to write to you, our Senators, to provide our views that at the Senate hearings on Sept. 27, Judge Brett Kavanaugh displayed a lack of judicial temperament that would be disqualifying for any court, and certainly for elevation to the highest court of this land,” they write. In an opinion piece for Slate, one of Kavanaugh’s roommates at Yale, James Roche, said the judge “stood up under oath and lied about his drinking and about the meaning of words in his yearbook”. “His willingness to lie to avoid embarrassment throws doubt on his denials about the larger questions of sexual assault,” Roche wrote, adding that he would be willing to speak to the FBI. On Tuesday, the New York Times published a letter written by Kavanaugh in 1983, which refers to himself and his friends as “loud, obnoxious drunks with prolific pukers” – a starkly different image from the one he portrayed to senators last week during a hearing before the Senate judiciary committee. During the hearing Ford accused Kavanaugh of attempting to rape her during a drunken gathering when they were in high school. Two other women have accused him of sexual misconduct, charges he has stridently denied.