There is method behind the madness of charring vegetables so much that you are forced to open every window and door to avoid the dreaded fire alarm orchestra. On a cellular level, amino acids and sugars are rearranging themselves nicely; for non‑scientists, that means flavours are concentrating, imparting complexity, bitterness, sweetness and deliciousness. This is why I tend to recommend roasting carrots (and any other veg, really), rather than boiling them. It’s also why today I can bunch together three such different recipes – a bread, a dip and a leafy salad – all joined together by the enchanting power of heat and smoke. This soft, crumbly, oaty loaf is brilliant toasted and served for breakfast with lots of butter, or with a soup or stew at any other time of day. Potato flour is starchy and makes the bread very light. It will keep well for three days. Prep 10 minCook 1 hr 20 minServes 6 300g parsnips (3-4 parsnips), skin left on and roughly chopped into quarters200g jerusalem artichokes, skin left on and roughly chopped in half120g potato flour (I used Doves Farm)120g rolled oats, ground in a spice grinder or food processor60g quick-cook polenta1 tsp baking powder1½ tsp bicarbonate of soda1½ tsp ground cumin1½ caraway seeds, toasted and roughly blitzed¼ tsp cayenne pepper30g soft light brown sugar25g spring onions (1-2 spring onions), finely chopped120ml olive oil360g soured cream2 eggs, separatedSalt and black pepper Heat the oven to 170C/335F/gas 3. Line and grease a 20cm x 10cm 900g loaf tin with greaseproof paper. Put the vegetables in a food processor and roughly blitz into 1cm pieces (or chop by hand). Put a large frying pan on a high heat and, once very hot, add half the parsnips and jerusalem artichokes. Dry-fry for about eight minutes, turning down the heat to medium-high after a few minutes and stirring every so often, until the vegetables are lightly charred but not burned. Repeat with the rest of the veg, then leave to cool for a few minutes. Put all the remaining ingredients except the egg whites and seasoning in a large bowl, stir to combine, then add the cooled vegetables, a teaspoon of salt and a good grind of pepper. Whisk the egg whites for a minute or two, to soft peaks, then gently fold into the bowl until just combined, taking care not to overwork it. Spoon the dough into the lined tin and bake for 30 minutes, until risen and beginning to colour. Cover loosely with foil, bake for another 20 minutes, then remove the foil and bake for a final 10 minutes, until golden brown (a skewer will not come out totally clean, but it should be only slightly moist). Leave the loaf to cool in the tin for 10 minutes, then turn out on to a rack. This aromatic vegetable dip, with eggs folded through it at the end, is a non-traditional take on an Iranian dish. Serve as part of a meze spread, or as a light supper or weekend breakfast with good bread and some salty cheese or crunchy salad. Prep 10 minCook 1 hrServes 2-4 500g aubergines (2-3 aubergines)150g red pepper 350g vine tomatoes (4-5 tomatoes)15g red chilli75ml olive oil1 onion, peeled and finely chopped 1 tsp ground cumin½ tsp ground turmeric1 tsp ground cinnamon2 garlic cloves, peeled and crushed1 tsp tomato pasteSalt and black pepper2 eggs, beaten5g mint leaves, roughly torn at the last minute30g walnuts, toasted and roughly chopped Heat a large griddle pan on a high flame. Toss the aubergine, peppers, tomatoes and chilli in a tablespoon of oil. Once the pan is very hot, add the vegetables in stages and cook, turning every so often, until deeply charred all over and soft – about 10 minutes for the tomatoes and chilli, 35 for the aubergines and peppers. As each vegetable is cooked, remove it from the pan and set aside on separate plates to cool for about 10 minutes. Once cool, peel the pepper, discard the skin, stem and seeds, and finely chop the flesh – you should end up with about 80g. Peel and roughly chop the tomatoes, to leave you with about 250g flesh and juice. Peel the aubergines, discard the skins and stems, but leave some of the char on the flesh to add smokiness to the dish, then put in a sieve set over a bowl and leave to drain for 15 minutes. Finely chop the aubergine flesh, to leave you with about 200g. Discard the stem and seeds of the chilli, and finely chop the flesh. Heat two and a half tablespoons of oil in a large saute pan on a medium-high flame. Fry the onion until softened and lightly browned – about seven minutes – then add the spices, garlic, cooked chilli and tomato paste, and cook for a minute more. Add the aubergine, pepper, tomato, a teaspoon of salt, a good grind of black pepper and 100ml water, turn the heat to medium, then cook for 10 minutes, stirring occasionally, until the liquid reduces. Slowly add the eggs, stirring continuously, and cook for two minutes on a medium-low heat, until they are just cooked. Transfer to a shallow serving bowl and smooth out the top with the back of a spoon. Scatter over the mint and walnuts, drizzle with the remaining oil and serve hot with warm bread to scoop it all up. It may seem a little counterintuitive to grill leaves, but it really elevates certain salads, particularly those with hardy wintry leaves. Prep 15 minCook 8 minServes 4 as a starter 2½ tbsp balsamic vinegar1 tbsp pomegranate molasses1½ tsp runny honey1 shallot, peeled and very finely chopped ½ red chilli, deseeded and finely chopped Salt and black pepper3 tbsp olive oil, plus extra for greasing250g radicchio, (1 head) trimmed and cut into 8 wedges150g kale, woody stems removed and discarded, leaves roughly shredded 1 orange, skin and pith removed, flesh cut into half-moons 40g blanched hazelnuts, toasted and roughly chopped1½ tsp toasted sesame oil In a small bowl, whisk the first five ingredients with an eighth of a teaspoon of salt and a good grind of pepper. Slowly drizzle in the oil, whisking continuously, to emulsify. Put the radicchio and kale in a large bowl, add half the dressing, a quarter-teaspoon of salt and a good grind of pepper, and toss gently. Heat a well-oiled griddle pan on a high flame and, once smoking, cook the radicchio and kale in batches, until charred in places but not completely wilted – about 90 seconds to two minutes. Transfer to a plate while you griddle the rest. Toss the orange and hazelnuts in the remaining dressing until coated. To serve, spread out the grilled kale and radicchio on a serving platter, pour over the dressed orange and hazelnuts, drizzle with the sesame oil and serve.