As some black-cab drivers in London used to insist, we never go south of the river. But when England’s Under-21s run out at Tynecastle on Tuesday there is one part of the country that should take particular pride. Having qualified for next year’s European Championship in Italy and San Marino with a 7-0 win against Andorra on Thursday, Aidy Boothroyd’s side to face Scotland could include as many as eight players born and raised in south London – an area fast becoming one of the most productive breeding grounds on the planet. As well as the regulars Tammy Abraham and Under-20 World Cup winner Ademola Lookman, who hail from Camberwell, Boothroyd’s squad has been boosted by the emergence of a new generation of young players including Roehampton’s Ryan Sessegnon of Fulham and Reiss Nelson, the Arsenal forward on loan at Hoffenheim this season. His fellow 18-year-old, the Kennington‑raised Jadon Sancho, was one of four south Londoners named in Gareth Southgate’s senior squad last week, moreover, along with the young goalkeeper Marcus Bettinelli (Croydon), Joe Gomez (Catford) and Nathaniel Chalobah (Gipsy Hill). With players such as Callum Hudson-Odoi, Emile Smith Rowe (both Croydon) and Jonathan Panzo (Brockley) tipped to follow their former England Under-17 teammate Sancho into the senior squad, south London’s emerging generation could dominate for years to come. According to Harry Hudson, a former Crystal Palace academy coach who set up the Croydon-based charity The Kinetic Foundation in 2011, it is partly down to the area’s unique demographics. “There is a real mix of people and that means you have so many different cultures playing together, with certain elements from each culture coming through,” says Hudson, who has helped an astonishing 33 local players sign professional deals, including Sunderland’s Joshua Maja – currently Europe’s topscoring teenager with nine goals in League One this season. “If you look at Jadon Sancho or Callum Hudson-Odoi, they aren’t traditionally English-style players like David Beckham or Paul Scholes and have games that are more about flair. It is also very competitive in south London – there is a certain resilience that players have to have to be successful. It’s very dog eat dog.” At the last count the area stretching from the boroughs of Richmond and Kingston in the west to Greenwich, Bromley and Bexley in the east had a population of 2.8m people – about 5.2% of England’s population – and more than 10% of English players to have played in the Premier League this season originate from south London. Arsenal forward Eddie Nketiah has yet to feature for Unai Emery’s side in the league but that did not stop the Brockley-raised 19-year-old being asked to train with Southgate’s senior players this week, with the England manager – himself schooled in south London at Crystal Palace – having shown he is always willing to give young players more experience. “There’s always been a high production rate in south London but with the Elite Player Performance Plan and better coaching, the overall level has kicked on,” says a youth scout from a top-six Premier League club who does not want to be named. “That success has coincided with clubs recognising the importance of education as well, with many at clubs like Arsenal, Chelsea and Manchester City being sent to public schools so they have the best of both worlds. Some players have previously struggled to cope with the demands of professional football but now they have a bit more wisdom which really helps to develop them holistically. By the time they turn 16, you usually see a well-rounded individual who can be a footballer or do something else because they have received an education.” Although Chelsea’s academy provided 19 of the 128 players selected for England this week – they have also won seven of the past nine FA Youth Cups – a lack of first-team opportunities for homegrown operators at Stamford Bridge has started to see a wider spread of talent. Besides Sessegnon and his twin brother, Steven, Fulham’s academy has produced Kingston-born Patrick Roberts – now on loan at the La Liga side Girona from City, while Charlton have seen Gomez, Lookman and the emerging defender Ezri Konsa fly the nest after arriving from a variety of backgrounds. “Footballers can come from any level – you just have to believe in them and try to help them improve,” adds the scout. “The grassroots scene where they can play with freedom and no pressure is sometimes a good way to develop. Lookman is a good example of that – he played grassroots until he was 16 and although he had many trials, he was always unsuccessful. A lot of Jadon Sancho’s ability comes from park football and playing on the [housing] estate and Reiss Nelson is a similar story.” Nelson, who represented Southwark’s Under-11s in the London Youth Games with Sancho and Manchester City’s Ian Carlo Poveda, is also thriving in the Bundesliga, after opting to spend the season there on loan. The former Palace youth-team player Mandela Egbo is among others to try their luck in Germany’s top division and after the success of Sancho – who trained with Kinetic last summer as he prepared to join Borussia Dortmund – Hudson would not be surprised if more soon follow. “Jadon just wanted to do some additional work on his movement so we did some individual sessions around him receiving the ball in behind,” he explains. “I wish we could attribute his great form this season to that... But it’s amazing that he’s got recognition with an England call-up. There’s a lot of players who are starting to go overseas and it’s working out, which is really good.” Even before France’s World Cup triumph, much was made of Kylian Mbappé and the team’s “boys from the banlieues”, with the New York Times describing Paris as “the greatest pool of soccer talent in Europe”. Eight of Didier Deschamps’ squad at the World Cup came from the French capital, and there is every chance that future England squads will have a heavy south London accent. “I think it matches Paris,” says the scout. “I go over there regularly and I think the only difference is that players are in a country where clubs will give young players a chance. When Palace or Charlton are struggling and they have no option but to play young players, they produce Wilfried Zaha and Joe Gomez. It’s not a coincidence – it will always happen if the players are blooded. There is so much talent out there but sometimes you just need a bit of luck to make the manager give you a chance. There’s definitely more Zahas in Croydon, I can assure you.”