A British teenager who is trying to become the youngest person to cycle solo around the world has had his bike stolen in Australia. Charlie Condell, 18, has pedalled through Europe and Asia since embarking on an eight-month, 18,000-mile journey in July. He woke up in Townsville, Queensland, on day 103 – Tuesday – to discover his bike, camping gear, passport and other equipment had vanished. All he was left with was the shirt and shorts he stood up in and one bag. Condell, who set off on his expedition the day after leaving Clifton College in Bristol, said he was determined to find a new bike and carry on. Writing on social media, he described the loss of his bicycle – which he had named Colin – in an understated way: Day 103. Today has been rather mixed. Started of in a rather sub-ideal manner with my realization that the bike had been stolen. Rather conflicted emotions throughout the day, as I've… https://t.co/79i7vjbIIR Instead of falling into gloom, he decided to take a trip to the nearby Magnetic Island. Suitably cheered, he sent a defiant message to his supporters: “Amazing day seeing wild koalas and feeding the birds of paradise! I do love Australia, and one bastard isn’t going to change that option! Have a great day with whatever you’re doing, and don’t stop – ever!” Condell has cycled through 17 countries, riding up to 125 miles per day, and flown between continents. Usually he camps wild but on Monday night he treated himself to a night at a hostel and a game of volleyball on the foreshore in Townsville after a tough couple of days cycling in searing heat. He estimated that at least £4,000 in equipment had been stolen but he said he still hoped to complete his trip by March and break the record. Condell’s bike was a lightweight carbon fibre Cervélo. Condell is funding his trip from his savings and he has also set up a crowdfunding page for people to support him. He has already had offers of help from people and is working out the best way to carry on with his journey. Another British man, Tom Davies, is believed to hold the record for the youngest person to cycle around the world unassisted. He was 19 when he completed his journey in 2015. 