Bath welcome the four-times winners Toulouse to the Recreation Ground but do so without their 20-year-old winger Joe Cokanasiga who has presented symptoms of delayed concussion this week, in more bad news for England. Taulupe Faletau is also absent, after breaking his arm in last Friday’s defeat by Exeter, so Zach Mercer is selected at No 8 where he faces an intriguing battle with the former New Zealand back-row Jerome Kaino. Jamie Roberts returns to the centres to add midfield ballast while Francois Louw is back at flanker after a stunning shift for the Springboks against New Zealand last weekend. For Toulouse, Cheslin Kolbe, another who was in action for South Africa in their narrow defeat by the All Blacks, returns to the wing. Romain Ntamack, the teenage son of former France wing and coach Emile, is among the replacements. Bath v Toulouse Saturday 1pm Exeter embark on their European campaign tipped as one of the few sides capable of challenging the established order and make just one change to their starting XV for the visit of Munster, with Ian Whitten coming in at inside-centre in place of Ollie Devoto. Munster are still without Conor Murray, as well as Alby Mathewson, so Duncan Williams gets the nod at scrum-half. Gloucester meanwhile, are in the midst of an injury crisis for their return to Europe’s top table, naming two hookers on the bench as well as giving the No 20 shirt – usually reserved for lock or back-row cover – to Matt Banahan. Eddie Jones will be in attendance for what is Danny Cipriani’s last chance to push for a place in England’s autumn internationals squad, named on Thursday. He is up against Julien Dumora in the absence of Benjamin Urdapilleta. Exeter v Munster Saturday 3.15pm, Gloucester v Castres Sunday 1pm Saracens are boosted by the return of their captain, Brad Barritt, for the trip to Glasgow. Barritt suffered a facial injury two weeks ago, which required surgery, but he is back to take his place in Mark McCall’s side. Maro Itoje, who came off the bench during last weekend’s win at Harlequins, returns at blindside flanker. For Glasgow, the co-captains Ryan Wilson – who will need no introduction to the opposing fly-half Owen Farrell – and Callum Gibbins return to the back row but there is no place for Tommy Seymour, who is absent for personal reasons. Lyon, the only debutants in this season’s competition, have been dealt a considerable blow with Liam Gill missing through injury. Carl Fearns, the former Sale and Bath back row, is on the bench. Cardiff Blues’ summer signing Samu Manoa is also among the replacements and set for his debut at the Matmut Stadium de Gerland. Lyon v Cardiff Blues Sunday 2pm, Glasgow v Saracens Sunday 3.15pm Last season’s losing finalists, Racing 92, are without the prolific winger Teddy Thomas for their trip to the Scarlets but Finn Russell and Simon Zebo are at fly-half and full-back respectively while Xavier Chauveau is preferred to Teddy Iribaren at scrum-half. Rhys Patchell is absent for the hosts at Parc y Scarlets after suffering a head injury against the Ospreys in the Pro 14 last weekend but Jonathan Davies returns at centre after missing that match. For Leicester, the England winger Jonny May has not recovered from the shoulder injury sustained at Twickenham during the victory against Northampton Saints last Saturday while Dave Denton also misses out. Ulster, meanwhile, are boosted by the return of Craig Gilroy, Jordi Murphy, Will Addison and Michael Lowry from injuries for their European opener at the Kingspan Stadium. Scarlets v Racing 92 Saturday 5.30pm , Ulster v Leicester Saturday 5.30pm Newcastle will make their first appearance for 14 years in Europe’s top competition away to the three-times champions Toulon but will be without their fly-half, Toby Flood, who has a shoulder injury. Niki Goneva is also missing and their captain, Will Welch, is out with an ankle injury so Mark Wilson will lead the side in Provence. For Toulon, the former All Black Liam Messam is suspended, as is Mathieu Bastareaud, but Julian Savea lines up on the wing as they look to get back on track in Europe after struggling in the Top 14. Edinburgh have made three changes to face Vern Cotter’s Montpellier with Duhan van der Merwe a notable absentee through injury. The former Ulster and South Africa scrum-half Ruan Pienaar moves to fly-half for Montpellier, who have Aaron Cruden, Frans Steyn and Johan Goosen all missing through injury. Gerard Meagher Montpellier v Edinburgh Saturday 4.15pm, Toulon v Newcastle Sunday 4.15pm