Originally 1MDB – an abbreviation of 1Malaysia Development Berhad (which means limited) – was nothing more than a Malaysian state fund, set up in 2009 to promote development through foreign investment and partnerships. The then prime minister, Najib Razak, was its chairman. The fund has since been at the heart of one of the biggest corruption scandals in the world. The US justice department believes more than $4.5bn was stolen and the resulting scandal has been responsible for the toppling of a government this year and the arrest of Najib, his wife Rosmah Mansor and a growing number of close associates. Leaked financial documents allege that 1MDB was a hub of fraudulent activity from the outset. Vast sums were borrowed via government bonds and siphoned into bank accounts in Switzerland, Singapore and the US. Some $731m appeared in the personal bank account of Najib just ahead of the 2013 election, and is alleged to have been used to pay off politicians, his credit card bill and fund the lavish shopping habits of his wife. Najib denies the allegations and insists the money was donated by a Saudi prince. Overseas, it is alleged the money funded the ostentatious lifestyle of one of the main consultants brought in to oversee 1MDB, Malaysian businessman Jho Low. Under Low’s watch, it is alleged the fund bankrolled purchases including tens of billions of dollars’ worth of property in Beverly Hills and Manhattan, including an apartment once owned by Jay Z and Beyonce; a $35m private jet; a $260m yacht; a $3.2m Picasso given to Leonards DiCaprio; $85m in Las Vegas gambling debts; a birthday party for Low where Jamie Foxx, Chris Brown, Ludacris, Busta Rhymes and Pharrell Williams performed live and Britney Spears jumped out of a cake; and $8m in diamonds for Australian model Miranda Kerr. Tens of millions of dollars also allegedly went towards funding film the Wolf of Wall Street, through a production company run by Najib’s stepson Riza Aziz. The alleged embezzlement of 1MDB money between 2009 and 2012 went unchallenged until 2015. That year, British journalist Clare Rewcastle-Brown, who ran the website Sarawak Report, was handed 227,000 leaked documents detailing the depth of fraud. The Wall Street Journal was also given documents. The Malaysian anti-corruption agency (MACC) began investigating and was about to issue a warrant for the prime minister’s arrest when Najib acted. During the “week of the long knives”, Najib fired the attorney general, Abdul Gani, who had been leading the investigation, sacked deputy prime minister and 1MDB critic Muhyiddin Yassin, and four other ministers who had raised the scandal. The MACC offices were raided and four officials arrested. Najib’s government also refused to co-operate with investigations in the US, Singapore and Switzerland. In 2016, the Najib-appointed attorney general cleared the prime minister of all wrongdoing and said the issue had “comprehensively been put to rest”. Not everyone was convinced by Najib’s declaration of his innocence. Mahathir Mohamad, a former PM who had helped Najib to power, continued to be outspoken on the issue. Convinced he was the only person able to act, he announced he would run against Najib in the general election in May this year. His opposition party was elected for the first time in a historic moment, and immediately put 1MDB on the agenda. Within days of his fall, properties linked to Najib were searched by police. They seized 1,400 necklaces, 567 handbags, 423 watches, 2,200 rings, 1,600 brooches and 14 tiaras, most of which were thought to belong to Rosmah, worth a total of $273m. In July, Najib was arrested in relation to money that had flowed into his personal bank accounts from funds connected to 1MDB. He was charged with three counts of criminal breach of trust and one of corruption. He pleaded not guilty to all charges. In September, he was arrested again, this time on 25 charges includes nine counts of receiving illegal bribes, five counts of using illegal proceeds and seven counts of transferring the proceeds to associates. He pleaded not guilty to all charges, which cumulatively carry jail sentences of more than 100 years. In October, Najib was charged with six counts of criminal breach of trust over the theft and misspending of $1.59bn of government funds. He pleaded not guilty to all charges. October also saw Rosmah arrested and charged with 17 counts of money laundering. She pleaded not guilty on all counts. Najib’s lawyer, Shafee Abdullah, was also charged with money laundering and tax evasion, while MP Abdul Azeez Abdul Rahim, who belonged to Najib’s UMNO party, was arrested and charged in connection with allegations of bribery and money laundering. This has been the subject of endless speculation. In May, it was said he was partying on a Thai island, though left quickly when Najib fell. His yacht, allegedly bought with 1MDB money, was seized this year in Bali and it has since been rumoured Low was staying variously in the Chinese gambling enclave of Macau, in Bangkok and in Taiwan. Mahathir recently seemed to confirm rumours Low was now in China. “It’s quite tricky for us to accuse China of hiding him, so we’re trying to work out some ways or private efforts to get back Jho Low from China,” he said. The Malaysian government confirmed Low has made repeated attempts to strike an immunity deal but they have been refused. The investigation continues, and efforts are being made to bring back the stolen money from abroad, though finance minister Lim Guan Eng recently said Malaysia would be lucky to recoup 30% of the money. Meanwhile Najib’s trial is set to start on 18 February. Rosmah is expected to face trial early next year.