For days now, we have known the name of the elderly black woman racially abused on a Ryanair flight from Barcelona to London. She is Delsie Gayle, 77, and from what we have seen from her reaction to the awful event, a person of notable poise and dignity. She looks like any number of my aunties; any of the estimable Windrush generation figures my late mother might have known through the church. Now, after what seemed an inordinate time in this social media-saturated age, the abuser who rounded on her so viciously has been unmasked by two newspapers; traced to sheltered housing, referenced by contemporaries who have nothing good to say about him. There is a yearning, understandable after such a ferocious, public act of cruelty, to see him directly exposed to the light of hostile publicity, blinded by it perhaps. But what would be the point? He may not be able to take responsibility for his actions. If he is, he is damned by them, by the knowledge that his show of inhumanity was seen by millions, by the terrible certainty that his dark side is forever transparent. That may be purgatory enough. But what of the other villains? The line from Ryanair since light was thrown on this squalid episode has been that the company cannot comment because the matter has been referred to the police. Indeed there is police involvement. Ryanair referred the matter to Essex police, who have in turn referred it to the Spanish authorities. But no one should get their hopes up, not least Delsie Gayle. Had the Spanish authorities been alerted while the plane remained on the ground at Barcelona, the abuser could have been removed from the flight and dealt with if that was appropriate. But that did not happen. What are the chances that the Spanish authorities will strain any sinews to deal with a historical event involving an elderly assailant long departed to another jurisdiction? Karl Turner, the shadow transport secretary, says he suspects no meaningful action will result from these belated manoeuvres. That may be an inevitable trajectory, but is it fair? The abuser may just be the sort of hazard all of us without white skin encounter from time to time, but then he had no legal duty of care. Ryanair, having taken Delsie Gayle’s air fare, owed her that legal duty of care. They failed her – and all of us who assume that we travel with the same rights and responsibilities as everyone else. When the company emerges from behind its carefully configured “no comment” cloak, it will have to explain why Delsie Gayle had to move while her abuser was allowed to complete his journey as he saw fit: like the Rosa Parks story enacted in reverse. Those who sat and did nothing might also reflect. One man, David Lawrence, filmed the abuse and posted on social media. Good for him. That is why the case became a cause celebre. But others sat by – keener to get home perhaps than to stand up for an elderly woman being racially abused. They also owed her the duty of care we all owe each other, not least the vulnerable. If we lose sight of that, all is lost.