Dean Smith has insisted that he was behind the decision to make John Terry his No 2 at Aston Villa. Laughing off suggestions that Terry could undermine him, Villa’s new manager said he is looking forward to developing a productive working relationship with the former Chelsea and England captain. “When I discussed the role there was an opportunity,” Smith said. “I was told there was an opportunity to take John and I said if I speak to John I think we can both come up with good enough, honest answers to see if we both want to move on with it or not. “That’s what we did. Me and John spoke about it and decided it was right. If it wasn’t we both could have said no. And I would be the head coach at Aston Villa and looking to bring someone else in. But I felt it was a win-win for both of us. It was my decision to bring John in.” Smith, a boyhood Villa fan, said he spoke to Terry for an hour before deciding to make him part of his coaching staff. The former Brentford manager said playing for Villa last season helped the 37-year-old’s case. Terry will work closely with Richard O’Kelly, who has followed Smith to Villa Park. “When the opportunity arose we spoke at length about how we saw the role moving forward,” Smith said. “I thought he was a good fit. At Brentford I worked with two coaches underneath in me in Thomas Frank and Richard O’Kelly. Thomas Frank was a former head coach at Brondby. I want coaches who are going to come and challenge me and make me better as well. “I haven’t seen the negativity. I don’t do social media. But if I can tap into the knowledge John has had from his career and from the coaches he’s worked with, to go along with the experience and knowledge of Richard, I think it will be great. He knows the players, he knows the dressing room, he knows the club. He’s very humble but he is asking questions already and that’s the sign, for me, of someone who wants to progress.” Smith dismissed suggestions that Terry could feature in Villa’s first team. “I think he made it very clear to everybody last week that he was hanging up his boots and retiring,” he said. “This is now his apprenticeship into coaching. He’s going to get the hours in with us. I’m quite flattered he’s chosen to work with us and Richard, to get those coaching hours in and learn what we do. He had his pencil case with him this morning and sat in the office at 7.30am. He’ll be there tonight and earn his rest.”