A man in his mid-30s might not be who you’d expect to find behind a revolution in tights, but Heist chief executive Toby Darbyshire thinks his outsider status has proved his greatest strength. “[The founding team had] so little experience of the industry that we looked at it with very fresh eyes,” he says. “We have the enormous benefit of no legacy … [so] we can stand up and say every single product on the market today is rubbish.” Darbyshire co-founded the company in November 2015 with Edzard van der Wyck (who has since left the business to focus on other projects). In the ensuing three years, the brand has raised $8.1m from venture capitalists, including Net-a-Porter founder Dame Natalie Massenet, and now manufactures 60,000 pairs of tights a month, distributing to 41 countries. In the peak season of winter, Heist sells a pair every 15 seconds. It was a big industry for two amateurs to take on. The global underwear market generated sales of $112bn in 2016 and is expected to reach $145bn by 2021. In the UK, Marks & Spencer sells more than 21m bras every year, and holds a 35% share of the market. More than one in four British women buy their underwear from the store. Yet, despite the sector’s size, it struck Darbyshire that it was ignoring the women that it claimed to serve. “My spark came [in 2015], walking through the London underground and coming across a very traditional underwear ad, picturing a woman in suspenders and heels standing in a library,” he says. “I thought: ‘Hang on a second, is this really how this industry talks to its customers? That’s pretty appalling’ … I thought: ‘Wow, this industry certainly needs something.’” Darbyshire also noticed a lack of innovation in the products – compared with the sportswear industry, for example, which is only slightly bigger, where companies such as Nike will spend billions on research and development. “The lingerie sector spends almost nothing,” Darbyshire says. “These are markets that have been ignored, in part potentially because they ‘only’ cater to women.” Central to Heist’s mission of using technological innovation and improvements in fabrics to make better underwear has been its innovation team led by Fiona Fairhurst. Fairhurst previously worked at Speedo, where she invented the Fastskin swimsuit, which was debuted by athletes at the 2000 Sydney Olympics (83% of the swimming medals were won by swimmers wearing the suit). User feedback has also been incredibly important. When the company first launched, it asked a group of 67 women to share what they found annoying about a humble pair of tights – “the last area of women’s fashion sold by the till in Boots,” Darbyshire says. The most common complaints – that the waistbands dug in, that they were itchy, and that they fell down – were each addressed by Fairhurst’s team. Heist tights have a seamless design, that stops them slipping down, they don’t have a gusset, they’re 5,000 thread count (rather than the usual 500), and there’s an adaptive waistband that shouldn’t dig in. That level of feedback has continued to inform each new iteration of the brand’s range. In 2018, Heist added five new shades, after 85,000 women around the world shared their nude skin tone as part of the company’s Nude Project. The firm also recently opened its first bricks-and-mortar store in Covent Garden, and aims to launch a shapewear range in the next month. Expanding the range is a process that takes years, Darbyshire says. “It all starts with tons of people telling us what they like and what they don’t like,” he adds. “Everybody hates shapewear. Just like tights, nobody came back to us and said: ‘You know what, I go home after a hard day at work and I put on [control pants] and I feel great about myself.’” Despite the three-year-old company’s impressive growth to date – 18.5% month-on-month sales growth and 300% annual growth in production and sales – Darbyshire admits there have been challenges. In 2017, a Heist advert was banned by Transport for London for being “overtly sexual” by showing a woman’s bare back. And spending the amount of time required to develop new products, with investors and customers keen to see the latest release, has also been a constant pressure. “I think that’s going to be our challenge as long as we exist as a business,” he says, adding that he expects it to take three years of work before the brand will be able to launch its first bra. There’s also an acknowledgement that disruptor brands need to respect the big businesses that have gone before, even while capitalising on their blind spots. “M&S might be going through a difficult time at the moment, but it’s much bigger than us,” Darbyshire says. “There should be some element of respecting what they’ve achieved and understanding how they’ve done it.” This isn’t his first business – he founded the solar energy company Engensa in 2010, before it was acquired by Ikea – and he admits his approach to running a company has evolved. “I think I’m much more open to failure now … I’ve had the opportunity to mess up quite publicly a couple of times already. You get more comfortable with it. “Take a swing and see where you get,” he adds, when asked for his advice to other entrepreneurs. “You’re much better off taking on big industries that have a lot of scope, rather than tinkering around the edges. With big industries, you can make a couple of mistakes and still win.”