Christian Eriksen will be available for Tottenham’s visit to West Ham on Saturday, according to Mauricio Pochettino, despite the uncertainty surrounding his abdominal injury. The midfielder has sat out Spurs’ past four matches and there were fears he could face an extended lay-off when the Denmark manager, Åge Hareide, said the problem could become “chronic”. Hareide suggested Denmark’s marquee player had carried the injury for a little while. Eriksen’s agent, Martin Schoots, moved to play down the controversy by blaming a mistranslation of Hareide’s words. Schoots said that Eriksen’s problem was simply “related to some fatigue”. He added: “Christian is having some rest and that is normal because otherwise it would not heal.” Eriksen played in every minute of Tottenham’s first seven matches of the season and Pochettino said his only issue before West Ham was whether to use him as a starter or a substitute. “Christian’s agent explained fantastically after the comment of the Denmark manager,” Pochettino said. “Christian is ready again to compete and play but it will be our decision if he’s going to play on Saturday or not – from the beginning or from the bench. That’s a decision I’m going to take on Friday. I think there’s nothing to say about the comment of the Denmark manager.” Pochettino will welcome back Mousa Dembélé after a thigh injury but Dele Alli (hamstring) and Danny Rose (groin) are, according to the manager, seven to 10 days away from fitness. The timeframe would see them miss Wednesday’s Champions League trip to PSV Eindhoven but could have them back for the Manchester City game at Wembley on Monday week. Jan Vertonghen (hamstring) is out until December. “The most important thing is that we have started to recover players,” Pochettino said. “We have seven games between now and 10 November and it’s so important to have nearly all the squad fit.” Pochettino was asked about the club’s transfer policy in light of a comment that the chairman, Daniel Levy, made to the Tottenham Supporters’ Trust. Levy had explained that the business plan for the summer window, when no incoming business would be concluded, was based on “certain assumptions that some players might be leaving and certain targets would be available”. Spurs were prepared to listen to offers for Dembélé, Rose and Toby Alderweireld only for all three to stay and it is no great leap to see that the lack of incoming funds had an impact on new signings. Pochettino also suggested it was “normal” that the club’s new stadium project would affect the funds available. He made it clear he would welcome a freshening up of the squad in January but, equally, he will not spend for the sake of it. “We are always trying to improve our squad because football is dynamic,” Pochettino said. “Every six months you need to do something to refresh and to wake up or change the dynamic in the dressing room. Always, no? That is the history in every single club. “But if you cannot achieve what you need or want, it is not common sense to sign players because you need to make people happy or act like all the [other] clubs. It is easy to say that we are going to sign three players and, look, the people are happy because we signed them. But, if we don’t need the players who are available, then why are we going to sign them?”