Famously boozy and bought-off, the Golden Globe awards ceremony is not a place you traditionally turn for lucid insights on art and the state of the industry. Yet on winning one three years ago, for her performance in the BBC’s The Honourable Woman, Maggie Gyllenhaal managed one. Eschewing the usual long list of thank-yous, she instead launched into a tidy dismantling of strained Hollywood cliches about “powerful women” – ones she had presumably heard a lot in response to her garlanded role as a high-powered businesswoman and life peer mired in personal and political crisis. “When I look around the room at the women who are in here, and I think about the performances that I’ve watched this year,” she said, “what I see, actually, are women who are sometimes powerful and sometimes not, sometimes sexy, sometimes not, sometimes honourable, sometimes not. And what I think is new is the wealth of roles for actual women in television and in film. That’s what I think is revolutionary and evolutionary and it’s what’s turning me on.” An accurate observation in general, it was also a perfectly self-summarising soundbite from an actor who has long challenged the hoariest definitions of “strong female character” – all too often used as a blanket term for perfectly virtuous, righteous women so flawless as to be featureless, frequently dreamed up by male screenwriters too timid to look much closer at them. From Secretary to Sherrybaby, Gyllenhaal has specialised in what she termed “actual” women: disrupted and disruptive, entirely ordinary and entirely unusual, with strengths made up largely of complications. In this regard, she may have found her quintessential role in The Kindergarten Teacher, a quiet but silently screaming psychodrama from writer-director Sara Colangelo, in which she stars as Lisa, a seemingly lamb-like preschool instructor who forms a peculiar, predatory relationship with an especially precocious five-year-old pupil. Blurred by the film’s own subtly drifting moral point of view, it’s among Gyllenhaal’s most elusive, shape-shifting characterisations: an anti-heroine likely to prompt equally stabbing pangs of sympathy and revulsion in audiences. Gyllenhaal’s soft, moonish features, capable of collapsing into melancholy or hardening and sharpening in resolve, have rarely been less predictably used. Fortyish and stably settled in Staten Island, Lisa has evidently done a lot right with her life: she’s a dedicated, well-liked teacher with a secure, longstanding job, is married to a decent, loving man and has raised two reasonably bright, reasonably well-adjusted children to near-adulthood. None of that is enough for a woman who feels emotionally and intellectually duty-bound to strive for the sublime: she’s openly wounded by her kids’ modest post-school ambitions, and attends evening poetry classes in the hope of uncovering creative genius within herself, though her work, everyone but her husband agrees, tends toward the prosaic. Having an eye for the extraordinary may be a virtue as a teacher, she feels, but it’s not the same as being extraordinary yourself. When she discovers that one of the shyest kids in her class has a knack for composing eerily advanced, stream-of-consciousness poetry in his head, her initially perky excitement as an educator gradually tips over into selfish obsession: haranguing the bewildered kid to discipline and record his gift, she simultaneously starts presenting his cryptic poems as her own in her evening classes, to general acclaim. Is she an overzealous patron or an outright stalker? Is she nurturing the boy’s talent or abusing it? At what point does teacherly interest become coldly experimental scrutiny? Colangelo, remaking a 2014 Israeli film with a few added kinks, leaves all these questions hanging, as does Gyllenhaal – not by projecting a blank slate, but by playing all these possibilities from moment to moment. It’s the richest, most cryptically folded film role Gyllenhaal has had in perhaps a dozen years, since Laurie Collyer’s Sherrybaby, in which she aggravated recovering-junkie stereotypes with raw, discomfiting sensuality. That in turn was only half as raw and discomfiting as the erotic identity she essayed in her breakout role in Secretary, as a young PA drawn into an explicit BDSM relationship with her eccentric boss; testing viewers’ perceptions of power in consensual submission, it set Gyllenhaal’s star image on a wilfully off-balance tilt that too few film-makers have tested since: it’s a lesson in Hollywood’s resistance to boldly unconventional female identity that her own Oscar nomination to date has come for one of her most atypically mold-fitting roles, as the journalist turned man-redeeming leaning-post to Jeff Bridges’ sozzled country star in Crazy Heart. In this business, women still get more credit for supporting damaged souls than for playing them. It has been suggested, in the age of Killing Eve and Sharp Objects, that television is more hospitable than film to the thornily complex female anti-heroine, and if so, Gyllenhaal has been taking advantage. Benefiting from the recent fluidity between big and small screen currently being enjoyed by A-list women from Nicole Kidman to Emma Stone, she has found two of her best recent roles on TV: the aforementioned, questioningly titled protagonist in The Honourable Woman led to her more flamboyantly offbeat turn as scheming, savvy Times Square sex worker Candy in The Deuce, a role that once again showcased her rare knack for controlled, intellectualised carnality. The Kindergarten Teacher’s Lisa is a lower-key puzzle box than either of those, but a more teasing one, and a bracing reminder of Gyllenhaal’s one-off movie star quality: the film may be going to Netflix, but her manifold ambiguities as a performer are still best magnified for the cinema. The Kindergarten Teacher is now available on Netflix