Glenn Murray just keeps going. Once the unexpected news came through that the striker would start here despite being knocked unconscious in a clash of heads at Newcastle last week, it was no surprise to see the 35-year-old score the game’s only goal. With a sure finish early in the second half, he claimed his sixth goal of the season and his 100th for Brighton. How Wolves could do with a poacher of similar quality. “Glenn was adamant he was fine,” said the Brighton manager, Chris Hughton, when asked whether he hesitated to select Murray even though the player passed all the concussion protocols after a collision with Federico Fernández. “We knew that medically he was fine to play so then really it’s about whether there’s any reluctance or nervousness but we never got that feeling from Glenn.” Thus Murray was on hand to strike in the 48th minute, swivelling and shooting with one touch to bring his tally for the campaign to the same as that of Sergio Agüero, Pierre-Emerick Aubameyang and Sadio Mané. His precise marksmanship enabled Brighton to convert their only shot on target and they protected their lead with some sterling defending by Lewis Dunk and Shane Duffy and excellent goalkeeping by Matt Ryan. Those attributes earned a third consecutive clean sheet and a third win in a row for Brighton. Wolves were left to curse their own impotent finishing. The gridlock on the roads around the ground before kickoff could be explained by the match coinciding with an open day at the nearby Brighton University but when the game got going it looked like the hosts were going to get schooled by Wolves. The first half-hour was one-way traffic, all headed towards Brighton’s goal. Hughton’s sheepish side could barely figure out how to get out of their own half as Wolves put on a seminar in progressive possession football. But only up to a point. For all their clever interplay, they could not plot a way to penetrate regularly. Matt Doherty made most inroads for Wolves, the Irish wingback a frequent threat down the right. He fizzed several low passes across the face of goal and was integral to Wolves’ best chance in the first half. That came in the 33rd minute when Doherty swapped passes with Hélder Costa before performing a snappy one-two with Raúl Jiménez, darting into the box and feinting past the last defender, only to fire a low shot inches wide from 16 yards. Other than that, the closest Wolves came to a breakthrough in the first half was when Adama Traoré forced a save from Ryan with a low shot from the edge of the box. Traoré was playing because Nuno Espírito Santo altered Wolves’ starting lineup for the first time this season, introducing the £18m summer signing from Middlesbrough instead of Diogo Jota after a record nine consecutive league matches with the same starting personnel. That was presumably intended to give Wolves more punch to go with their nifty footwork. But things did not pan out like that. Wolves were lucky to reach the break with the scores blank. Because despite being dominated, Brighton created the clearest opportunity of the first half. Duffy sent a towering header wide from three yards after a corner by Solly March. Wolves failed to heed the warning and found themselves a goal down within three minutes of the resumption. This time fortune favoured Brighton, as a mis-hit shot by Bruno from outside the box wrongfooted the defence and goalkeeper and ran to Murray, who showed that his predatory instincts remained undimmed, as he swept the ball into net from 10 yards. Santo made a double substitution on the hour, withdrawing Jiménez and Traoré, and Wolves piled on pressure. Ryan tipped away a rasping long-range shot by Doherty and also made a smart block from Rúben Neves. His best save came in stoppage time when he denied Ryan Bennett. Wolves huffed and puffed but could neither knock down the door nor pick the lock. That is a persistent problem for a team who have got a lot right since their return to the Premier League but scored only nine goals in their 10 matches. “That’s something we have to improve,” said Santo. “But sometimes you have to give credit. The way Brighton defended, they were very brave and put themselves between the ball and the goal.” Hughton also gave credit. “We can certainly play better, we had to rely on our determination and team spirit,” he said. “On more occasions than not, Wolves’ performance would have got them a victory.”