Atlanta lives on Instagram as #weloveatl, a hashtag started by three local photographers in 2012 to corral shots of the city on social media for a photography exhibition at Young Blood Gallery. They received more than 5,000 submissions and the show ultimately included 275 photos from over 100 local photographers. But the hashtag has lived on well past that show. In the years since, #weloveatl has turned into a movement, with over 1m posts to the hashtag on Instagram and 69,000 followers for @weloveatl. “If you say #weloveatl, it’s a proclamation, it’s different than identifying where you’re at, it’s saying ‘I love my city’ or ‘we love our city’,” co-founder Tim Moxley said in a 2014 interview. Co-founder Brandon Barr told Guardian Cities #weloveatl is now registered as a not-for-profit corporation to connect, support and boost Atlanta’s photographers, online and off, with exhibitions and installations throughout the city. The aim, he said, was to support local nonprofits and promote the love of ATL. “For us as founders, it’s been exciting to give this platform to the many talented photographers in the city and be constantly surprised by the visual storytelling of this community,” Barr said. “It’s a city constantly writing its own story, and that’s pretty special.” Atlanta continues to make its mark on Instagram. Search the city’s hotspots and you’ll find gleaming high-rises and packed stadiums, signage and street art – and even urban rainbows. Lauren Holley, who founded the Atlanta Urban Photo Walkers meetup and posts herself as @graphiknation, says Atlanta flies under the radar with most international travellers, and is best known for its airport. “I think that’s kind of part of the appeal – when people end up here by chance, maybe because of a job, convention or school, they feel surprised – like they ‘discovered’ something really special about a city they never thought much of.” Guardian Cities is in Atlanta this week for a special week of journalism. Share your shots of the city with us on Instagram and Twitter using the hashtag #GuardianATL. A selection will be included in the wrap of readers’ responses to run Friday.