Glenn Hoddle remains in a serious condition in hospital but is responding well to treatment after suffering a heart attack, with the family of the former England manager having extended their thanks to the sound supervisor who administered first aid at BT Sport’s London studios. Hoddle, who had been previewing Brighton’s game with Wolves on his 61st birthday on Saturday morning, collapsed after the appearance on Robbie Savage’s show. Simon Daniels, a member of the production crew and a special constable, gave him immediate medical attention on the scene before the arrival of the emergency services. A source close to the family told a former teammate that the former England manager had been “close to death”. A spokesman for Hoddle said on Sunday: “Glenn remains in a serious condition in hospital after suffering a heart attack yesterday [Saturday]. He continues to respond well to treatment. The family are grateful to everyone in the football family – and beyond – that have sent kind messages of support. They are very much appreciated. “In particular Glenn and his family would like to publicly thank the BT Sport staff that treated him immediately on set following his collapse. Glenn is now in the care of the professional NHS medical services, who have also been exemplary in helping him and the family during the last 24 hours. Doctors have advised the most important thing for Glenn is time to rest. Therefore, his family have reiterated the request for their privacy to be respected during this period.” Hoddle played for Spurs, Monaco, Swindon and Chelsea over a career which spanned two decades and is recognised as one of England’s most graceful and skilful footballers, scoring eight times in 53 games. After becoming player-manager of Swindon and inspiring them to promotion to the Premier League, he took the same role at Chelsea. As a manager he led England to the 1998 World Cup and later enjoyed spells in charge of Southampton, Spurs and Wolves until 2006, when he turned to television punditry.