Geoffrey Rush came close to tears in court explaining how he imagined his own daughter’s death during a scene in the production of King Lear in which he was accused of behaving inappropriately. Rush became emotional on the stand during the second day of his two-week defamation hearing against Sydney newspaper the Daily Telegraph on Tuesday, describing his thoughts during a scene in the play where he carried the woman at the centre of the complaint on stage. The Oscar-winning Australian actor is suing the Daily Telegraph over a series of articles published at the end of November and beginning of December in 2017 that alleged he behaved inappropriately during a 2015 stage production of King Lear. One front-page story was headlined “King Leer”. Rush played the title character in the play and Eryn-Jean Norvill, the woman who the Telegraph wrote had made a complaint about Rush’s behaviour during the production, played Lear’s daughter Cordelia. In its defence, the Telegraph claims that Rush “engaged in conduct of a kind in which only a pervert would engage” during a scene where Norvill lay prone on the stage with her eyes closed while Rush, who played Lear, grieved above her. The Telegraph says that during rehearsals of the scene Rush had at various stages hovered his hands above Norvill’s torso “pretending to stroke or caress her upper torso”. The Telegraph also claims Rush had “made groping gestures in the air with two cupped hands [which were] intended to simulate and in fact did simulate him groping and fondling [Norvill’s] breasts”. But Rush denied that, becoming emotional as he described thinking about his daughter during the scene. “I always imagined that it was my own real-life daughter [that] she’d been hit by a bus on the street near where we live in Camberwell,” he said. “I knew she was gone and I carried her to the footpath, and every night I would reinvent that scene in my mind because she’s in her early to mid-20s and [so] was my daughter and [I] needed that trigger.” Rush strenuously denies any of the claims made against him, and is seeking aggravated damages against the Telegraph. In the stand on Tuesday he denied he had engaged in any inappropriate behaviour towards Norvill during the play, rejecting all of the claims made by the Telegraph and describing their relationship as “whimsical”. “I had no inkling,” he said. “My antenna is pretty good ... I lived Lear on a daily basis but I’m pretty aware of mood scapes within a group of people and I never detected that I was making her, as I hear I was, making her feel uncomfortable or I was ruffling feathers. “No one came up and said I think you’re getting on Eryn Jean’s nerves, nothing at all. It felt congenial and collegiate, they’re the only words I can express.” On Tuesday Rush also revealed he was told to resign or be stood down as the head of the Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts Awards in the wake of articles. The AACTAs are Australia’s equivalent of the British Academy of Film and Television Arts, or the Oscars in the United States. Rush stood down as the president of the AACTAs in the wake of the articles, releasing a statement at the time saying he would step aside “until these issues have been resolved”. Under questioning from his barrister, Bruce McClintock, Rush revealed he had been asked to go because of concerns about the broadcast partners of the awards. He said he had been told by AACTA chief executive Damien Trewhella that there was “blood on the walls” and that there had been a “massive fight” within the film organisation following the articles, because of concerns the awards night broadcasters would “pull the plug”. “By Sunday [the board] had issued a kind of document to me saying we want you to resign or we will ask you to resign,” he said. Rush said he later received a note signed by all but two of the AACTA board members “apologising with their deepest regrets and inviting me back to take back the position”. “My response was we should wait and see how these events turn out,” he said. The trial continues. 