Shout out to Zlatan Ibrahimovic’s continued instinct for the memorable, and his former Manchester United colleague, Wayne Rooney lifting DC United back to relevance; respect too to the Red Bulls for their surge to the line to overhaul Atlanta for the MLS record wins and points total; but Josef Martinez’s record-breaking goal haul was the story of the year. Off the field, the remarkable turnaround that may keep a team in Columbus was one of the more heartwarming demonstrations of fan power and community organizing this or any other year. GP AMAZING.#zLAtan#LAvLAFC https://t.co/xyk78K6xSr The Zlatan Game, as it will forever be known. I was a sceptic having watched the Swede struggle for fitness towards the end of his time at Manchester United, but all that cynicism washed away when he came off the bench with the Galaxy trailing in the first ever LA derby to single-handedly turn the game on its head with a sensational double. Ibrahimovic couldn’t drag his dysfunctional Galaxy side to the play-offs, but he did produce the most jaw-dropping moment of the season. GR Montreal flickered intermittently throughout the year, and Nacho Piatti remains one of the most elegant playmakers in the league, but LA Galaxy’s final-day choke robbed us of the sight of Zlatan doing Zlatan things in the knockout rounds. The Galaxy were free-scoring and free conceding all season, and eventually the latter trait caught up with them. GP A play-off series without the defending champions in contention always lacks something. It’s the same in any arena – see how the World Cup was worse off for Germany going out with a whimper in the group stage. Toronto FC endured a season that was dismal and baffling in equal measure, finishing 12 points short of the play-offs. Nonetheless, a play-off series without the likes of Sebastian Giovinco and Victor Vazquez will always be worse off. Play-off games in front of Orlando City’s ‘Purple Wall’ also would have been fun. GR Dallas stuttered at exactly the wrong time, and a final day loss to Colorado tumbled them out of the automatic semi-final spots. Oscar Pareja now has to get their heads right on a short turnaround to face Gio Savarese’s Portland, whose starters were rested in anticipation of a scenario like this. In fact it wouldn’t be a surprise to see both higher seeded Western teams go out in the play-in games in midweek, as LAFC, fresh from failing to get past 10-man Sporting KC, will be up against a rested Real Salt Lake team, who Mike Petke will have leaning into their underdog status. GP There’s an element of chaos that comes with every Atlanta United game, particularly away from Mercedes-Benz Stadium. Look at how Tata Martino’s side managed to concede three times away to the worse team in the league, San Jose, just a few weeks ago. A Eastern Conference semi-final against New York City FC, or even a surging DC United side, could prove to be a dangerous proposition. GR It might seem odd to be talking about a team who secured an automatic bye as a dark horse, but Seattle have just put together the best second half of a season in MLS history without anyone talking about them seriously. The current crop of players are better than the group that made MLS Cup last season and at least as good as the group that won the season before. GP Can DC United still be considered a dark horse? Their run over the past few months has been astonishing, and completely unexpected. There were doubts over the signing of Wayne Rooney, with some questioning his fitness and maybe even his commitment to the cause, but his arrival has been a catalyst. There’s an energy around the team at the moment and a momentum that will be difficult to halt. GR Yes and no. An absurd proportion of teams get a shot at the post-season, but the field narrows suddenly after this opening round of games, and nobody wants to be dealing with a single elimination game three or four days after the end of the regular season. It is getting harder and harder to guarantee one of the two automatic bye slots in each Conference. I’d still like to see a four-team cutoff point and ideally a round robin group stage, with the highest seed playing all their games at home, but the current format isn’t totally outrageous. GP No. Cases in point: the LA Galaxy and Toronto FC. In Ibrahimovic, the Galaxy boasted the league’s second top goalscorer, and yet it still wasn’t enough to make the play-offs. Sure, they would have dragged themselves over the line had they not choked in the second-half of Sunday’s home game against Houston, but regardless, the Galaxy wasted one of the most talented rosters in the league (just ignore the defence). The same goes for Toronto FC. There are always a few teams cut adrift at the foot of MLS, but just because the benchmark is set at 12 out of 23 doesn’t mean it’s easy to qualify for the play-offs. The nature of the league and its level playing field makes it so. GR With no Zlatan joker card to mix up the West I’m going to look to the East and note that Miguel Almiron’s struggle for fitness may determine a lot for Atlanta, and that Yangel Herrera’s return has come just in time to get NYC FC looking dangerous again. But I will go for Wayne Rooney, who has produced personally, but more importantly has galvanized every DC player around him.  GP Not a particularly original answer, but Josef Martinez. If he hits a hot streak, like he did over the summer, then Atlanta United could blow the competition away. Goals haven’t been so free-flowing of late, though (three in nine games), coinciding with Atlanta blowing their Supporters’ Shield lead. Of course, Atlanta also need Miguel Almiron to stay fit and firing, but Martinez is the weather vane for their play-off hopes. GR Red Bulls 3-3 NYC FC. Red Bulls win on penalties. GP DC United 3-1 NYC FC. GR Sporting KC 2-1 Seattle. GP Sporting KC 3-2 Seattle Sounders. GR The strange thing about watching the New York Red Bulls win their third Supporters Shield in six years this season was that there was an underlying sense of watching someone playing a video game just to reach the level they can’t crack. The high score they’ve racked up means little until they can finally get past the boss and complete the game. But for once the balance is there in this Red Bulls team to have varied approaches to goal and a stinginess about protecting their own. Defense wins trophies. They may well have to defeat DC and NYC FC/Atlanta to get to the final, but under Chris Armas they’ve developed the discipline to see out tight games. It’s a lesson they might have learned from Peter Vermes, who having finally got his Sporting Kansas City team to avoid the play-in game for the first time since his side won it all in 2013, will be confident that his discipline and tactical nous over two legs will get his team another appearance in a final. Like the Red Bulls, they can score from a number of angles, and have a solid defense. In this scenario they’d have to win the Cup at Red Bull Arena, but they’ve won trophies on the road before, and I get the feeling that whoever makes it out of the East may have had to give their all in the Conference final, and may be diminished rather than battle-hardened by the experience. History, including their controlled win over New York in last year’s Open Cup, suggests that this may be Sporting’s year, and the Red Bulls may have yet another heartbreak. GP DC United v Sporting KC - Sporting KC to win. The MLS Cup final isn’t always a meeting of the best two teams in the league. More often than not, it is a meeting of two teams who have hit form at the right time. DC United have been in form for weeks, while Sporting KC secured top spot in the West with a run of three straight wins to close the regular season. Predicting the MLS play-offs is a fool’s game, but form counts for a lot. GR