I have a Dell an all-in-one desktop PC from 2012. It has become painfully slow. It takes so long to boot up and run Google Chrome, Microsoft Office and Apple iTunes that it’s almost useless. (It also does photo and video storage, accounts and school work.) A local computer business will upgrade the hard drive to an SSD, and clone it so I don’t have to reinstall everything, for about £300. According to them, this should give it an extra year or two of life. I like the style of this machine, and discarding it would be a waste if it still worked fine. However, the poor performance is critical and I am worried the hard drive will die and I’ll lose everything. But, after more than six years of service, am I throwing good money after bad? Is there a replacement that would provide a good all-round upgrade for a similar cost (although I’d spend a bit more on a new one)? It doesn’t have to be an all-in-one: I have looked at micro-PCs and laptops. Iain Your worry filled me with dread. Hard drives are increasingly likely to fail after five years of use. Every PC should be backed up, and you should have multiple copies of irreplaceable data. If you don’t, please buy a USB external hard drive as soon as possible and back up both your PC and your data – photos, music, documents, accounts etc. Windows 10 includes backup software that will do the job, or you can use alternatives such as Macrium Reflect or EaseUS or AOMEI. I also recommend using a file copier such as FreeFileSync to create separate backup copies of your data folders. If your PC fails, you will be able to access these files just by plugging the external hard drive into another PC. For extra security, you can upload files to free online drives such as Microsoft OneDrive (5GB), Google Drive (15GB), Syncplicity (10GB), Yandex Disk Free (10GB free, in Russia), and so on. I don’t understand why your Dell Inspiron One 2320 is so slow. It has a 2.5GHz Core i5-2400S processor and 6GB of memory, which makes it far more powerful than most of cheap PCs you could buy to replace it. The processor has a PassMark benchmark score of 4962. That’s twice as fast as the Pentium Silver N5000 (PassMark 2442) used in many cheap laptops. Even if you bought one with this year’s Core i3-8130U (PassMark 5042), it would only match what you have now. The old excuse that Windows slows down with age fails becuse your PC got a whole new operating system when you upgraded to Windows 10. In sum, something is fundamentally wrong that an SSD will not fix. I have no chance of diagnosing the problem without seeing your PC, and even then it might take hours, unless it’s just clogged up with dust or you have no hard drive space left. However, I suspect you have a BIOS/disk/driver problem that re-installing Windows won’t fix. You could start by running Dell’s SupportAssist program, which might be on your Start menu under S. If not, you can find it online. SupportAssist should tell you if new drivers and firmware updates are available. Install all the updates you can find, and see if that improves things. If not, go to Windows 10’s Settings app (the cogwheel), click Update & Security, and try the troubleshooting options on the Troubleshoot page, If they don’t help, go to Recovery and choose “Reset this PC”. Just be careful to choose the option that preserves your software and (now backed up) data. Windows has several hidden programs that can isolate problems, such as ResMon (Resource Monitor), PerfMon (Performance Monitor) and Event Viewer, but you need some technical expertise to use them. Instead, try running SiSoftware’s free Sandra Lite. This will provide a remarkably thorough analysis of your PC and benchmark the various parts. It could find the problem that is crippling your PC, though fixing it might be another matter. My stock answer to the SSD question has always been yes, until today. Swapping a hard drive for an SSD has been a good, cheap way to extend the life of a PC. This applies to laptops in particular, and most all-in-one PCs are basically laptops on sticks. SSDs are even better value if you fit them yourself. For example, you could pick up a 480GB SanDisk SSD for £66.54. This is quite a bit less than £300. Your local computer business has to charge for installation, but it’s not that hard to do. It’s not clear whether your PC supports SATA II drives (as Crucial thinks) or SATA III drives. A SATA III drive will work, but it will only deliver half the speed: 3Gbps instead of 6Gbps. All things considered, I don’t recommend an SSD at £300. Fixing your PC would provide a much bigger boost to performance than an SSD, to the point where you wouldn’t really need one. As mentioned, your old Inspiron 2320 all-in-one is more powerful than any of the cheap replacements you could buy. But if you can’t fix the Dell, it would be better to put your £300 towards a new machine. This will also bring new, faster ports, UEFI firmware that boots quicker, better graphics and other improvements. If you want another Dell AIO, the best option is the 24in non-touch Inspiron 24 5000 at £699. That buys you a Core i3-8100T with 8GB of memory and a 1TB hard drive, but it has a non-touch 24in screen. Lenovo’s 520-24ARR is better value at £599. This has an AMD Ryzen 3 2200G (PassMark 8106), 8GB of memory, a 128GB SSD and a 1TB hard drive with a 23.8in non-touch screen. Currys PC World, Argos and others have plenty of all-in-ones, but I wouldn’t recommend anything below the Lenovo 330-20IGM at £399. This has a Pentium J5005 processor that runs at almost exactly the same speed as your antique Dell, plus 8GB of memory and a 1TB hard drive. Alas, the 19.5in non-touch screen is smaller and has a lower resolution (1440 x 900 pixels) than the one you have now, but it’s still better value than a £300 SSD. If your 2012 machine worked properly, you’d be looking for something twice as fast to last the next six years, not the same speed or slower. Most all-in-one PCs use laptop technologies, and you’d get a faster and more upgradeable PC if you bought a desktop instead. Let’s consider the Intel Core i3-8100, because that would be a good choice if you don’t want to pay for another Core i5. A full Core i3-8100 should run at a TDP of 65W in a desktop. However, Intel sells other versions of the same chip where the performance is slugged to make them run cooler, and make laptop batteries last longer. The S, T and U versions sacrifice more and more performance, with the ultra-low power U version running at only 15W. The Core i3-8100 has a PassMark score of 8095 – a decent improvement – but that drops to 5042 for the Core i3-8130U. Your 65W Core i5-2400S scores 4962, which isn’t significantly slower. You could get a Dell Inspiron 3470 mini-desktop with a Core i3-8100, 4GB of memory and a 1TB hard drive for £399, and add a Dell or other monitor for £120 to £130 or so. It’s short on memory, but you could add 4GB for £37.19, and there is space to fit an extra M.2 2280 SSD. At the moment, Dell will throw in a 23in S2319H screen for £428.16, including free delivery. You may find other deals if you can wait until 23 November, Black Friday. Have you got a question? Email it to Ask.Jack@theguardian.com This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.