Kimi Räikkönen is clearly a popular winner and there was a sense of relief that in his fifth year since rejoining Ferrari he returned his first win for the team in his second stint. It was a long time coming, 2,044 days since his last victory, for Lotus at the 2013 Australian Grand Prix. “Fucking finally” was the Finn’s typically forthright reaction. He had earned it, with a perfectly executed drive begun by beating Lewis Hamilton through turn one. Ferrari may have dispensed with his services next season but the US Grand Prix proved that Sauber will have a driver still able to bring the team on. He was buoyant afterwards but pleasingly refused to bow to any form of hyperbole. On the time it had taken finally to win again Kimi stayed assuredly Kimi. “It hasn’t really been a big deal for me,” he said. “It’s been a much bigger deal for other people. If it comes, it comes; if it doesn’t, it doesn’t change my life one bit.” Hamilton failed to close out his fifth world championship – surely delayed only until Mexico on Sunday – but he expected Mercedes to look hard at their strategy. The team pitted him early under the virtual safety car, perhaps with memories of failing to do so in Austria still lingering. They had gone aggressive and at that point in the race it did not look a bad move. The team principal, Toto Wolff, described it as deciding to “bite the bullet”. They were still trying to win the race, and initially made a fist of it. Hamilton was held up by Räikkönen but still had 17 seconds on him after he had pitted and time enough on Max Verstappen to stop again and come out in second, close to Räikkönen. Mercedes, however, kept him out hoping for fresher rubber at the end – but in doing so Räikkönen closed to within 8sec. The advantage had gone and by the time Hamilton caught Räikkönen and Verstappen he no longer had the grip to attack. The Mercedes move was bold but they ultimately missed their moment. Renault revealed on Thursday that they were working on a new power unit for next season. Having signed with the team for 2019, Daniel Ricciardo can only hope it is a marked improvement. His Renault-powered Red Bull went out in Austin with an energy store failure, believed to be the same problem that ended his race in Bahrain. An unhappy honey badger showed his teeth. “He’s taken out his frustration in his room by putting his fist through the wall, which you can totally relate to,” said the Red Bull principal, Christian Horner, whose team will be using Honda engines next season. “I’m sure he’ll be having a word with his future employers about it.” Red Bull hope to avoid any penalties at the next meeting where the thin air negates their power disadvantage and marks their best hope for a win from the remaining three races. Ricciardo has made it clear he knows the Renault project is a work in progress and does not expect miracles. But he will desperately want evidence of a step up next season. Blue flags and the alacrity with which lapped cars move out of the way of the leaders was once again on the agenda after the race. With Räikkönen, Verstappen and Hamilton all duelling at the front, traffic was occasionally an issue. It is the same for all of them of course and Hamilton did not seek to make any issue of the subject. But interestingly when questioned on their use, he chose instead to make a point about the sheer disparity of pace across the grid. “It is a fundamental issue of the sport,” he said. “There should not be such a big difference between first and last. How Williams and McLaren can be three seconds off the lap, it’s a huge amount of performance.” In fact flags were not the issue, argued Hamilton, but F1 itself. “I think they have to change the rules to allow that gap to close so we have more awesome racing,” he said. “It has the potential to be the greatest racing series there is. Look at MotoGP, they are wheel to wheel, fighting from corner to corner.” Sebastian Vettel did well to force the title race into another round especially after he went back to 14th after hitting Ricciardo on the first lap. But it was another error after a season peppered with misjudgments. He had passed Ricciardo for fourth cleanly through turn 12 but then went in too deep on the next corner and, when Ricciardo came back, he touched the Australian causing the spin that sent him down the field. He has vigorously defended some of the moves he has made this season but in Texas admitted that, though Ferrari had gone down the wrong development route allowing Mercedes to take advantage, he too was culpable. “I have no problem admitting the mistakes I’ve done on top,” he said. “There will be a lot of stuff over the winter that we need to review, all of us, including myself.”