The 2018-19 Champions Cup kicks off on Friday in what is always a keenly anticipated weekend in the European club rugby calendar. Here are six players well worth keeping an eye on. Tough, uncompromising back-row forwards are precisely what Eddie Jones has been searching for since he became the England coach. The former Sale and Bath forward is now happily based in France and has spent the past year recovering from a serious knee injury but, once the 29-year-old has more comeback minutes under his belt, this could be the season he reminds people on both sides of the Channel of his no-nonsense value. With the excellent Australian Liam Gill also lending a classy edge to Lyon’s pack, the Top 14 side could make as lively an impression on their tournament debut – against Cardiff on Sunday – as La Rochelle did last year. Everyone had an opinion regarding Carbery’s – and Irish rugby’s – dilemma last season. If he wanted to be Johnny Sexton’s successor as fly-half for Ireland he simply had to play at 10 on a regular basis and a high-profile switch from Leinster to Munster was ultimately the upshot. The colour of the jersey is different but the 22-year-old’s talent remains; if Munster are to nudge Leinster out of the winners’ circle they need Carbery to be at the forefront of that resurrection, particularly if their other guiding light, Conor Murray, remains sidelined. Alert, elusive and smart, Carbery will earn immediate love from Munster’s Red Army if he can help mastermind Exeter’s downfall at Sandy Park on Saturday. Jones loves a powerful wing and, at almost 18st and 6ft 3in, Cokanasiga has all the physical credentials to make an impact in the pool stages. The Fijian-born 20-year‑old, whose father was in the British army, is not yet the finished article but an England cap could materialise this season if he continues his early form for Bath. He has three tries in five league starts since signing from London Irish and, with Semesa Rokoduguni on the other wing, will give Toulouse’s defence an early test of their resolve at the Rec on Saturday. Leinster are the defending champions and, scarily, have the capacity to improve. In Ringrose they have a class centre for whom the next 12 months could be life-changing if he manages to stay fit and sparkles in Brian O’Driscoll’s old No 13 shirt. Last season, injury-wise, was occasionally frustrating but province and country know there is lots more to come from a 23-year-old who should have made the 2017 Lions squad. A spectacular opening night in Dublin on Friday at Wasps’ expense would be a good place to start for a player with the balance, pace and attitude to be an Irish great. Hardly a left-field choice but put yourself in Russell’s position for a moment: new club, new overseas life, new challenge. If anyone is going to make Saracens and Leinster think twice at the pointy end of this season’s tournament it is probably Racing, who were slightly unlucky not to sneak past Leinster in May’s final in Bilbao, and Russell has been handed the keys to the Parisian dream machine. If the Scot fires his team will romp through Pool 4 unchallenged; if he suffers one of his occasional blowouts, not least at Parc y Scarlets on Saturday, a very different script could unfold. This is Russell’s chance to demonstrate he is a sufficiently good fly-half to fill the now departed Dan Carter’s golden boots. One of the abiding images of last season was the beaming smile of the former England coach Andy Robinson after the Blues’ spectacular Challenge Cup final win over Gloucester. His son, Olly, has thrived since moving across the Severn Bridge from Bristol and no less an authority than Sam Warburton, the retired Wales and Lions captain, has suggested Robinson should be on England’s radar. With Saracens occupying the same pool as the Blues this is the 27-year-old’s moment to measure himself against the Vunipola brothers, Maro Itoje, Michael Rhodes et al and back up Warburton’s judgment. Given the Blues have not featured in Europe’s elite tournament for five years, he will not be alone in wanting to prove a point. With a host of potentially tight European games looming, let’s just run through the drop-goal stats from the leading fly-halves in Britain and Ireland. Of the Premiership 10s, George Ford, Owen Farrell, Gareth Steenson, Toby Flood, Danny Cipriani and Lima Sopoaga have yet to land a solitary one between them this season. Cipriani last kicked one domestically almost three years ago. Johnny Sexton, despite his famous effort to beat France in Paris last season, hasn’t kicked one in the Pro12/14 for Leinster since 2012-13. The stats now suggest a drop goal is attempted only once every 10 games or so, with the focus having shifted to trying for seven points rather than three. All well and good but there will be days, particularly as winter draws in, when a drop of magic of the Ronan O’Gara or Jonny Wilkinson variety comes in very handy. It is a sign of the times that several of European rugby’s more evocative names – Clermont Auvergne, Stade Français, La Rochelle, Bordeaux-Bègles, Ospreys, Harlequins, Northampton– are in the Challenge Cup this season. Clermont, beset by injuries last season, just happen to be the Top 14’s early leaders, with Stade in second. The rest of the field may well have to dig deep to prevent a French team winning the tournament – which carries with it the prize of automatic qualification for next year’s Champions Cup. Pool 1Bath, Leinster, Toulouse, Wasps Opening fixtures Fri Leinster v Wasps 7.45pm (BST)Sat Bath v Toulouse 1pm Pool 2Castres, Exeter, Gloucester, MunsterOpening fixtures Sat Exeter v Munster 3.15pm Sun Gloucester v Castres 1pm Pool 3Cardiff Blues, Glasgow Warriors, Lyon, SaracensOpening fixtures Sun Lyon v Blues 1pm, Glasgow v Saracens 3.15pm Pool 4Leicester, Racing 92, Scarlets, UlsterOpening fixtures Sat Scarlets v Racing 5.30pm, Ulster v Leicester 5.30pm Pool 5Edinburgh, Montpellier, Newcastle, ToulonOpening fixtures Sat Montpellier v Edinburgh 3.15pmSun Toulon v Newcastle 3.15pm