Tensions heightened on Capitol Hill as the Senate braced on Wednesday for the results of an FBI investigation into allegations of sexual assault against Donald Trump’s supreme court nominee Brett Kavanaugh. Republican senators said they expected to receive transcripts of interviews from the abbreviated background check into Kavanaugh as early as Wednesday, one day after Trump inflamed an already toxic political brawl over the judge’s nomination by mocking a woman who has accused his nominee of sexual assault. In a letter to the Senate judiciary committee on Wednesday, Democrats suggested that past background checks had revealed evidence of inappropriate conduct despite Republicans’ repeated claims that there was never a trace of wrongdoing. In a letter addressed to the committee’s chairman, Chuck Grassley, and signed by eight of the panel’s 10 Democrats, they challenged the veracity of a tweet sent on Tuesday by the Republican majority that said: “Nowhere in any of these six FBI reports, which the committee has reviewed on a bipartisan basis, was there ever a whiff of ANY issue – at all – related in any way to inappropriate sexual behavior or alcohol abuse.” Democrats said the information is “not accurate” and demanded the Republicans correct the statement. They said the tweet mischaracterized information in previous background checks and violated the confidentiality agreement around the investigations. The Republican majority tweeted again later, saying it stood by its comment and that “nothing in the tweet is inaccurate or misleading”. Nothing in the tweet is inaccurate or misleading. The committee stands by its statement, which is completely truthful. More baseless innuendo and more false smears from Senate Democrats. https://t.co/x7VUEKnFRV The rising tensions have led to heightened security at the Capitol, with some senators using police escorts to shield them from protesters eager to confront them, according to the Associated Press. Senator Susan Collins, a Maine Republican who is a key undecided vote on Kavanaugh, was escorted out of a hearing Wednesday by three police officers. The letters come as Democrats raise new questions about Kavanaugh’s truthfulness and temperament. Several high school and college classmates have come forward to challenge Kavanaugh’s characterization of his teenage years and his drinking habits. On Tuesday, the New York Times published a letter written by Kavanaugh in 1983, which refers to himself and his friends as “loud, obnoxious drunks with prolific pukers” – a starkly different image than he portrayed to senators last week during a hearing before the Senate judiciary committee. During the hearing, Christine Blasey Ford accused Kavanaugh of attempting to rape her during a drunken gathering when they were in high school. He has forcefully denied the allegation. Two other women have accused him of sexual misconduct, charges he has stridently denied. Following the hearing, Flake triggered the fresh FBI investigation of Kavanaugh last Friday when he agreed to advance Kavanaugh’s nomination – but only if there was a week delay for law enforcement to investigate allegations of serious sexual misconduct against the judge. The White House then ordered the investigation. The scope of the FBI’s investigation remains unclear, however. At least three people identified by Ford as witnesses and a second accuser have been interviewed by federal agents. But there are several reports of former classmates and corroborating witnesses who say they have not been contacted by the bureau. Ford and Kavanaugh have not yet been interviewed. The bureau has until Friday to complete it’s supplemental investigation but senators said on Wednesday that they expected to receive the findings as early as that afternoon. The findings will be shared with the White House and with the Senate Judiciary Committee, which will make it available to all the senators and a handful of aides. It remains unclear if the results will be made public in any form, despite calls from some Republicans for a full airing of the report. In short, cloture is a way of cutting off debate and ending a filibuster on a particular issue before the US Senate – part of a multi-step process that culminates in a final vote on legislation or a nomination. In the case of judge Brett Kavanaugh, the Senate Majority leader, Mitch McConnell, must first file for cloture, which will set the stage for a final vote on Kavanaugh's supreme court nomination. Once McConnell files for cloture, the motion must “ripen” meaning that it cannot be voted on until a full legislative day has passed. For example, if he filed for cloture on Wednesday, a cloture vote would not take place before Friday. The cloture vote – as opposed to the final vote – is often where the real drama happens. Republicans have a narrow 51-49 majority in the Senate and could vote to invoke cloture without support from a single Democrat. If only 50 senators agree to end debate, Vice President Mike Pence would be brought in to break the tie. If the motion, fails McConnell could try again or he could opt to pull the nomination. Invoking cloture for supreme court nominees once required 60 votes but was lowered in 2017 to a simple majority threshold last year during the nomination fight over justice Neil Gorsuch. Sixty votes are still required to approve legislation. Once cloture is invoked, debate on the matter is limited to an additional 30 hours. After that, the full senate would proceed to a final vote. Lauren Gambino “I’m afraid if somehow or another we don’t make [the report] public both sides will be very selective with what they share with y’all,” senator Bob Corker, a Republican of Tennessee, told reporters on Wednesday. Senate majority leader Mitch McConnell repeated his vow to hold a cloture vote on Kavanaugh’s nomination by the end of the week, saying: “It’s time to put this embarrassing spectacle behind us.” The findings, which will include interviews with key witnesses, will be relayed to the White House and the Senate Judiciary Committee. McConnell dismissed criticism from Democrats that a Friday vote on Kavanaugh’s nomination is too soon and would not be enough time to evaluate the findings from the FBI. McConnell called it part of the minority’s effort to “move goal posts” and delay a vote on his nomination. In a sharp rebuttal, Senate minority leader Chuck Schumer said Democrats do not have the power to stop a vote, and the delay to allow for an FBI investigation was done to accommodate the concerns of three Republicans senators. “Man up,” Schumer said to McConnell in a floor speech, “And say it’s your decision, not ours.” Meanwhile, Ford’s attorneys say they will turn recordings of her taking a polygraph test and notes from her therapy sessions in which she discussed the alleged assault to the FBI if the bureau agrees to interview her. Their request came in response to a letter from Grassley accusing her lawyers of “withholding material evidence”. He said the committee had obtained a letter from someone claiming to be an ex-boyfriend of Ford’s that “raises specific concerns” about the reliability of her polygraph test. The person, who was not identified, said he witnessed Ford help an roommate prepare for her polygraph test. The roommate – and Ford’s team – have denied the account. In reply to Ford’s lawyers on Wednesday, Senator John Cornyn, the No 2 Republican accused them of trying to play political games. “This is a bad joke,” he said on Twitter. “At her request Dr Ford and Judge Kavanaugh were interviewed before 20 million Americans. This is solely for purposes of delay.”