Last time the Black Eyed Peas played London, in 2010, they could barely move for props and effects. A motorcycle zipped overhead, costumes bristled with end-of-the-world hardware, fans’ real-time BlackBerry messages were displayed on a screen. This time? Not so much. It’s not quite Austerity Peas at this tour-opening show, but it is a visually subdued set, inasmuch as this group ever do things by halves. There is little in the way of dazzlement, apart from several moments when fans who had downloaded an app point their phones at the stage to see bursts of hearts and pyramids. The reason for the downsizing can be inferred from frontman Will.i.am’s mid-set address to the audience. Since the departure of singer Fergie last year, the group have reverted to the original rap-based trio of himself, Taboo and Apl.de.ap, and rediscovered their conscious hip-hop origins. Shaken by Ferguson and Donald Trump, they resumed releasing new music last January, after a gap of seven years. The urgency of tracks such as Ring the Alarm and Constant – both played tonight – has inspired waggish nicknames like De La Peas. Will makes no apology. “If you like boom-bap hip-hop, pick up the new album [Masters of the Sun, Vol 1],” he advises. “If you like I Gotta Feeling, pick up The E.N.D.” Their 2009 LP sold 11m copies. Here, though, he bumps up against the fact that this Saturday-night crowd, teeming with couples and families, do like I Gotta Feeling. Combined sales and streams make it the second-biggest song of the century, and to the casual listener its breezy positivity still defines the group. They play it, of course, as they do the other up-ful biggies – Shut Up, Let’s Get it Started and Boom Boom Pow. They can’t be unaware of the joy produced by these pop air-punchers, which is surely the reason the Peas have recruited singer Jessica Reynoso to deliver Fergie’s belting melody lines. Discovered by Apl when he coached the Filipino version of The Voice, she indisputably has the lungs, but when it comes to magnetism Fergie’s are big shoes to fill. Give her time. (By contrast, Nicole Scherzinger, surprise guest on This Is Love, overflows with the stuff.) The new material, a descendent of the 90s beats they grew up with and not influenced by modern idioms, is received respectfully but with less delight. It could be argued that only the staunchest fans – AKA Peabodies – had yearned for this reunion. To the rest of us, the group’s absence has gone unmarked, in part because Will.i.am has remained so present. (The longest-serving judge on The Voice UK, he returns to the series in 2019.) For an artist fascinated by futurism, he shows unexpected enthusiasm for the past with this new aesthetic, embodied by the dressed-down male trio spitting rhymes in front of a pyramid of light. Whether it will fly with the Peabodies is hard to predict, but heading backward is a conscious and sincere decision that deserves respect. • Touring until 3 November. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.