This recipe is really all about a small act of reciprocity. I’ve just finished making a documentary about Ugandan Asians for BBC4. We filmed at an Indian grocery, and to say thank you to the shopkeeper, we bought lots of vegetables from him afterwards. I cooked and packed them into Tupperware for the BBC team to take home. When we were next filming, as a thank you to me they returned the pots filled with blackberries they’d picked that morning. Here’s what I made with them. This is very simple and satisfying to make, given how few ingredients go into it. The squidgier the dates and the faster your blender, the better and smoother it will be. Feel free to vary the fruit you use: tangerine segments and/or pomegranate seeds warmed in a pan would be lovely in deepest, darkest winter. Prep 10 minRest 15 minCook 10 minServes 4 For the mousse200g medjool dates, pitted 150g unsalted cashews 60g ripe avocado (about half an avocado), roughly chopped2 tbsp brown rice syrup 4½-5 tbsp cocoa powder (I like Green & Black’s) 1 big pinch sea salt For the rosewater blackberries 3 tbsp caster sugar2 tsp rosewater (I like Steenbergs) 300g blackberries1 small handful mint leaves Put the dates and cashews in a big heatproof bowl and pour over 500ml freshly boiled water. Leave for 15 minutes, then tip into a sieve over a measuring jug. Make up the water in the jug to 300ml, if need be. Put the drained dates and nuts in a blender with the 300ml water, avocado, brown rice syrup, cocoa powder and salt, and blend smooth – add a splash more water if you need it to help blitz the mixture. Taste and add more rice syrup or cocoa, if required. Spoon into little serving pots and pop in the fridge to cool. To make the rosewater blackberries, put the sugar and a tablespoon of water in a small saucepan over a medium to low heat. Stir, add the blackberries, then leave to bubble and boil, stirring only very occasionally, so as not to break up the fruit. After 10 minutes, the deep burgundy juice should have thickened and reduced. Take off the heat and leave to cool. To serve, spoon a few cooled blackberries and their sticky juices over the chocolate pots and garnish each with a couple of mint leaves. This article contains affiliate links, which means we may earn a small commission if a reader clicks through and makes a purchase. All our journalism is independent and is in no way influenced by any advertiser or commercial initiative.  The links are powered by Skimlinks. By clicking on an affiliate link, you accept that Skimlinks cookies will be set. More information.