Do men learn from women? Often. Do they admit it publicly? Rarely, even today. Let’s stick to literature. No matter how hard I try, I can’t think of many male writers who have said that they were in any way indebted to the work of a woman writer. Among Italians only one comes to mind, Giuseppe Tomasi di Lampedusa, the author of The Leopard, who wrote that he had benefited from reading Virginia Woolf. I could list quite a few great male writers who either belittle their female colleagues, or attribute to them a capacity only to write banal, trifling stories – of marriage, children, love affairs; cheap romances and sentimental novels. Recently, things have been changing, but not very much. For example, when some renowned male writer says in private, or in public, that we women writers are good, I would like to ask: are we as good as you, better than you, or good only within the context of books written by women? That is, have we broken out of the literary women’s space we are confined to (and not only by the market)? Or have we overturned literature in general and its values? In other words, if you are a male writer who reads me and finds me good, are you paying me a generous compliment of the sort paid to a female student who has learned her lesson well? Or are you willing to admit that, today, you can learn from writing by women as much as we women have learned – and are learning, reading over the centuries – from writing by men? Here, in my opinion, things get complicated. Plenty of cultivated men are willing to praise us for our capacity to stir the emotions (and what does a woman do well, traditionally, if not stir the emotions and make the hours pass pleasantly?). But these men keep for themselves the literature that revolutionises, that ventures into minefields, that digs into political confrontation or addresses heroic struggles with power. The courage to go through the world fighting with words and deeds, street by street, remains in many people’s imagination the province of male intellectuals. Women, meanwhile, are still assigned to the balcony, from where they may contemplate life passing by and describe it in tremulous words. Many women who write, in every part of the world, in every field, do so with lucidity, with a pitiless gaze, with courage, with no concession to sentimentality. A widespread female intelligence that produces writing of a high literary quality has become manifest. But the cliche dies hard: we are emotional; we please. Men make great literature and teach fearlessly, through their words and deeds, how all the evil in the world should yield to good. • Translated by Ann Goldstein