A clean sheet is not to be sniffed at, especially after the two spankings suffered by the Republic of Ireland in their last two competitive matches. But nothing here suggested Martin O’Neill’s side will clamber off the bottom of their Nations League group by beating Wales on Tuesday, nor that a bright future lurks just beyond that. O’Neill tried things and the Irish fought hard. So there was that. But Ireland’s execution of even basic ploys was mostly dreadful. The sad thing as far as the spectacle was concerned was that Denmark, though tidier, had no imagination. Having been dismantled in Wales in their opening Nations League match last month, the Irish needed to stage a brighter show at home, not least to quell public criticism of O’Neill. The manager hoped this game would stoke new optimism about the country’s prospects but the number of empty seats suggested many supporters were not ready to be convinced. Denmark were not especially welcome visitors, for they were the last opponents to come here for a competitive match and inflicted a 5-1 defeat in November’s World Cup play-off. Mercifully for the hosts, Christian Eriksen, who struck a hat-trick in that demolition, did not make the trip this time owing to injury. The Irish side was different, too, with only six players who began in November starting here. O’Neill has never been one to bow to popular demand but he finally gave an international start to Matt Doherty, the Wolves defender whose lack of caps has puzzled many of his compatriots. The 26-year-old began at right wing-back as O’Neill, in search of solidity, deployed three central defenders. James McClean served as left wing-back, while Cyrus Christie was assigned a surprising central midfield role. Harry Arter, returning to the squad after abstaining from last month’s matches in protest at the way Roy Keane spoke to him when he was injured, also began in central midfield and there was an amusing aptness to his role in the first notable incident. In the third minute he went down off the ball and Denmark, seemingly convinced he was injured, stopped playing – but the referee did not whistle so Jeff Hendrick nicked the ball and strode through on goal. He shot wide before being surrounded by Danes berating him for a lack of sportsmanship, while his teammates were no doubt more vexed by his inaccuracy. Two minutes later Arter, perhaps over-eager to prove his toughness, was booked for a ridiculous tackle on Martin Braithwaite. The next effort at goal, meanwhile, came in the 16th minute from Richard Keogh, who basically tackled the ball over the bar from 20 yards. Helter-skelter it surely was but at least the Irish approach put the visitors on the back foot early on or, more precisely, forced them to make frequent headed clearances. When the Danes started to attack they did so with better technique, although their first chance ended with Thomas Delaney colliding with goalkeeper Darren Randolph after the midfielder lunged at a deflected shot from Braithwaite. The hosts’ best chance of the first period fell in the 39th minute to Shane Duffy, whose header from a free-kick by Hendrick failed to find the target. Just before the break Mathias Jørgensen almost profited from a mistake by Doherty at the other end but Randolph foiled his close-range attempt. Moments later Pione Sisto hit the post with a curling shot from the edge of the box. O’Neill introduced Enda Stevens on the left at half-time to enable McClean to advance into a more familiar attacking position. But Denmark, better passers without hinting at mastery, made the Irish defend for long periods simply by circulating the ball in the home team’s half. They seldom looked capable of mustering enough creativity to make a breakthrough from open play. The vacuum left by Eriksen was obvious. They threatened from a corner near the hour mark, when Arter whacked a header by Simon Kjaer off the line. The Cardiff City player was replaced by Callum Robinson a short time later as O’Neill grasped for at least a smidgen of control in midfield. Ireland sorely lacked quality going forward. At last, in the 71st minute, Ireland cobbled together a nice attack, but Kasper Schmeichel pushed away Christie’s well-struck drive.