An al-Jazeera documentary has claimed that 15 international cricket matches in 2011 and 2012 were the subject of 26 spot-fixing scams, with “a small group” of England players alleged to have been involved on seven occasions. Cricket’s Match-Fixers: The Munawar Files is the follow-up to the Qatar-based news network’s previous such programme in May this year. It looks into the movements of Aneel Munawar, an alleged operative for the Indian crime syndicate D-Company who was recently the subject of a public appeal by the ICC’s anti-corruption unit. The film was made available by al-Jazeera on Sunday and details the alleged spot-fixing arrangements – ie the number of runs that would be scored by batsmen during a 10-over passage of play – supported by recorded telephone conversations in which Munawar allegedly outlines the agreed details to a bookmaker in India. Of the 15 matches listed by the documentary makers England players are alleged to have batted to order in seven, with Australia doing so in five and Pakistan three. A game between Sri Lanka and Zimbabwe completes the list. Precise details of the alleged fixes – overs, runs and players involved – are redacted in every instance. Al-Jazeera’s investigations team claim that in some of the matches both teams appear to have been delivering a fix. They also state that only one of the 26 scoring patterns allegedly predicted by Munawar did not come to pass and then by only one run. The fixtures involving England include the 2011 Lord’s Test against India and all three Tests of the 2012 series against Pakistan in the United Arab Emirates. In limited-overs cricket there are games against Bangladesh, South Africa and the Netherlands during the 2011 World Cup, as well as versus Afghanistan in the 2012 World T20. Along with these games, Al-Jazeera’s video includes an alleged phone conversation between Munawar and what is claimed to be an England player, unnamed, in which the former offers congratulations for the 2010-11 Ashes win before confirming an impending payment for supposed future spot-fixing arrangements. The voice is distorted by al-Jazeera in the final edit, with the unnamed England player replying “lovely” when the payment is mentioned. The network claims it has since approached the cricketer in question, who responded by saying the conversation did not take place and that the recording could be “a fabrication”. Al Jazeera claims to have passed the relevant material to a forensic speech scientist, who concluded that this was not the case. The documentary outlines the ease with which Munawar was able to get close to players, with pictures of him taken in the vicinity of India’s Virat Kohli and Rohit Sharma, England’s Tim Bresnan and Graeme Swann and Darren Sammy of West Indies. Al Jazeera state there is no suggestion that any of these players are involved in fixing. A spokesperson for the England and Wales Cricket Board added: “ECB takes its responsibilities on anti-corruption and preserving the integrity of cricket very seriously. Whilst the limited information we have been given by al-Jazeera is poorly prepared and lacks clarity and corroboration it has been properly assessed. Analysis of this by the ECB Integrity Team has cast no doubt on the integrity or behaviour of any England player, current or former.” Al-Jazeera, whose previous documentary in May alleged spot-fixing by England and Australia during Test matches against India in 2016 and 2017 respectively, has said they will share their information with Interpol but have so far declined repeated requests to pass on all unedited material to the ICC’s anti-corruption unit. The documentary makers have accused the ICC of failing to act on past information about Munawar and added that the world governing body put out a request for public help in August only once it learned the network was planning a second programme. Alex Marshall, the ICC’s anti-corruption chief, said: “I must refute the assertion that cricket does not take the issue of corruption seriously, We have more resources than ever before working to rid our sport of corruption. The investigation into these allegations has already commenced and will run alongside a number of other live unrelated investigations.” Cricket Australia meanwhile is quoted in the documentary as saying the claims about its players are “contemptible”.