The raw pace of Olly Stone looks set to be unleashed in Wednesday’s opening one-day international against Sri Lanka, with the fast bowler in line to win his first England cap following a soaraway summer for Warwickshire. The 24-year-old is arguably the quickest on the county circuit and while he went wicketless in England’s solitary warm-up match last week – and has shone more with the red Duke’s ball this year – Eoin Morgan appears keen for an early look at his new weapon given his regular enforcer, Liam Plunkett, misses the start of the tour. England trained under lights on Tuesday amid an infestation of flying insects and though confirmation of the team is not due until the toss, there is an expectation that Stone will play. A third spinner is also likely on what is expected to be a turning pitch, meaning Liam Dawson, Hampshire’s left-armer, could earn his second ODI cap. Stone, whose inclusion would mean Mark Wood missing out along with Sam and Tom Curran, took 43 wickets in seven matches in Division Two of the County Championship last season and struck every 22 balls. It also marks an impressive comeback for a player who in 2016 suffered a career-threatening knee injury. Certainly Jos Buttler, England’s vice-captain and wicketkeeper, felt the sting in Colombo last week when taking balls from Stone during the 43-run DLS win over a Sri Lanka Board XI, even if he sent down six wides and shipped 32 runs from six overs. Buttler said: “He was hitting the gloves really hard. I thought he was impressive. The guys facing him in the nets [on Monday] said it wasn’t that enjoyable. He’s had a great season and come back really well from that injury. “I think he is a really exciting prospect. Like Liam Plunkett, who has had a fantastic time for us and taken a lot of wickets, he can perform a similar role as a big, tall guy with pace.” With David Willey also out through injury, competition for bowling places at next year’s World Cup is hotting up and Morgan has warned his players that not even members of an in-form batting lineup are guaranteed their spots, with the captain prepared to drop himself should his form not be up to scratch. Morgan sat out a Twenty20 international against South Africa last year – albeit a move based on giving two new batsmen in Dawid Malan and Liam Livingstone playing time, rather than his own returns – and insists he will always put the needs of the team first. “It is a brave call but we have come a long way with this team and we need to put ourselves in the best position in order to be contenders,” Morgan told Sky Sports. “If that means I am not good enough to be in the team as a captain or as a player I will be the first to say it. I’m an honest guy. I’m more than capable of making a tough decision. “I’ve dropped myself in the past to create opportunities for guys and see if they can play at international level. When you drop yourself as a captain it sets the tone and example of ‘nobody’s place is cemented’. “We are trying to build a squad of 16 or 17 to try to win a World Cup, that’s the objective. It’s not an individual trying to get runs or wickets – it’s a team collective everyone must be prepared to buy into.”