England face two big tests in their preparations for the World Cup when they play Brazil and Australia in the next few days and I’m really excited to watch how they cope with stronger opposition having booked their World Cup spot in France. After watching the qualification campaign, it was hard to say that England looked ready to win a World Cup but these two games could be an indication of progress under Phil Neville. I think his results have been really positive – England qualified despite a few difficulties against Wales and from what I hear from players he’s been very diligent and on top of standards. I read an article recently about him being quite hands-on with the players, who he speaks to every day and even knows the names of their dogs! I don’t know whether that helps with winning football matches, although marginal gains can be very important when you’re one of the best teams in the world. I have to admit I was a little bit surprised to hear how much he communicates with the players and how he knows everything about their personal lives. He’s taken an interesting approach to management and, if it works, he will be a genius. If it doesn’t, then perhaps some will question the benefit of being so hands-on with the players. Ultimately, he will obviously be judged on how England perform on the pitch next year and I think there is every chance they can reach another semi-final at least; then it will just be about special moments and players seizing big moments that can hopefully get England over the line. Of course I hope they go all the way but there are going to be plenty of others who are also very capable of winning the tournament, probably more so than ever in previous World Cups. The United States are always strong and France will be contenders as well, especially as the host nation. But Australia are my dark horses to do really well because they have shown some real improvements in recent years and have one of the best strikers in the world in Sam Kerr. She has finished as top scorer in the US for the past two years, so the likes of Steph Houghton and Millie Bright will have to be at their best to contain her. It will be good for them to play against a forward of her calibre. The core of the team still remains from the 2015 World Cup but for England to win the tournament I think they will need their strikers Jodie Taylor, Toni Duggan and Fran Kirby to be at their very best. Being able to put the ball in the back of the net is so important at the highest level and could be the difference between reaching the semi-finals and actually winning the World Cup. We saw how crucial it was for Harry Kane to be the goalscoring talisman for England’s men to have any chance of success in Russia this summer; I think the same will apply for the forwards for England women next year. The USA are always strong and France will be contenders as well, especially as host nation. But Australia are my dark horses to do really well There are some good young players such as Leah Williamson, Hannah Blundell and Keira Walsh who are building up their experience on the international stage, although Walsh is for me in the best position to force her way into the starting team next year. She is a top holding midfielder who can control the pace of the game and dictate play so it will be interesting to see how she copes with that responsibility in international football. It has been a privilege to watch Eden Hazard this season and I agree with the widely held view that he is currently the best player in the Premier League. He is clearly quite sensitive to whether his manager gives him the freedom to express himself and it seems that Maurizio Sarri knows how to get the best out of him so far. Sarri has also been smart in his public declaration of confidence in Hazard, setting him the target of 40 goals. Have no doubt, he will want to achieve that target now. Hazard was quite outspoken last season about Antonio Conte not putting him in the right position so it is clear he requires a tactical system from the manager to allow him to flourish. Hazard also looks great physically – with the multiple changes of direction and cutting movements he makes there must be so much loading on his leg muscles but he is so strong within his hamstrings and uses his body to draw fouls and beat players. For his goal against Liverpool in the Carabao Cup, he put himself in a position where the defenders couldn’t risk fouling him because of the clever way he shields the ball using his body. Sarri is apparently considering making Hazard captain this week. I think that would be a really good idea because it will give him the extra responsibility and shows that he is not only the best player in the team but the key man at the club. There was some talk that he could leave in the summer but now he is flourishing under the new manager. He was captain for Belgium at the World Cup and performed well with that responsibility so I think saying to him: “go on, be that leader for us” can only ensure high levels of performance. Chelsea aren’t in the Champions League this season so that’s a definite advantage over Manchester City and Liverpool and, on current form, they look like huge contenders to win the title. I think City are still the team to beat, although they have a tough game at Liverpool on Sunday which I will be watching in Turin.