The day my son was born was one of the most stressful of my life. My wife had been in labour for more than 12 hours at the hospital and we were told quite abruptly she’d need an emergency caesarean. The decision had to be made very, very quickly. The doctor and midwife, who were cool and calm, didn’t say it but it was obvious if we delayed this there was a real chance we’d walk back out of the hospital with a death certificate instead of a healthy baby boy. I remember when they took my wife away being hit with an existential wave of anxiety about how much trust I was putting in the hands of the medical staff at the Royal Hospital for Women. I was asked if I’d like to be in the operating theatre when the little tacker was finally extracted and of course said yes. Despite the overwhelming waves of anxiety, the second I put the scrubs on I busted out my iPhone and grabbed a few selfies – anxiety be damned, there was content to be created. Forty (believe me, I was counting) insanely stressful minutes later I was holding my son, Declan, and my life had been changed forever. During the delivery the midwives let me take a photo of Declan being yanked out, covered in blood and gore. After the nurses took him away again I turned the video into a gif in reverse (the child going back into my wife’s stomach) and sent it to my brother-in-law. I still hadn’t told him my son’s name. At 30, you’re still considered a young dad, at least in Sydney. I’m definitely one of the few parents in my circle of friends but it looks like trends are changing. The traditional pathways to parenthood are being thrown to the wind by millennials of necessity. As long as I can remember I’ve always wanted to be a dad but even as a teenager I had “the checklist” in my mind. You find a girl, you get married, you buy a house and get a steady job and then you think about having a child. We are still renting and most of the people in my age cohort aren’t buying property before  having a kid or bothering to get married. Millennials rent and have precarious employment because those are the cards we’ve been dealt. The rest is outcome of birth or incredible fortune. There’s no way to work a retail job in Camden hard enough to buy property in Point Piper. If you think otherwise I’d love to hear more about your self-managed super fund and your love of that cheeky Mike Carlton. One of the joys of being able to throw away that kind of checklist mentality is that we get to make our own rules. So many of the child groups or books I’ve read are in paroxysms of anxiety about screen time or food or how you communicate with your kids. There are honestly Gen X parents out there whose love for medical progress ends at IVF. The moment little Bonathon pops out, he’s vax-free, gluten-free and a committed paleo warrior. Don’t vaccinate your kids because someone with a triple-barrelled last name on Instagram says measles can be cured by drinking one to two litres of unpasteurised horse urine daily. Only feed your children organic chia. Never let your child face east. If the child sees an LCD screen, it will die immediately. Screen time I’m a bit wary about, but only those insane nursery rhyme YouTube videos that I’m sure are turning my kid into a Chinese Manchurian Candidate. I can’t wait for his first words to be “The Latest Five Year Plan is President Xi’s Greatest Triumph”. Millennials are making up the rules as we go along (except for vaccinations: vaccinate your kids) – our goal is to spend as much time as we can with our son and let him know he’s loved. It feels like there’s so much more space in society now to just be a hands-on dad. When I’m out with my son by myself, I still get the occasional member of the grey-rinse set, dripping with resin jewellery, asking: “Where is his mother?” But most people are pretty chill about it. We live in the era of the latte papa and it’s an incredible change for good that dads can now be confident and affectionate towards their kids without somehow impinging on their masculinity. What’s more masculine than being a loving father? Having a child is an incredible joy and I thoroughly recommend it to everyone who can do it. The circumstances are never going to be perfect but you’ll figure it out. If you do decide to have a kid, please do not email me if your child decides not to sleep, that’s on you as a parent. That said, for most of the work of child-rearing I feel like I can do a passable facsimile of what my incredible wife does, but where that falls down is breastfeeding. We’ve been lucky enough to be able to exclusively breastfeed since birth (having been bullied into it by some aggressive midwives) – but because we’ve had issues with expressing, my wife is basically tethered to the child. I can’t get up at night and feed the boy to give her a solid eight hours of sleep and it does get to me. She can’t yet bugger off for a weekend away letting me take the kid. I just can’t be enough of a parent for our child yet. Would you believe as a straight, white male what has driven me insane is being unable to feed my son. This baby is going to need his mum for at least a while longer. It seems that despite all the progress of gender equality and being able to flip gender roles on their head, men being unable to lactate may be the final Rubicon to cross. Given we’re close to being able to gestate babies in bags, how far away are we from men being able to chow down on some Pfizer Dadanol and get lactating? Looks like until the Elon Musk of norgs gets on the case, I’m going to continue to be the worse parent.