Lena Dunham, the star and creator of the HBO comedy series Girls, has had an operation to remove her left ovary after struggling with increasing pain. The 32-year-old writer and actor, who had a hysterectomy 11 months ago to alleviate the symptoms of endometriosis, had the operation this week. She posted on her Instagram account, which is followed by three million people, to talk about her health problems, saying she had two hour surgery to remove her ovary, which was encased in scar tissue and fibrosis. She said that it had been “kinda hard to walk/pee/vamp”. Dunham wrote: “My mother took this picture after I spent nine hours in the post op recovery area with v low blood pressure, the nurses were diligently monitoring. I was so out of it that I thought I looked sensually moody a la Charlotte Rampling [turns out it was more of a constipation vibe. “A lot of people commented on my last post about being too sick to finish promoting my show by saying my hysterectomy should have fixed it [I mean *should* is a weird one]. “That I should get acupuncture and take supplements [I do]. That I should see a therapist because it’s clearly psychological [year 25, y’all. These are the fruits!] “But a big lesson I’ve learned in all this is that health, like most things, isn’t linear- things improve and things falter and you start living off only cranberry juice from a sippy cup/sleeping on a glorified heating pad but you’re also happier than you’ve been in years.” Dunham said she felt blessed creatively and lucky to have health insurance and money for care. “But I’m simultaneously shocked by what my body is and isn’t doing for me and red with rage that access to medical care is a privilege and not a right in this country and that women have to work extra hard just to prove what we already know about our own bodies and beg for what we need to be well,” she said. Dunham announced her total hysterectomy at the beginning of the year in an essay in Vogue. Endometriosis, which affects about 176 million women worldwide, is a condition caused by tissue similar to the lining of the womb growing elsewhere, most commonly in the abdomen, ovaries, rectovaginal septum, bladder and bowel. The condition can cause such severe and chronic pain that women pass out or are admitted to hospital. Surgery is complex because the tissue grows around organs and fuses them together. The decision was a tough one, Dunham said. “I never had a single doubt about having children,” she wrote. “As a child, I would stuff my shirt with a pile of hot laundry and march around the living room beaming.”