Rafael Benítez has emerged from his night out with Mike Ashley and Newcastle United’s first-team squad in cautiously optimistic mood. The manager heads to Manchester United on Saturday looking happier, and sounding more positive, than at any point this season. “I am convinced, 100%, that we will stay in the Premier League this season,” said Benítez, whose side have only two points. If the Spaniard will not begin to truly trust Ashley until the owner reinforces an understrength squad in January, the conviviality over an Italian meal at a Northumberland restaurant on Wednesday does seem to have started breaking the ice. “It was a pleasant dinner; everything that was said will stay between us but I think it’s positive,” said Benítez. “I think some good can come out of it. I can’t see any negatives. I think it was his [Ashley’s] idea to support the team and the manager. Everyone was relaxed and the mood was very good.” Asked whether he felt more confident about being able to make signings in January, the manager’s reply was instructive. “I hope so,” he said. “He knows my ideas and if we talk and he sees the games it will be easier for everyone to understand. “I’m very realistic, I know January is a difficult window but, at the same time, Newcastle is a nice city, it’s a good place with fantastic fans and it’s an opportunity for players to come to the Premier League. I’m quite optimistic but, at the same time, realistic. Maybe we can fix things and improve. We will see if we can go in the right direction.” Ashley, after failing to attend any of Newcastle’s games for more than a year, has been in the stands for the past two fixtures and is scheduled to be at Old Trafford to watch Benítez’s lastest reunion with his old foe José Mourinho. Benítez was reluctant to be drawn on Mourinho’s travails in Manchester, saying only: “Sometimes you have to praise players. Everyone has his own ideas; it’s important the team understands your way of managing. But I don’t see a fragile Manchester United team.”