Manchester United’s first signing of the José Mourinho regime, Eric Bailly arrived from Villarreal saying it was “a dream come true” to be joining the club. A little over two years on, that dream has turned into something of a nightmare and the already fragile confidence of the £30m signing must have been shattered when he was hooked after just 19 minutes of his side’s first half horror show against Newcastle last weekend. With his future at the club looking far from assured, the central defender is reported to be hopeful of securing a January move away from Old Trafford and both Arsenal and Tottenham Hotspur are rumoured to be interested in offering him an escape route. Mourinho has certainly made no secret of his desire for an upgrade or two in the centre of his defence and Milan skipper Alessio Romagnoli has been mentioned as a possible contender. United may have to battle with Chelsea for the Italy international’s signature. Maurizio Sarri is believed to be an admirer of Romagnoli’s and is looking for defensive reinforcements as speculation abounds that both Gary Cahill and Andreas Christensen will be allowed to leave Stamford Bridge in January. Having been a regular starter during Antonio Conte’s time in charge, Christensen has yet to make a Premier League appearance under Sarri and told a Danish website he is running out of patience. “In the last three seasons I’ve played, so it’s clear that I do not see me staying if my current situation continues in the future,” he said. Cahill, who has played just three times for Chelsea this season, is wanted by Southampton and Aston Villa. Flamengo’s 21-year-old Brazilian midfielder Lucas Paquetá is ready to ignore the advances of Manchester United, Paris Saint-Germain and Barcelona to sign for Milan in January. The club has agreed to pay £30m for the 21-year-old, who had previously been linked with a summer move to Liverpool. The youngest member of Tite’s provisional 35-man World Cup squad, Paquetá ultimately failed to make the cut for Russia. Liverpool, Chelsea, Manchester United and Juventus continue to hitch their skirts and pout in the direction of Aaron Ramsey, who will be a free agent once his contract with Arsenal expires next summer. Free to speak to foreign suitors in January, the midfielder could sign a pre-contract agreement with the Italian club if he fancies a spell in Serie A. Barcelona hope to bring Ajax central defender Matthijs de Ligt to the Camp Nou as the heir apparent to Gerard Pique, who has become something of a liability. Pique’s mistakes have cost his side four goals in as many games recently and the player has conceded “there are people that hope things go badly for me”. De Ligt, Napoli’s Kalidou Koulibaly and Internazionale’s Milan Skriniar may not be among them, but are all rumoured to be potential beneficiaries if the 31-year-old doesn’t up his game.