The spectator whom Brooks Koepka hit with a tee shot at the Ryder Cup is considering legal action against the tournament’s organisers after losing the sight in one eye. One of Koepka’s drives on the opening day of the tournament flew towards the crowd and hit Corine Remande. “Doctors told me I had lost the use of that eye,” the 49-year-old told Agence France-Presse. “It happened so fast, I didn’t feel any pain when I was hit. I didn’t feel like the ball had struck my eye and then I felt the blood start to pour. The scan on Friday confirmed a fracture of the right eye-socket and an explosion of the eyeball.” Koepka was quick to make his way over to the crowd and apologise to Remande, who was later treated at an eye hospital in Paris. “Quite clearly, there is responsibility on the part of the organisers,” she said. “Officials did not shout any warning as the player’s ball went into the crowd. More than anything I want them to take care of all the medical bills to make sure there is no risk of infection.” Remande, who had travelled from Egypt to attend the tournament, also criticised the tournament organisers for “not making contact” with her following the incident. She plans to consult a lawyer on Tuesday with a view to seeking damages. The European Tour has now pledged “support for as long as necessary” and a Ryder Cup spokesperson said: “It is distressing to hear that someone might suffer long-term consequences from a ball strike. “We have been in communication with the family involved, starting with the immediate on-course treatment and thereafter to provide support, helping with the logistics of repatriation, including providing a transfer for the family from Paris to Lyon. We will continue to offer support for as long as necessary. “Ball strikes are an occasional hazard for spectators but this kind of incident is extremely rare. We can confirm that ‘fore’ was shouted several times but also appreciate how hard it can be to know when and where every ball is struck if you are in the crowd. “We are hugely sympathetic and will do everything we can to support the spectator, insofar as that is possible under very difficult circumstances.”