Donald Trump flew to Florida on Monday to see first hand the devastation wrought by Hurricane Michael, the storm that left at least 18 people dead and dozens more missing after slamming the Panhandle last week. Accompanied by the first lady, Melania Trump, the president said the government’s priority was providing food and shelter to victims and restoring power. Officials have said Michael was one of the worst storms ever to make landfall in the continental US. On arrival at Eglin air force base near Valparaiso, Trump spoke briefly of the storm’s impact on local residents, telling reporters: “You know many of these people, they have no homes. Some of them have no trace of a home … so our big thing is feeding, water and safety.” The Trumps were due to move on to storm-ravaged Georgia later in the day. Trump approved emergency disaster declarations for several states across the south-east in the wake of the hurricane, ordering federal aid to assist with local recovery efforts. The category 4 hurricane produced winds of 155mph and left entire communities in ruins. The coastal township of Mexico Beach was all but wiped out, with entire homes swept from their foundations. Trump was given an aerial view of the devastated areas from Marine One, the presidential helicopter, as rescue efforts on the ground remained marred by blocked roads. According to reporters who followed the president in a separate helicopter, a water tower could be seen lying on its side, huge trucks lay scattered in a parking lot and many houses were roofless. Trump also saw Tyndall air force base, which was almost destroyed by Michael. “Just arrived in Florida,” the president tweeted. “Also thinking about our GREAT Alabama farmers and our many friends in North and South Carolina today. We are with you!” Just arrived in Florida. Also thinking about our GREAT Alabama farmers and our many friends in North and South Carolina today. We are with you! Michael made landfall in Florida before tearing into southern Georgia and moving through the Carolinas and Virginia. Authorities expect the death toll to rise, with at least 46 people unaccounted for. Forecasters said the storm’s damage could cost as much as $30bn. As of Sunday evening, as many as 183,000 Floridians remained without power. More than 1,700 search and rescue personnel have been deployed, according to state officials. Trump praised Rick Scott, the Florida governor, for his response to the storm, saying: “The job they’ve done is Florida has been incredible.” The state is a key battleground for the November midterm elections but politics ground to a halt in the wake of the storm. The first debate in the closely watched race to succeed Scott was postponed, as was a debate between the Democratic senator Bill Nelson and his challenger, Scott. Trump left his own political concerns in the capital. At the White House, on his way to Marine One, he was pressed on the disappearance of Jamal Khashoggi. He speculated, without evidence, that “rogue killers” may have murdered the journalist, not agents of the Saudi Arabian government, as claimed by Turkish officials. Trump was also forced to respond to questions about a DNA test taken by Elizabeth Warren to determine her Native American heritage, a point of contention between the president and the Massachusetts Democrat. The president has derided Warren as “Pocahontas” and offered in a July rally to pay $1m to charity if she took a DNA test. After Warren released the results of the test on Monday morning, Trump claimed he never promised the $1m payment, telling reporters: “I didn’t say that. You better read it again.”