Maurizio Sarri has said he is “lucky” to find himself in direct opposition to José Mourinho and does not yet consider himself worthy of favourable comparisons to the Manchester United manager, whom he rates as one of the best in the world. Chelsea welcome Mourinho back to Stamford Bridge on Saturday with their former manager having suffered a trying start to the campaign, similar to that in 2015 as his second spell at the club unravelled. Yet, whereas his predecessor, Antonio Conte, clashed with Mourinho over the past two seasons, Sarri has nothing but admiration for the man who led the London club to three Premier League titles and whom he will confront for the first time. The Chelsea head coach suggested United were the best in the division “player for player”, “a wonderful team” and said Mourinho is “a coach who has won everything, everywhere”. “Results speak for him so, at the moment, he is better than me for sure,” Sarri said. “I hope to improve myself in the future, but I need to win [trophies] if I want to compare myself to him. You are talking about one of the best coaches in the world, and I’m not at the moment one of the best. I need to win. “I have won Serie B, Serie C, Serie D in Italy, like the Championship, League One and League Two here in England. But now I need to win at this level. Mourinho won in the past but will be able to win also in the future because he is really one of the best. Maybe the best. I am lucky to be here because it’s very difficult to start in a non-professional team, and to finish in one of the most important clubs in the world. So you need to be lucky.” Asked to explain how he had benefited from good fortune over a coaching career that has taken the former banker progress through Italian amateur football before, at his 19th club, arriving in the Premier League, he said: “I was in the right place in the right moment. First of all, to arrive in Empoli [in 2012], where I had a very young team, but the players were very good. We had Daniele Rugani, who was 19. Elseid Hysaj, who was 19. We had Riccardo Saponara, who was 20 and Lorenzo Tonelli, who was 21. Nobody knew them at that moment, but they were very good and we won Serie B. So I was lucky. “When Mourinho was at Internazionale and my target, in that period, was just to be a professional coach, I probably would not have believed this day would come. To have thought that would have been incredible. Without determination, it’s impossible to arrive here from non-league. So, while my character is different to Mourinho’s, maybe my level of determination is the same. But the Special One is Mourinho.”