Kepa Arrizabalaga The Spaniard showed bravery and quick instincts to deny Juan Mata and Ander Herrera but he could do nothing about Anthony Martial’s double. 7 César Azpilicueta The right-back will be disappointed that Martial, his direct opponent, scored twice. But he is a diligent player and kept trying until the end. 5 Antonio Rüdiger Gave Chelsea the lead with a thumping header. A big threat from set pieces and produced some forceful challenges. Sometimes too robust. Booked. 6 David Luiz Pulled out of position when United took the lead. Still lacks discipline and missed a good chance. His header led to Ross Barkley’s equaliser. 5 Marcos Alonso Drove forward to link attacks in the first half. But he is truly comfortable at left-back? His defensive work failed to convince as the tide turned. 5 N’Golo Kanté While the Frenchman was as energetic as ever, he continues to look uncertain on the right of the midfield trio. A potential problem for Maurizio Sarri. 6 Jorginho Went missing when Chelsea lost control in the second half. Unfortunate that his touch took Ashley Young’s cross to Martial for United’s leveller. 5 Mateo Kovacic An inventive presence in midfield, the Croatian caught the eye with some delicate touches and driving runs. He has settled in well at Chelsea. 7 Willian While he was on the ball a lot, the Brazilian lacked conviction in the final third. He needs to show more thrust in the decisive areas. 5 Álvaro Morata The striker worked hard but often frustrated the home fans with his lack of bite. Could have shown more conviction after being released by Kovacic. 5 Eden Hazard Chelsea’s talisman oozed menace whenever he had room to roam inside from the left. United often resorted to crude measures to stop him. Booked. 6 Ross Barkley Replaced Kovacic and saved a point for Chelsea. 7 Pedro Failed to get into the game after replacing Willian. 5 Olivier Giroud His hold-up play was more effective than Morata’s. 5 David de Gea Let down by his defence when Chelsea took the lead. Showed his class with fine saves from Kanté and Morata in the second half. 7 Ashley Young Struggled to keep Hazard quiet and booked for fouling the Belgian in the first half. But the right-back played a prominent role in United’s equaliser. 6 Chris Smalling The centre-back rarely put a foot wrong. If there is a criticism, though, he could have been more assertive when Chelsea launched their aerial barrage. 6 Victor Lindelöf This was one of the Swede’s better games for United. Made an important intervention when Giroud threatened a late equaliser. 7 Luke Shaw Skinned by Willian early on, the left-back recovered well and kept the Brazilian on a tight leash. His delivery led to United’s equalising goal. 7 Nemanja Matic The defensive midfielder found himself skating on thin ice after picking up a booking for an early foul on Hazard. Grew in stature in second half. 7 Paul Pogba Looked around for someone to blame after losing Rüdiger for Chelsea’s opener. Made up for that error with a more responsible display after the interval. 6 Marcus Rashford Restricted by his defensive responsibilities on the right flank in the first half. When his moment arrived, though, he set up Martial’s second goal. 6 Juan Mata United’s creator impressed against his former club. Had his side’s first shot on target and started the move that led to their second goal. 7 Anthony Martial Preferred over Alexis Sánchez on the left, the Frenchman was invisible during the first half. But he was ruthless and brilliant after half-time. 8 Romelu Lukaku Headed a decent chance wide and toiled in the first half. Helped change the flow by dropping deeper in second half. Caused problems with his physicality. 6 Ander Herrera Introduced to give United more steel in midfield. 6 Andreas Pereira Booked. 5 Alexis Sánchez Booked. 5