Jordan Pickford Horrible moment of overplaying should have resulted in conceding a penalty, but his bold pass helped create the first goal. 6 Kieran Trippier Carried on his World Cup form. Blocked, blocked and blocked again, but was accomplished all round. 8 Joe Gomez When the pressure was on in the second half he stood strong. His passing was an asset too. 8 Harry Maguire Some shaky moments and got a booking to boot, but largely nullified Spain’s threat from crosses. 7 Ben Chilwell Not as effective as against Croatia but has an old head on young shoulders and stood up to the defensive task. 6 Eric Dier His needless, aggressive, sliding tackle on Sergio Ramos set the tone. Efficient and effective. 7 Harry Winks A fine performance in only his second international. Strikingly comfortable on the ball, especially in tight spaces. 7 Ross Barkley His chipped pass opened up the space for the third goal and confidence bloomed. Athleticism was an advantage. 8 Raheem Sterling Brought Manchester City form to an England shirt. Two goals, the first a beauty, and smart, aggressive play on the flanks. 9 Marcus Rashford Scored with a fine finish, provided an even better assist and never stopped working. No longer a fringe player. 9 Harry Kane He failed to score, but he did everything else. The captain thrived alongside his partners. 9 Substitutes: Kyle Walker (for Barkley 76) 7; Trent Alexander-Arnold (for Trippier 85) 6; Nathaniel Chalobah (for Winks 90) 6. David de Gea Not much he could do about any of the goals, not confident by any stretch. 6 Jonny Could have scored after four minutes but England’s first goal came down his side and was subdued thereafter. Booked. 5 Sergio Ramos Scored a punchy diving header at the last and asserted himself as usual, but was also effectively targeted by England. 6 Nacho Got spun like a top in the first half and never recovered, will not look back on this match with fondness. 5 Marcos Alonso Spain’s best player, though he too was exposed by England’s attack. Constant option going forward. 7 Sergio Busquets Was set about by England from the off and never got to establish his rhythm. Even passed the ball out of play. 5 Thiago Alcântara Flicks, tricks and all round impudence but this talented player could not find a way to effect the match. 5 Saúl Ñíguez Man of the match at Wembley last month, anonymous in southern Spain. Subbed with half an hour to go. 5 Iago Aspas Offered very little, later substituted, and did not show the technical ability to trouble England’s defence. 4 Marco Asensio Spain’s best opportunities in the first hour all fell to him and he squandered them all. Flattered to deceive. 4 Rodrigo Applied himself well and should have won a penalty. 6 Substitutes: Dani Ceballos (for Aspas 57) 6; Paco Alcácer (for Saúl 57) 7; Álvaro Morata (for Rodrigo 72) 6.