Looking like the colossal love child of a container ship and a whale, writhing above the treetops of Weiwuying park in the southern Taiwanese city of Kaohsiung, the world’s largest performing arts centre has a suitably immense presence. By turns galumphing and graceful, the roughly £260m hulk contains an opera house, concert hall, theatre and recital hall, seating up to 7,000 people within its curvaceous shell. As Taiwan faces ever more pressure for assimilation from mainland China, whose cultural building boom has led to a new museum or concert hall open practically every week in recent years, the National Kaohsiung Centre for the Arts, AKA Weiwuying, is a monumental statement that this plucky nation means business on the international cultural stage. Gaping openings in the building’s hefty flanks beckon you into a cave-like landscape, where the floor rides up in great waves as the ceiling plunges down to meet the ground, forming a world of tunnels and canyons. The glossy-white steel skin is sliced open in places, bringing shafts of light into the space and offering intriguing glimpses of the venues within. It provides cooling respite from the tropical heat of this coastal city, channelling the breeze beneath its bulging belly to make a welcome place for picnics, tai-chi, yoga classes and some exhilarating swings. “We were struck by the informality of the performing arts in Taiwan,” says Dutch architect Francine Houben, whose practice, Mecanoo (designers of the Birmingham Library), won the competition for the project in 2007. “Chinese opera has its origins in street theatre, so we wanted to make a place that would feel as casual and informal as going to see a performance in the park.” The venue’s ambience is more that of a leisure centre than an opera house, particularly compared with Taipei’s national theatre and concert hall, each built in 1987, which stand on either side of the capital’s central square, like a pair of regal temples from the Forbidden City. By contrast, Weiwuying’s artistic director, Chien Wen-Pin, hopes people will spill into its theatres from the park, and treat it as their living room. “We had over 50,000 people turn up to our open day,” he says. “People occupied the space in a way were weren’t planning or expecting, taking their shoes off, doing exercise, lying in the shade, even breaking into song as they entered the concert hall.” Featuring the largest organ in Asia, designed as two thickets of bamboo with more than 9,000 pipes, the concert hall is a swirling symphony of oak and champagne-coloured seats, with a 22-tonne acoustic reflector dangling ominously from the ceiling. Despite its 2,000-person capacity, it feels surprisingly intimate, the furthest seat being 30 metres from the conductor. The Parisian magician of acoustics, Albert Xu, built a 1:10 model of it to ensure it provides the perfect reverberation time for everything from a classical orchestra to the twanging of the Taiwanese aboriginal mouth harp. He also worked his magic on the other three spaces, each designed with a distinct character and calibrated to accommodate a variety of art forms. The 434-seat recital hall has an asymmetrical seating layout, “so more people can see the pianists’ fingers”, say the architects, while its panelled walls can rotate to provide different levels of absorption, whether it’s hosting harsher classical Chinese music or jazz, or softer baroque chamber music. The playhouse, with deep blue seats, can accommodate an orchestra to the side of the stage (important for Chinese opera, where there must be a direct line of sight between the musicians and performers). Meanwhile, the deep red 2,236-seat opera house enjoys a humungous backstage, four times the size of the auditorium, conceived as a “theatre machine” that can contain the scenery and equipment for five different shows at once. “It’s even bigger and better equipped than Beijing’s opera,” Houben whispers conspiratorially about an important point of national pride. If the auditoria are exemplars of their kind, then the circulation and foyer space between them feels a little like an afterthought. With the four ovoid venues set in a rectangular volume stretching 225 metres long by 160 metres wide, there is a lot of leftover space, mainly decked out with acres of grey carpet, plasterboard walls and suspended ceiling tiles, every surface painted black or white, giving it a rather bleak, monotonous feeling. Within the building there is little of the spatial drama promised by the undulating plaza outside. Instead, it has the air of a deep-plan office block with theatrical ambitions. The architects are quick to point out that the budget is actually very tight for a project of this scale, which necessitated some of the prosaic fittings. While Jean Nouvel’s Philharmonie de Paris cost £340m, and Herzog & de Meuron’s Elbphilharmonie in Hamburg was a whopping £690m (each housing a single auditorium), Mecanoo has provided four theatres in one for a fraction of the price. The robust, rough-and-ready quality is also somehow appropriate for the nature of this no-nonsense port city. “We wanted it to have the detailing of a cargo ship, not a luxury yacht,” says Houben, referring to the visible steel welding joints between the panels of the building’s billowing white hull. Those who aren’t told of the container ship allusion might just think it is badly finished, but various nautical markings reinforce the seafaring air. The bigger question is if this city of three million, which has enjoyed a single 1,600-capacity theatre until now, has the ability to fill such an enormous complex on a regular basis. The director of the £106m National Taichung theatre, another ambitious cave-like opera house, an hour away by train and built by Toyo Ito in 2015, admits it is struggling to sell tickets to its current run of Wagner’s Siegfried, after the novelty of the venue’s opening has worn off. Taipei, meanwhile, awaits the opening of its long-delayed £133m performing arts centre designed by OMA, another theatre, concert hall and blackbox auditorium combined in a thrilling multilayered transformer of a building. It is an extraordinary abundance of venues for one country to be opening in the span of a few years, all planned in the mid-2000s by different regional and national administrations. As China picks off Taiwan’s allies with dollar diplomacy (only 17 countries now recognise the island as independent, thereby disqualifying themselves from formal relations with China), it seems as if cultural diplomacy is one of the few weapons it has left. If the palpable level of excitement in Kaohsiung on the opening night of Weiwuying last week is anything to go by – when tens of thousands gathered in the park for a spectacular gala performance staged on the building’s outdoor amphitheatre, complete with an aerial ballet of drones – there’s an eager population waiting to fill its great halls with life.