The Church of England has just done another slightly silly thing. Senior figures, including Archbishop Justin Welby, are backing attempts to draw children away from the lure of Halloween into “light parties”, where they can share “fun activities” in church. It is suggested that attendees wear superhero costumes instead of dressing up as “scary witches and ghosts”. “Nowadays,” the church claims, “most people believe that you can’t fight evil with evil – you can only fight evil by doing good, and good will always win in the end.” This is factually untrue – most people in the world today are obviously very happy to return evil for evil, or else they would not behave as they do. More seriously for a church, this programme entirely misses the reality and danger of evil. If Halloween has any point, it is to allow children to play with small, safe doses of fear and danger. They love this, as if they sense what the world will hold for them when they grow up. This attraction to danger is obvious in the stories they like. One of the striking things about the Harry Potter books is that bad things happen in them to good people, with a realism quite absent from most evangelical literature. If you compare them with the Narnia books of CS Lewis it is very notable that the Potter books are much more dangerous for the heroes. Lewis is far more concerned with inner danger. His heroes know they will be victorious if they only act rightly; in Harry Potter, as in life, there is no such guarantee. In a curious way, this makes Rowling more religious than Lewis, because if the supernatural does not have an edge of terror, then it is not worth bothering with, and unless Halloween is a festival of darkness it’s nothing more than a marketing opportunity for sweet-sellers. The make-believe needs to be a little disturbing. The difficulty for evangelical Christians is that some of them are really and truly frightened by the costumes. A certain sort of evangelical takes very seriously the idea of a child dressing up as a witch or a wizard, and the website of the evangelical alliance offers them all sorts of tracts to hand out with the sweets explaining that Jesus is the real light of the world. It’s almost a pity that the old-style hell and damnation comics showing children literally swept off to hell for dressing up have disappeared. The Church of England as a whole isn’t silly like that. But it has a special difficulty of its own. It wants to appear normal. Its members, or most of them, want to appear normal, too; part of the mainstream of English society. But fewer and fewer people now find religion normal at all. That can inspire evangelicals: they want to be different and distinguished from the sinners around them. But this was not, historically, the culture of the Church of England, which was of the church embedded in Englishness, in the way that church spires are just part of the rural landscape. The language and the bible characters were just part of English self-understanding. Even the arc of English history was understood as a continuation of the Bible: the English were in some sense God’s chosen people. Given that sort of confidence, Halloween was not at all frightening. But it’s gone. Children no longer learn Christianity from their families in the same natural way that children nowadays are taught that “good will always win in the end”. The church no longer owns folk religion – the rituals that don’t seem religious at all, like weddings and funerals. It doesn’t even own superstition. Gwyneth Paltrow has nearly 2.8m twitter followers, and the Archbishop of Canterbury has around 130,000. So it can no longer infuse the everyday rituals of ordinary life with a hint of something stranger and more important. One answer might be to make its own rituals, and to reproduce in Christian terms the horror behind Halloween and then the slightly eerie hope of All Souls’ Day afterwards; but that would require courage and imagination. “Light parties” manage instead to be simultaneously banal and offputtingly weird. • Andrew Brown writes about religion for the Guardian