Welcome to a new-look Guardian Weekly. We’re incredibly excited to share the new magazine with you. From pages 4 to 9 you’ll find a roundup of the week’s key headlines. These are followed by the big story of the week: the US Senate’s vote to finally bring the confirmation saga of Brett Kavanaugh to an end, despite multiple allegations of sexual impropriety. After that, you’ll find our new Spotlight section, which offers longer looks at the other key stories of the week. Towards the back of the magazine you’ll find features, opinion, arts, books and puzzles. We hope you will enjoy reading. As we were working on this first new issue, we woke up on Monday to the latest report from the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. The report made for sobering reading, with climate scientists making it very clear that unless the planet manages to curtail global warming at 1.5C – the bottom end of what was agreed in the Paris climate accords – then the impact on everything from sea levels to the survival of coral and insects will be far greater than anticipated. We will return to this story over the coming weeks but, to begin, we have a visual explainer of what the difference between 2C and 1.5C would mean for the planet. Higher global temperatures also mean more drought and wildfires. This year has been particularly devastating for wildfires in California. One of the worst was the Carr fire near Redding in northern California. John Vaillant and photographer Tim Hussin travelled to the area in the aftermath of the 81,000-hectare fire to meet residents there, many of whose lives have been destroyed by the blaze. The Carr fire was particularly dangerous because a combination of toxic elements – high heat, plenty of fuel and high winds – turned a wildfire into what scientists refer to as a “fire whirl”. It might make sense to think of it as a tornado made of fire. Brazil held the first round of its presidential election last Sunday. Far-right populist Jair Bolsonaro led the field with 46% of the vote. Though Bolsonaro led his nearest rival, Fernando Haddad by 17%, the two will run off for the presidency on 28 October. Those results meant that over 46 million Brazilians voted for a man who has been charged with hate speech and made inflammatory attacks on women, black people, gay people, foreigners and indigenous communities. In Spotlight, we report on the aftermath and our Latin America correspondent Tom Phillips looks ahead to the second round of the election and asks if Brazil’s left and centre can work together to form the grandest of coalitions to defeat Bolsonaro. There’s plenty more inside, from Bee Wilson on the genius of Nigella Lawson’s How to Eat to an interview with The Crown’s Claire Foy. We hope you enjoy the new magazine. Let us know what you think about it here.